2013- 2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
          HOUSING PROGRAM

























2013- 2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
              INTRODUCTION







2013- 2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                  OVERVIEW










                                                                                      2. 0 Land Use
   2. 0 LAND USE ELEMENT
   2. 1     Land Use Element
                     The Land Use Element is a guide to future land use within Calexico and
                     affects many of the issues addressed in the other General Plan elements.
                     The Land Use Element identifies the type and location of future land uses
                     within the City. The specific land uses and their location within the
                     community in turn affect the remaining General Plan elements. For
                     example, the location and type of land uses outlined in the Land Use
                     Element affect the circulation system that is identified in the Circulation
                     Element. Likewise, the land uses identifed in the Land Use Element
                     reflect the community' s goals and vision for its future form and character.
                     In addition to land uses, the Land Use Element also addresses how growth
                     will occur, with special attention given to the public services and facilities
                     and how they will be funded. Implementation of the Land Use Plan will
                     also assist in creating a balance between jobs and housing within the City.
                     A balance between jobs and housing allows people to live and work within
                     the same community, and often within the same neighborhood.
   2. 1. 1   Establishing a Vision
                     The Vision for community lancl use will guide the growth of the Calexico
                     area in an efficient, coordinated manner in order to provide for high
                     quality and balanced land use in the unique Imperial Valley setting. The
                     General     Plan Advisory Committee (" GPAC",             see  Appendix     A)
                     participated in a process of looking to the future for Calexico and
                     establishing a vision for the community. The Land Use Element is
                     responsive to the Vision of the City of Calexico as formulated by the
                     GPAC because it:
                     a.       opens up additional opportunities for our families to have a choice
                              in living environments and satisfies a diversity of housing needs.
                      7       has the potential for establishing andlor reviving the downtown
                              area' s economic opportunities.
                     c.       recognizes the short- term growth opportunities towards the east
                              near Bowker Road and the long-term opportunities toward the
                              Eastern International Border crossing.
                     d.       recognizes the growth opportunities towards the wesdnorthwest
IJ                            where potential    commercial    development could occur along
                              Dogwood and Cesar Chavez Roads to capitalize on traffic re-
                              routed at the border crossing and Imperial Valley Mall traffic.
                     e.       recognizes the short-term growth opportunities towards the north
                             near Heber Road and long-term opportunities toward Interstate 8.
        City of Calexico General Plan                                                           2_
                                                                                   2. 0 Land Use
                  f.      explores     potential   options   and   configurations    for   future
                          development at key entry points to the City.
                  g.      reinforces public and private uses already established, many of
                          which are oriented to various types of services for the citizens.
                  h.      expands the economic base in areas that are readily accessible to
                          workers located throughout Calexico.
                  i.      maintains a balance of land uses through the creativity that can be
                          applied to mixed- use projects.
                  j.      contributes to economic development potential by adding a broader
                          choice of housing opportunities to a diversity of income levels.
                  k.     allows City agencies to work together to achieve a common goal of
                         joint use of facilities in the future and identifies the need for more
                         mixed- use communities.
                  0       identifies the opportunities to expand the downtown area towards a
                         mixed land use designation and opportunity to re- visit the building
                         height limitations policy.
                  m.     explores opportunities to improve recreational opportunities and
                         communities to seasonal occupants.
                  n.      identifies the need to add schools to the northwest portion of the
                         City.
                  o.     explores opportunities to expand the Sphere of Influence in areas
                         where services can be provided and provide long-term benefit to
                         the City.
L__l
                  p.     examines the opportunity of incorporating a fully functional
                         hospital for the existing Calexico and providing additional
                         emergency facilities to support and serve future growth.
                  q.     explores the opportunity to expand the Calexico International
                         Airport for more public and commercial use.
                  r.     increases     the   City' s  regional   outlook   and   identifies   the
                         opportunities and constraints in regional plans and programs that
1                        may affect the City.
                  The visioning statements, above, are summarized below and discussed in
                  Section 1. 2 of the General Plan. They become the overall direction for the
                  City and the main objectives of the General Plan:
                  1.     To create mixed use developments, allowing and encouraging
                         residents to be able to live, work and shop within their community;
                  2.     To transition and expand the economic and job base in Calexico
                         from agriculture to other job sources;
                  3.     To guide the development of areas within the City and the sphere
                         of influence;
     City of Calexico General Plan                                                           2- 2
                                                                                          2. 0 Land Use
                     4.       To oversee the development of roadway and infrastructure systems
                              that will address existing deficiencies and accommodate projected
                              future needs;
                              To promote commercial, residential and industrial development
I                             that will capitalize on the City' s location near Mexico;
                     6.       To continue to promote the development of quality housing for all
                              segments of the population;
                              To   ensure    that residents  are   provided    a  safe  and    healthful
                              environment in which to live and work;
                              To preserve those amenities that makes Calexico an attractive
                              place to live and work.
  2. 1. 2 Existing Issues and Land Use Disfribution —2004
                     Calexico is affected by several forces that are unique to its location
                    adjacent to the international border with Baja California, Mexico. The City
                    continues to relate to Mexicali, just a cross the border, as a boon to
                    commercial activity in Calexico, but now is feeling the pressure of
                    commuters who bring their children to private schools in Calexico,
                    wealthy Mexican residents who are buying homes in Calexico because of
                    safety concerns in Mexicali, and trucking and the potential for commercial
                    trade due to the enactment of the North American Free Trade Agreement
                       NAFTA") since the 1992 General Plan was published. In addition to
                    impacts associated with Mexico, Calexico and other cities in the Imperial
                    Valley are now experiencing unprecedented growth due to the higher cost
                    of housing in San Diego and other counties along coastal California.
                    A recent article by Lori Weisberg in the San Diego Union- Tribune
                    reported that regional demographers predict that Imperial County' s
                    population will double by 2030 and that 20,000 new homes could be built
                    in the next ten years ( 2004). There is need for housing and employment in
                    the Imperial Valley, due in large part to the lack of affordability of home
                    ownership in the San Diego metropolitan area. Weisberg' s article
                    illustrated numerous examples of people who commute daily from cities in
                    the Imperial Valley to the San Diego area.
                    According to an Albert A. Webb Associates windshield survey and aerial
                    photography conducted in March 2004, the City of Calexico had
                    approximately 2, 060 acres of existing residential, 290 acres of commercial
                    uses, 255 acres of industrial uses, and the remaining acreage within the
                    City consisted of vacant, parks, schools, and agricultural/ open space uses.
                    Urban development and agricultural production in Calexico is entirely
                    dependent      upon   water   imported   from    the  Colorado     River.   As   the
                    population of the southwest continues to grow, the competition for limited
1                   water    supplies   will   escalate. The   Imperial   Irrigation District, which
                    supplies water to Calexico, has initiated an agreement to divert some of its
                    water allocation to other urbanized areas of southern California.
       City of Calexico General Plan                                                                2_3

 1
                                                                                      2. 0 Land Use
   2. 1. 3    Cultural Resources
                       The City of Calexico' s history is linked to the community through its
                      historic sites and structures as well as the living history of its residents.
                       Sites of significant historic or cultural value should be identified and
                      preserved as a means to educate and foster a stronger sense of community.
                       Through the active use of historic buildings, collection of aral histories
                      and display of art and information about Calexico' s past, the incorporation
                      of cultural resources into the arts and culture of the community will unify
                      and beautify the City.
   2. 1. 4    Future Land Use
                      In order to capitalize upon its proximity to Mexico, the City should
                      continue to provide opportunities for maquiladora uses or " sister"- plants to
                      locate in the City. Additionally, the City should make use of the business
                      park overlay that will allow the City and future developers the flexibility
                      to regulate the uses allowed that would most benefit the City and
                      alternative land design opportunities that may not be available under
                      typical   land use designations. Encourage commercial development to
                      support Calexico' s growing residential areas, in the downtown area for
                      pedestrians from Mexicali and local residents, and highway commercial
                      uses that capitalize on the substantial number of border crossings each
                      year. Land uses need to respond to the eastern border crossing and
                      revisions to the main border crossing that will redirect automobile, truck
                      and pedestrian traffic.
                      To promote possible job creation in the region, Calexico should work with
                      the County of Imperial,      and California, United States and Mexican
                      governments to support the Silicon Border project planned for a             15
                      square- mile area located west of Mexicali just south of the border near
                      Mount Signal. The Silicon Border project is proposed to compete with
                      semiconductor manufacturing centers in Asia. Calexico can support the
CJ                    proposed project by working to create a skilled labor force, evaluating
                      future uses of the Airport Expansion Overlay area, and possible future
                      expansion of the City' s Sphere of Influence to the west. Long-term, the
                      Silicon Border project will include a border crossing station which could
                      facilitate land development on the U. S. side of the border which would
                      likely need to be served by Calexico.
   2. 1. 5    Land Use Plan
                      The General Plan' s Land Use Plan for Calexico is one of the most
                      important documents for the control of the direction of development that
                      the City has. Figure LU- 1 shows the General Plan land use designations
                      within the City Limits and Sphere of Influence (" SOI"), which are
                      expected to build out within the next 20 years. Some areas within the SOI
                      are designated Residential Specific Plan (" RSP"). This is a mixed use
                      designation and Table LU- A sets the maximum number of residential units
         City of Calexico General Plan                                                          2_4
  LJ
                                                                                                               2. 0 Land Use
                     and commercial square footage allowed per RSP area shown on Figure
                     LU- 1.      Subsequent to distribution of the Draft General Plan Update in
     1               December of 2005, enough became known about Caltrans needs for the
                     Jasper/ SR- 98 realignment and several proposed projects, that RSP- 3 and
                     RSP- 4 designations were replaced by specific land uses, as proposed.
                                                             TABLE LU-A:
                                       RESIDENTIAL SPECIFIC PLAN LAND USE
  1               Business Park with a commensurate reduction in allowable units and/or acres of commercial resulting in no
                  significant increase in traffic.
                     Figure LU- 2, Future Land Uses, illustrates the arrangement of land uses
                     that may occur as the City develops over time. The " long- term"                                       line
                     shown on Figure LU- 2 and elsewhere throughout the General Plan and
                     Environmental Impact Report represents the ultimate direction and build-
                     out the City might expect in the long-term future. The Future Land Use
                     Plan ( Figure LU-2) does not establish specific required time frames for the
                     phasing of future development but can serve to guide development and
                     infrastructure improvements over the next approximately 50 years. The
                     Near-,      Mid- and Long-term labels have been used for ease of discussion
                     and descriptions. The Near-term SOI is the same as the current approved
                     SOI for the City of Calexico.
                     Table LU-B, General Plan Land Use Summary, summarizes the land uses
C  I                 within the Sphere of Influence (" SOI") shown on Figure LU- 1. Table LU-
                     B shows a total population within the SOI of between 85, 340 and 98, 260
                     residents, based on assumptions described in subsequent paragraphs. If the
                     U. S. Census rate of growth, 44 percent between 1990 and 2000, is applied
                     to the current population of the City, it suggests that the Sphere of
                     Influence will build out in about 20 to 30 years.
                     Table LU- C, Future Land Use Summary, totals the land uses shown within
                     the total area delineated on Figure LU-2 ( approximately north to Heber
                     Road, east to Barbara Worth Road, and west to Dogwood Road). The total
                     area shown on Figure LU-2, and elsewhere throughout the General Plan
                     and Environmental Impact Report ( sometimes referenced as the "                                      Long-
                     term       Sphere        of   Influence"),      represents       the     area    evaluated          in  the
                     environmental             analysis for the        General       Plan     update as the ultimate
                     developed area and build- out the City might expect in the long-term
                     future.
l
       City of Calexico General Plan                                                                                        2_5
                                                                                                     2. 0 Land Use
                   The estimated General Plan population projections shown in Tables LU- B
                   and C were developed using the following assumptions: a household size
                   of 425 people per household per the City' s 1999 General Plan Housing
                   Element; residential development at the maximum density allowed in the
                   General Plan for each type of residential use; and the build- out for areas
                   designated " Residential Specific Plan" based on a formula that includes
                   net developable land divided among low density residential, medium
                   density residential, high density residential and commercial uses. If
                   specific land use information about a future specific plan was known by
                   the City at the time of this update, the known information was used for
                   population projection and services needs. The " formula" was applied to
                   RSP areas with no known development proposals. Generally, the RSP
                   acreage was assumed to include 10 percent commercial/ public facilities
                   uses, 20 percent parks and schools, and 60 percent residential ( 50 percent
                   LDR, 15 percent MDR, 5 percent HDR).
                 TABLE LU-B: GENERAL PLAN LAND USE SUMMARY
Residential             Existing' = 2, 060                              8, 2302                31, 750
                        Projected =        3, 240 -            12, 6] 0- 15, 650           53, 590- 66, 5 ] 0
                        4, 000
Total Residential*          5, 300- 6, 060 acres          20,840- 23, 880 units           85, 340- 98, 260 residents
                         Existing3  -
Commercial                               290                                  3, 158, 100                           3, 950
                         Projected —     610- 700              6, 642, 900- 7, 623, 000                     8, 300- 9, 525
Total Commercial*        900- 990 acres              9, 801, 000- 10,781, 100 sq. ft.     12, 250- 13, 475 employees
                         Existing3—
Industrial/ Business                     255                                  4, 443, 120                           2, 220
Park
                         Projected -     435- 1, 200          7, 5 79, 440- 16, 465, 680                    3, 790- 8, 230
Total IndustriaU             690- 1, 455 acres           12, 022, 560- 20, 908, 800       6, 010- 10, 450 employees
Business Park*
  Totals include existing land uses plus projected development within the City limits and the sphere of
influence.
  Per windshield survey and aerial photography, March 2004.
2 Projected from 2000 Census data.
     City of Calexico General Plan                                                                                 2- 6

                                                                                                             2. 0 Land Use
                           TABLE LU- C: FUTURE LAND USE SUMMARY
                                      LONG- TERM SPHERE OF INFLUENCEI
  Residential                 Table     LU- A =     5, 300-             Table LU- A =                  Table LU- A =
                              6, 060                                                             85, 340- 98, 260
                                                                     20, 840- 23, 880
                              Long- term        sphere =
                                                                                                   Long-term sphere =
                              3,' 750- 4, 500               Long-term sphere = l 5, 215-         64, 660- 79, 170
                                                                          18, 625
  Total Residential*              9, 050- 10,560 acres           36, 055- 42, 505 units                150, 000- 177, 430
                                                                                                           residents
  Commercial                  Table LU- A = 900- 990         Table LU- A = 9, 801, 000-               Table LU- A = 12, 250-
                                                                       10, 781, 100                                     13, 475
                              Long-term         sphere =
1                             460- 565                           Long-term sphere =
                                                                 5, 009, 400- 6, 152, 850
                                                                                                        Long-term sphere =
                                                                                                                  6, 260- 7, 690
  Total Commercial*           1, 360- 1, 555 acres           14, 810, 400- 16, 933, 950 sq.      18, 510- 21, 165 employees
                                                                            ft.
  Industrial/ Business       Table       LU- A =       690-   Table LU- A = 12, 022, 560-              Table LU- A = 6, 010-
  Park                        l, 455 —                                            20, 908, 800                          l 0, 450
                              Long-term         sphere                 Long-term sphere =                Long-term sphere =
                              1, 250- 2, ] 00                      21, 780, 000- 36, 590, 400                  10, 890- 18, 290
  Total Industrial/                1, 940- 3, 555 acres      33, 802, 560- 57, 499, 200 sq.      16, 900- 28, 749 employees
  Business Park*                                                            ft.
    Totals include existing land uses plus projected development within the City limits and the sphere of influence.
                      The City is currently considering expanding its approved Sphere of
                      Influence beyond the SOI show on Figure LU- 1.                            Although the General
                      Plan anticipates that there will be growth in the future and evaluates an
                      area larger than the existing SOI, it is not known at this time where and to
                      what extent the SOI may be expanded. Figure LU-4, Anticipated
                      Development, illustrates projects that: are currently under construction, the
                      City has approved, or those for which the City has received a development
                      application.
                      The Land Use Plan includes land use categories. There are residential,
                      commercial, industrial, agricultural, business park, open space, and public
                      facility categories.            Future areas to be developed are designated as a
                      specific land use type or as a type of residential or industrial " Specifc
                      Plan"       to    encourage        a mix   of land        uses    and    densities with         design
                      guidelines, infrastructure, and services taken into consideration.
       City of Calexico General Plan                                                                                      2_

                                     2. 0 Land Use
    Page intentionally left blank.
  u
 1
l
u
IJ
       City of Calexico General Plan          2- 8
                                                             IV
                                                                                                F'igure LU- 1
                                                           w°w'
                                                      W             E
                                                            GIS
 A   L B   E  R T       A.
                                                                         General Plan Land Use Plan
WEBB                                                         S
A S S O C I A T E S
fiNGLVEERIP"G CONSUL'fANTS                             Not to Scale            City of Calexico General Plan
    2004\ 04- 00461GisiLar7d_ Use_ 11x17. mxd Map revised Nov. 20, 2006.                                 2- 9

                                                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                       r,., y CI7'Y  LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                              INTERNATIONAL BORDER
     NOTE:
     All development proposed in the vicinity                                                                                                                                 SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
     of the Planned SR- 98 Realignment                                                                                                                                        MID-TERM SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
                                                                    NOTE: Portions of SR- 111 are proposed
     Corridor shall be reviewed by the City
     for consistency with plans for corridor                        to be a future Freeway facility ( See Figure                                                              LONGTERM SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
                                                                    C- 3).   As such, no direct commercial
     development, in consultation with                                                                                                                                        ffiGHWAY
                                                                    access will be allowed.                                             i
     Caltrans. The alignment may change                                                                                                                                       PROPOSED FREEWAY
     over time to meet design criteria and
     environmental requirements that may                                                                         PF           PF
                                                                                                                                                                              PROPOSED STREET
                                                                                                                                                   PF
     come about as a result of more detailed                                                                                                                                  RAILROAD
                                                                                                                                   CC
     plans for the highway. Dedication of                                                                                                                                     STREET
     fixture right of way may be required.                                                                                              f
                                                                                                                                                                              ALL AMERICAN CANAL
                                                                                                                         JASPER RD
                                                                                                                                                                        rTTT  CENTRAL MAIN CANAL
                                                                                                                                                               I              AP- AIRPORT
                                                                                                                                                                              CO- COMMERCIAL ORF7CE
                                                                                                                                                                               PF- PUBLIC FAC[ LITIES
 1                                                                                                                       PF                 f       n { -                      CGCOMMERCIALrCORE-MIXED USE
                                                                                                                                                                               CH- COMMERCIAIrH[ GHWAY RELATED
                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                               CN-COMMERCIAIrNEIGHBORHOOD
                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                               RSP- RESIDENT[ AL SPECIFIC PLAN
t  I
                                                                                                                                                                               RSPwBPOVERLAY
                                                                                                                                                                               BP- BUSINESS PARK
                                                                                                                                                                               LDR- LOW DENSITY RESIDEIVTIAL ( 1- 5 UNITS/AC)
                                                                  PF                                                                                                           MDR- MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (5. 1- 12 UM7'S/ AC)
                                                                          CC
                                                                                                                                                    PF '                       EiDR- HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ( 12. 1- 20 UNI1'S/ AC)
                                                                                                                                                                               OS- OPEN SPACE
                                                                                                                                                               1 ` --
                                                                                                                                                                               OS w/ AIRPORT EXPANSION OVERLAY
                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                               I- INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                                                               ISP- INDUSTRIAL SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                    PF                                                   PF     FUTURE PUBLIC FACIL[ TIES
                                                                                                                                                                         CC FUTURE COMMERCIAL CENTERS
                                                                                                                                     PF
1                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                        Areas shown with land use designations which are located outside of the
                                                                                                                                        City' s current Sphere of Influence will be subject to future changes and/ or
                                                                                                                                        moditications of use as determined in the future Sphere of Intluence
                                                                                                                                        expansion study, including the addition of an eastern industrial conidor.
C
                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure LU- 2
                                                                       Wabb
                                                                 w               E
        A   L B  E  R   T      A.                                          S                                                                                                                          Future La d Uses
u      WEBB
        A S S O C I A T E S
                                                                          S
       ENGLVEERS'G   COCISUL7A7: I5
                                                                 Not to Scale                                                                                                                    City of Calexico General Plan
       G: 12004\ 04--0046\ Gis\ Future_ Land_ Use_ 11x17. mxd Map revised March 7, 2007.                                                                                                                                          2- 10
                                                                                   3. 0 Circulation
  3.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
1 3. 1   Introduction
                    The    Circulation  Element    defines  plans   for the  various   methods     of
                    transportation on the City streets for automobiles, truck traffic and public
                   transit as well as pedestrians and bicyclists. The purpose of the Circulation
                    Element is to ensure adequate access throughout the City through the
                    improvement and maintenance of the transportation system.
                    Circulation and transportation planning relate closely to land use planning. If
                    streets and transportation are not in place to serve the desired land use, the
                   desired development will be severely impaired. The design of the circulation
                    system strongly influences the distribution of land uses throughout the City.
                    Streets and public access are the primary motivator in the determination of
                   how much density/ intensity an area can accommodate. The location and size
                   of the existing and planned street system in Calexico is one of the foremost
                   determinants in measuring the community's ability to accommodate increased
                   growth.
  3. 2 Existing Conditions
                   The circulation system in the City of Calexico is oriented to the automobile.
                   The system is dominated by Imperial Avenue/ Highway I l l which travels
                   north/ south, and Birch Street/ Highway 98 which travels east/west. Figure C- 1
                   shows the Existing Circulation System within the City.
                   Within the east and west sides of the City, traffic circulates with ease.
                   Congestion is not a problem. The problem is that access openings along SR-
                    111 allow vehicular traffic to cross Imperial Avenue/Highway l 11 in an effort
                   to get to either the eastern or western side of town. The primary obstacle to a
                   free-flowing traffic system is the outdated and inadequate system of 4- way
                   stop signs along Imperial Avenue, as well as the congestion created by the
                   International Border Crossing. Once northbound traffic reaches and passes the
                   traffic signal at Birch Street and Imperial Avenue/ Highway             lll,  the
                   congestion    almost disappears.    Southbound traffic has no relief once        it
                   proceeds down Imperial Avenue on their way to either downtown Calexico or
                   Mexico. The fact that downtown abuts the International Border does tend to
                   worsen the problem. A secondary hindrance to east/ west traffic is the railroad
                   track which generally parallels Highway 111. Currently, no grade separated
                   crossings of the tracks exist within the City.
                   Safety issues relating to crossing Highway 111 affect both pedestrians and
                   vehicular traffic. Recent efforts to alleviate accidents and congestion include
                   the closure of Jasper Road at Highway 111 until a signal light is installed; and
  City of Caiexico General Plan                                                                 3- 1
                                                                                     3. 0 Circulation
                    the installation of a raised median from the U. S. and Mexico International
                    Border to St" Street to prevent crossings of the highway.
                    Two other issues affect existing traffic conditions within the City. The first is
                    created by truck traffic. Truck traffic to/from Calexico businesses and through
                    truck traffic on major and secondary arterial streets, and collector and local
                    roads creates unsafe conditions and traffic congestion. A second traffic impact
                    is caused by the location of school sites. Due to the proximity of some school
                    sites immediately opposite each other on major and secondary arterials,
                    congestion is a problem during morning drop- off and afternoon pick-up times.
  3. 2. 1 Existing Roadways
            Imperial Avenue/ Highway 111
                   Imperial Avenue/ Highway 1 l 1 is the primary north/ south arterial in the City
                   of Calexico. The roadway basically divides the City in half. All traffic that
                   travels north to Interstate 8 or south into Mexico, travels on this roadway. The
                   traffic is so substantial that Imperial Avenue ( within the City limits south of
                   Birch Street) is usually jammed with not only through traffic, but also with
                   north/ south local traffic, and automobiles that are trying to get from one side
                   of town to the other. The fact that there are only two traffic signals on this
                   portion of the roadway contributes greatly to the congestion. Many four-way
                   stop signs also contribute to constant stop and go traffc, both heading in and
                   out of Mexico. To ease this situation closest to the border, a raised median
                   was built between Second Street and Fifth Street, thus eliminating cross traffc
                   at Third and Fourth Streets. The stop signs at Third and Fourth Streets were
                   removed for north/ south traffic. Traffic control personnel assist with traffic
                   flow through this area during peak traffic times.
           Traffic Signals along mperial Avenue
                   Although quite expensive, signalization is the easiest way to alleviate the
                   congestion on Imperial Avenue. With the creation of a system that enables
                   vehicles to travel between the border and Birch Street with the fewest possible
                   delays would dramatically reduce the congestion on Imperial Avenue in the
                   City. Traffic tends to flow smoothly into and out of the City via Birch Street,
                   and considering its inadequacies as a primary easdwest thoroughfare, the
                   trouble spots are few and manageable.
1
  City of Caiexico Genera( Plan                                                                    3- 2
1
                                          3. 0 Circulation
           Page intentionally left blank.
J
C
C
1
1                                                       3- 4
  City of Calexico General P1an
                                                                                        3. 0 Circulation
              Birch Street (State Route 98)
                      Birch Street/ State Route 98 is classified as a State Highway and is a primary
                      east/ west arterial in the City of Calexico. SR 98 currently provides two lanes
                      of travel in each direction east of its intersection with 011ie Avenue. West of
                      011ie Avenue, Birch Street becomes a two- lane ( one in each direction) road
                      forming a bottleneck which when combined with a lack of left turn lanes at
                      Cezar Chavez Blvd., aggravates congestion within the area. Caltrans plans to
l_ J                  upgrade Birch between Highway 111 and David Navarro Avenue to a four-
                      lane highway. There are no bike lanes or bus stops provided and curbside
                      parking is prohibited.
                      SR- 98 east of SR- 111 is currently two lanes in each direction between SR- 111
                      and Encinas Ave. This section of roadway currently experiences significant
                      congestion. East of Encinas Avenue to Bowker Road, SR- 98 is a 4- land
   J
                      divided road. From Bowker Road easterly, SR- 98 varies between one and two
                      lanes in each direction. According to the Caltrans District l 1 website, SR-98
                      is planned to be widened and/ or realigned between SR- 111 and SR- 7 from
                      two lanes to four lanes ( six lanes in some locations). A portion is planned to
                      be realigned northerly to coincide with portions of the Jasper Avenue right- of-
                      way.
              Second Street/ Anza Road
                      Second Street, which becomes Anza Road east and west of the City, is one of
                      the major east/ west cross town arterials near the southern edge of the City,
                      parallel to the International Border. In the section west of Imperial Avenue,
                      there are two lanes in each direction. As the street enters the Central Business
                      District, the street narrows to one lane each way with angular parking along
                      most of the segment between Paulin and Heber Avenues where it is only one-
                      way in the eastbound direction. Second Street is one of only three easbwest
                      arterials that enable traffic to cross the railroad tracks located west of
                      Highway 111. As the cross- street located closest to the U. S./ Mexico border,
                      Second Street is impacted most when queues ( lines) of autos form waiting to
                      be processed at the border. The Calexico/ Mexicali Border Transportation
                      Study, June 2000, by Katz, Okitsu &         Associates states that the impact to
                      Second Street is substantial as a result of delays at the border.
              Cole Road
                      Cole Road is classified as a Collector on the Imperial County Circulation
                      Element. Cole Road is the most northern of east/west roadway within the City
                      limits. Cole Road currently is constructed as a two- lane undivided roadway
                      from west of the City limits to Enterprise Boulevard. At Enterprise Boulevard
                      it transitions into a four- lane undivided roadway between Imperial Avenue
                      WestlScaroni Road and SR 111. East of SR 111, Cole Road is currently
                      constructed as a four-lane divided roadway between SR 111 and M. L. King
                      Avenue. It then transitions back into a four- lane undivided roadway east of M.
     Gity of Calexico Generai Plan                                                                     3- 5
1
 J
                                                                                   3. 0 Circulation
                   L. King Avenue to Bowker Road. Curbside parking is prohibited along both
                   sides of the roadway and bus stops are provided along the portion of Cole
                   Road    between   SR   I11   and  Yourman     RoadJRockwood        Avenue.    The
                   intersection of Cole Road and Highway 1 l 1 is controlled by a traffic signal. A
                   frontage road on either side of Highway 111 leads into Cole Road. Traffic
                   congestion is a concern on Cole Road, and with its improvements has become
                   a major commercial and industrial arterial, relieving some of the pressure on
                   Birch Street.
          Jasper Road
                   Jasper Road is an unclassified east/west roadway that forms the northern City
t                  limit of Calexico. Jasper Road is currently constructed as a two- lane
                   undivided roadway. No bike lanes or bus stops are provided and curbside
                  parking is prohibited. In the future, the City will request that Caltrans realign
                   and reroute SR 98 from Birch Street to the Jasper Road alignment between
                   Bowker Road and Dogwood Road. Jasper would then become a 6- lane
                  highway.
          Dogwood Road
                  Dogwood Road is a north/ south roadway located along the western edge of
                  the City' s Sphere of Influence. It connects from Highway 98 north to
                  Brawley. Dogwood Road is currently a two- lane undivided road in the vicinity
                  of Calexico.
u
           Kloke Road
                  Kloke Road is a north- south roadway that connects Jasper Road with Grant
                  Street. Currently constructed as a two- lane undivided roadway, Kloke Road is
                  an important north- south roadway on the western side of the City.
          Cesar Chavez
                  Caesar Chavez Boulevard is currently an unclassified two- lane roadway that
                  parallels the Union Pacific Railroad tracks. Caesar Chavez Boulevard runs
                  northwest from Second Street to SR 98 through a predominantly industrial
                  area. According to the Calexico West Border Station Expansion/ Renovation
                  Feasibility Study, CannonDesign 2005, the terminus of Cesar Chavez Blvd, at
                  Second Street is directly opposite the entry/exit point of the vacated
                  commercial port which is proposed to be converted into the passenger car
                  point of entry between Calexico and Mexicali. Due to this location, Cesar
                  Chavez Blvd. is proposed to serve as the primary, or an additional, entrance
                  roadway to/ from Mexico through the proposed Calexico West Border Station.
                  Although this may serve to alleviate some of the traffic congestion near the
                  border, the intersection of Cesar Chavez Blvd. and Highway 98 may need to
                  be upgraded and/ or Cesar Chavez Blvd. may need to be extended northward
                  to Cole Road.
   City a alexico General P( an                                                                   3- 6
                                                                                   3. 0 Circulation
           Andrade/ Meadows Road
1                  Currently a two- lane undivided arterial, Andrade/ Meadows Road runs north
                   from Second Street to Heber Road. Andrade/ Meadows Road provides an
                   important north- south link in the eastern portion of the City.
1          Bowker Road
                   Bowker Road is currently constructed as a north- south two- lane divided
1                  arterial that runs from Anza Road to Jasper Road. Bowker Road is located in
                   the eastern portion of the City' s Sphere of Influence.
1 3.2.2 Existing Transit System and Planned Trails
                   The Imperial Valley, including the City of Calexico, is served by Imperial
                   Valley Transit ( ICT), an inter-City fixed route bus system. The ICT system is
                   administered by the County Department of Public Works, operated by
                   LAIDLAW TRANSIT SERVICE INC., and subsidized by the Imperial Valley
                   Association of Governments ( IVAG). According to IVAG' s 2005- 2006
                   Transit Finance Plan, June 2005, the bus service has " ten ( 10) wheelchair
                   accessible 40 ft. transit buses and two ( 2) wheelchair accessible minibus.
                   Service is provided from 6: 00 AM until approximately 1 l: 00 PM weekdays,
                   and 6: 00 AM to 5: 00 PM on Saturdays, within the areas classified as the
                   Primary Zone: a North- South axis through Brawley, Imperial, El Centro,
                   Heber and Calexico, and from 6: 00 AM until 6: 00 PM in the Secondary
                   Zones; outlying cities and communities of Niland, Calipatria, Westmorland,
                   Seeley and Holtville." Calexico also has a Dial- A- Ride demand response
                   service which is subsidized by IVAG and administered by the City of
                   Calexico. This demand response service is available to seniors and persons
                   with disabilities seven days a week.
                   In late 2003, the City adopted the City of Calexico Bicycle Master Plan. The
                   network of trails and lanes described in Chapter 6 and all of the Bicycle
                   Master Plan is incorporated by reference as an integral part of the City' s
1                  Circulation Element. Figure G1. 5, Proposed Bicycle Network, shows the
                   bicycle and multi- use trail/ lane system.
  3. 3 Level of Service
                   The Circulation Element has been developed in recognition of the need to
                   relieve existing congestion and to provide a circulation system that can
                   accommodate future anticipated growth. Levels of Service ( LOS) standards
                   are used to assess the performance of a street or highway system and the
                   capacity of a roadway. An important goal when planning the transportation
                   system is to maintain acceptable levels of service along the federal and state
                   highways and the local roadway network. To accomplish this, the California
t                  Department of Transportation ( Caltrans), City of Calexico, County of
  City ef Calexico General Plan                                                                   3- 7
                                                                                                                  3. 0 Circulation
                    Imperial, and the other local agencies adopt minimum levels of service to
                    determine future infrastructure needs.
                    Traffic analysis uses the Level of Service ( LOS) system of categorization to
                    evaluate the project area roadway intersections. Traffic engineers use this
                    LOS system of categorization to describe how well an intersection or roadway
                    is functioning. The LOS measures several factors including operating speeds,
                    freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, and average vehicle delay at
                    intersections. The LOS approach uses a ranking system, similar to education,
                    with level ` A' being best and level ` F' being worst. Table C- A, Level of
                    Service ( LOS) Standards, describes LOS levels in terms the average driver
                    can understand. The LOS is related to the volume-to- capacity ratio ( V/C). To
                    determine the V/C ratio, the average daily traffic ( ADT) volume on a
                    particular roadway link is divided by the capacity of that same section or
                    roadway.
                    The circulation system of the City of Calexico is primarily composed of a
                    system of arterial and collector roads with two state routes traversing the City.
                    Currently, the majority of vehicle delay occurs at the signalized intersections
                    because vehicles are stopped to allow cross traffic to clear. Each intersection
                    with such congestion problems needs to be evaluated in a detailed traffic study
                    at the time that development in the area or roadway improvements are
                    proposed.         With the programmatic                   level of information              available     in the
                    General        Plan,   LOS along roadway segments can be evaluated and the
                    roadways sized to accommodate future traffic needs which is the purpose of
                    the Circulation Element.
                                          TABLE C- A: LEVEL OF SERVICE ( LOS) STANDARDS
                         L.evel of Se vice                           Description of Operatian &                         v ge of V/C Ratios
                                               Describes prima' liy free-flow cor ditions at average travel speeds.
                                 A           Vehicles are seldom in peded in their ability to maneuver in the trafl=ic     0.00-0.60
                                                           sU eam Delays at inte sections are mini rml.
                                             Represents reasonably uniitq ecied opeiaiions at average iravel speeds.
                                 B'           Ihe ability to maneuver in the haffic s rn is slightly neslricted and        0.61-0.70
                                                                    delays are not bothetsome.
                                               Represerrts stable operations, however, ability to change lanes and
                                 C            maneuver may be more restricted than L.OS B and longer queues are            0.71-0.80
                                                                   experienoed at inteisec,rtions.
LJ
                                 0             Congesrtion occws and a small change in volwr es ir       ses delays        0.81-0.90
                                                                           slibstantially.
                                 E           Severe congestion occ; rs with e ensive delays and lowira el spceds           0.91- 1. 00
                                                                               occ; u.
                                 F            C aracterizes aita ial flow at e rerr ely low speeds and intersection >          1. 00
                                                  congestian occurs with hi delays and e ctensive queuing.
                    Source: " Highway Capaciry Manual," Highway Research Board Special Report 209, National Research Council,
                    Washington D.C., 2000
   City af Calexico Genera! Pian
                                  r7E xvv ort;. , :           aE,       e±: e^  a4 3;. , <     v.:.
   a   f,          f
                                             T.:"' '"*.:
       i     Kloke Ave.                                   8       Zapata St.                                  1 5 Eady Ave.                                      Grant St.
       2     Coie Rd.                                     9       Rancho Fron2era Ave.                        1   CesaF Chavez       vd.                         Sherman Ave.
                                                                                                                                                                 5+h St.
      Q Eatrada Bivd.                                    1        A American Canai                                East Ralroad Bivd,
       4     Frontage Rd. West                           1"1'     Sam EIIisStreef                                 Rcickkwciod
                                                                                                                     c         Ave.                              2nd St.
       5     Frontage Rd. East                           1,       CaNe De Oto WesELoop                        i   F b r Avt.                                     NewRiverGreenway '
                                                         1,                                                       Enc+nas Ave.                                   Rair,rad tuk iti- use Path ,
       6     A eadows Rd.                                         State Hrc way 98                                                                          E'J
       7     Rockwnod Rve.                                        Slate N hvray 98 NorU east                    1 A. Anayd Ave.
   I.EGEND                                                                     f—{ Southem        Paeifrc Railway                        Mi     ClasstBicyclePath
                                    Sehaofs -—
                                4   F rks 1 Upen Space __._. _                       City Bountiary                                             Class Ii Bicyde Eane
                                    Cammunity Faci ity ,.                              Intecn ticmal Bounaary               x s ia euu Eema uau C1S98 N) Fi1GyGl   RfAiiB
                                                                                   Rroposed {mper'ial Gount                                     Mou        Bicyete! Hiking Trail
   o .           28       0.5 :     5       1 MNe                                  6kritcle A       ster Pt n
                                                                                                                                                       ain
Source: City of Calexico Bicycle Master Plan,                                                                                                                                  Figure C- 1. 5
                Wallace, Roberts and Todd, LLC 2002
                                                                                                                                            Proposed Bicycle Network
A  L B  E fi  T   A
WEBB '
  5. :           t5:
                                                                                                                                                           of Calexico General Plan

                                               3. 0 Circulation
                Page intentionally left blank.
City of a exicc General F' lan                              3- 10
                                                                                     3. 0 Circulation
    3. 3. 1  Tra   c Sfudies
                    The City of Calexico conducted a traffic study ( Appendix E) as part of the
                    2005 General Plan update. The objectives of the study were to determine the
                    future traffic volumes in the City of Calexico and its Sphere of Influence, to
 J                  determine whether the City' s required level of service standard will be
                    maintained at General Plan buildout year, and if not, what proposed roadway
                    classifications will be necessary to maintain said level of service. The study
                    was conducted in order to           make recommendations for the Circulation
                    Element and research available options on alleviating congestion along
                    Imperial Avenue and other primary/major roadways, as well as anticipating
                    and accommodating future growth allowed by the 2005 General Plan.
                    Due to Calexico' s unique proximity to the U. S./ Mexico border and the traffic
                    congestion challenges that proximity raises on both local and regional levels,
                    many traffic analyses have been completed over the years. Most recently,
                    IVAG     commissioned     the     Greater Calexico  Area   Arterial   Needs    and
                    Circulation Analysis, June 2005. Past studies addressing the border crossing
                    traffic   issues   include:   U. S.    GSA   Calexico   West    Border     Station
                    Expansion/ Renovation Feasibility Study,       2002- 2003;  the  Calexico    West
                    Border Station Expansion Circulation Analysis 2003; the Imperial County
                    Arterial Plan, 2000; and Imperial County Transportation Plan Highway
                    Element ( Caltrans District I 1),  2002.
IJ                  Traffic studies are also required by the City for major development projects
                    and even small projects that pose traffic/ congestion issues ( see Circulation
                    Element Policies which follow).
   Circulation System
ii
J  3. 4. 1 Classi cation of Streets
                    The circulation system consists of five standard street classification types:
                    highway, primary arterial, majar arterial, secondary arterial, and collector and
                    other smaller local roads. The General Plan Circulation Element plans for the
                    secondary roads, arterials, and highways but does not address the collector
                    and local roads. In addition, the City is bisected by two State Routes that are
                    considered freeways or expressways in some locations. Standard General Plan
                    Street Classifications are identifed in Table C- B and typical General Plan
                    Recommended Roadway Cross Sections of the Circulation Element roadways
                    are illustrated in Figure C- 2. The Recommended General Plan Circulation
                    Element planned roadway system is illustrated in Figure C- 3 with roadway
                    classification information Circulation Element Roadways shown in Table C-
                    C.
                    Any classification of street can be designed as divided or undivided roadway.
                    Divided roadways have the ability to incorporate turning lanes to improve the
   City of Calexica General Plan                                                                  3- 11
                                                                                                         3. 0 Circulation
                    through carrying capacity of the roadway. Further, divided roadways may
                     incorporate raised medians to restrict access from driveways and adjacent
                    roads. These types of roadways are the most efficient since conflicts or
                     intersections are minimized permitting traffic speed to be more constant.
                    Undivided roads are less efficient than divided roadways, though they may
                    incorporate the same number of through lanes as divided roadways. They also
                    require less right- of-way because they have no left-turn lane or raised median.
                    TABLE C- B:           STANDARD GENERAL PLAN STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
                             Classification                         Right-of-Way/Paved Width (in feet)'
                                Freeway                                               210 / 172
                              Expressway                                              210 / 172
                                Highway                                          48- 178 / 120- 124
                           Primary Arterial                                     100 - l 26 / 76 - 84
                            Major Arterial                                       80-   126/ 60- 80
                         Secondary Arterial                                             75 / 55
                    1 Ciry of Calexico Circulation Element Recommendations, September, 2005, Appendix E.
   3. 4. 2 Truck Routes
                    Although the opening of the eastern border crossing for commercial traffic has
                    improved the situation somewhat, truck traffic is still a safety and congestion
                    issue within Calexico. To alleviate some of the issues caused by truck traffic
                    on non- industrial secondary, collector and local streets, the Circulation
                    Element establishes truck routes to serve major industrial and commercial
                    areas of the City and to move trucks that do not have designated stops in
                    Calexico to better be directed through the City. Figure C- 4 shows the Interim
                    and Ultimate Truck Routes within Calexico. The " interim" routes would be
                    used until SR- 98 is realigned to the Bowker, Jasper, Dogwood alternative
                    alignment, then the ultimate truck routes could be established.
LJ
   City af Caiexico General Plar                                                                                      3- 12
1
     w                                                                                                              w
     z                                                                                                              z
                                                      200. 00'   RIGHT OF WAY
     J                                                                                                              J
     Q                                                                                                              Q
                   14. 00'                    80. 00'          I 6'    6' I     80. 00'            14. 00'
     0                                                                                                              0
     c                                                                                                              c
        SECTION
            HIGHWAY      111                            NO  SCALE
     w                                                                                                              w
     z                                                148. 00'   RIGHT OF WAY                                       z
     J                                                                                                              J
     Q
     0
                   14. 00'                    54. 00'          i 6' I  6' i     54. 00'            14. 00'
                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                    0
     c                                                                                                              c
        SECTION
           HIGHWAY       98                             NO  SCALE
     w                                                                                                              w
     z                                                                                                              z
                                                      160. 00'   RIGHT OF WAY
     J                                                                                                              J
     Q
     0
                   14. 00'                    54               i12' I12'  i     54. 00'            14. 00'
                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                    0
     c                                                                                                              c
        SECTION
           JASPEft     ROAD       REALIGNMENT           NO  SCALE
                                                                     i                                              w
     W
                                                                                                                    z
                                                      126. 00'   RIGHT OF WAY
     J                                                                                                              J
                  VARIES                                                                          VARIES
            15. 90'  TO    11. 9i          FC TO FC VARIES FROM 76. 00' TO 80. 00' (        34. 10'  TO   30. 10')
                                      VARIES  FROM 38'     TO 42' VARIES FROM 38' TO    42'
     0                                                                                                              0
     c                                                                                                              c
        SECTION
           PRIMARY       ROAD                           NO  SCALE
                                                                                                         FIGURE
 A L B   E   R T      A.                GENERAL PLAN                        RECOMMENDED
                                                                               SECTIONS                       C- 2
  I           BB
A S S 0 C I A T E S
                                            ROADWAY             CROSS
ENGINBBRZNG  CONSULTANTS
                                                  CITY OF CAI.EXICO. CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                                PAGE 3- 11
1
        w                                                                                            w
                                                                                                     z
        z                                          100. 00'    RIGHT   OF WAY
        J                                                                                            J
        Q
                      10. 00'              34. 00'             C'            34. 00' 10. 00'
        0                                                                                            0
        c                                                                                            c
           SECTION
tPRIMARY                     ROAD WITH MEDIAN        NO  SCALE
        w                                                                                            w
                                                                                                     z
        z                                          126. 00'    RIGHT OF WAY
        J
                      23. 00'                          80. 00'    FC TO  FC          23. 00'         Q
                                                                                                     3
        0                                                                                            0
                                                                                                     c
           SECTION
                                                     NO   SCALE
                MAJOR    ROAD
                                                                                                     w
        w
                                                                                                     z
        z                                           80. 00'  RIGHT    OF WAY
                                                                                                     J
        J
                                                       60. 00'    FC TO  FC                          Q
                                                                                                     3
        0                                                                                            0
                                                                                                     c
           SECTION
                                                      NO  SCALE
                MAJOR     ROAD
                                                                                                     w
         w
                                                                                                     z
         z                                          75. 00'  RIGIHT OF WAY                           J
         J
                                                                                     10. 00'         Q
                       10. 00'                         55. 00'    FC TO FC
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                     0
         0
                                                                                                     c
  a      c
  s
           SECTION
                SECONDARY       ROAD                  NO SCALE
  a
  e
                                                                                            FIGURE
     A L B    E  R T      A.           GENERAL PLAN RECOMMENDED
                                         ROADWAY CROSS SECTIONS                                 C- 2
      V EBB
    A S S 0 C I A T E S
                                                                                               CONTINUED
  g
  o ENGINSBRING  CONSULTANTS
                                               CITY OF CALEXICO,          CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                 PAGE 3- 12
  i
                                                                                                                              w                            s.
G:\ 200\ 04- 0046\ Iroffic\ General Plan. prol>> Iz0/ 2006I 4: SSPM
                               I"
                                                                                                      Z          C --_
                                                                                                      N—
                                                                                                                       DOGWOOD   RD
                                                                                                 2u                          zu
                                                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                              NC
                                                                                                                                    NG
                                            G
                                              Z
                                                                                                                        KLOKE RD
                                              N
                                               D                                                                          2U
                                                                            c(                                c
                                                                                   00                                               c
                                                                                                              N '
                                                                                                               n
                                                          CESAR       4u                                       m
                                                            HAVE
                                                                                                               o
                                                             IMP RIAL AVE
                                                                                                                                         SR-   1 1 1
                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                               u      ROCKWOOD         AVE              4u
                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                      BLAIR AVE                                                     N
                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                     ENCINAS AVE
      N                                                      2u                     RANCHO         FRONTERA                         0
      N
                      W
                                                                    ANDRAD      RD                                                     MEADOWS   RD
   a  n                                               il                   4U          4D            2U
   x D =                                                                                     N
                                                                         ANNYA               D
                                                                     EAST RIVERA
                                                                           z" '     s        m
                                                                                      p\     N
                                                      o _
                                                                           BOWKER  RD                                                  BOWKER   RD
                                                                          2u                                                 2u                      zu
    A
                                                                                           C                R
                 z                                                                 m       m
                    d                                                              v       o :
                 O
                 a
                 d
   o
    A
    O
                                                              c
                 y
                CJ
                                                                                        BARBARA WORTH      RD
                                                                          zu                   zu                         2u
                                                                                   D
                                                                                   O
                                                                                   D

                                                                                                      3. 0 Circulation
                                   TABLE C- C: CIRCULATION ELEMENT ROADWAYS
                                                                    East- West Roads
                                                                           ROW      Recommended     Recommended
  E- W Segments                                Limits
                                                                              ft.)   Classification     Lanes
       Heber Rd                 SR- 111 to Barbara Worth Rd                   75       Secondary          2U
      Jasper Rd                Dogwood Rd to Bowker Rd*                     210        Highway            6D
      Jasper Rd              Bowker Rd to Barbara Worth Rd                   100         Major            4U
        Cole Rd                Dogwood Rd to Meadows Rd                      126        Primary           4D
       Cole Rd                      Meadows Rd to SR- 98                     126         Major            4U
         SR- 98                 Dogwood Rd to Bowker Rd                      154       Highway            4D
         SR- 98             Bowker Rd to Barbara Worth Rd*                   178       Highway            6D
       Grant St            All- American Canal to Imperial Ave               75       Secondary           2U
         7th St                 Harold St. to E. City Limits                 75       Secondary           2U
  Anza Rd/ 2nd St             W. City Limits to Dogwood Rd                   100         Major            4U
  Anza Rd/ 2nd St              Dogwood Rd to tmperial Ave                    100        Primary           4D
  Anza Rd/2nd St            Imperial Ave to Barbara Worth Rd                 100         Major            4D
   Planned 6- Lane rea] ignment of SR- 98 along Bowker Rd, Jasper Rd, and Dogwood Rd
 D = Divided, U = Undivided
                                                                 North- South Roads
                                                                           ROW      Recommended     Recommended
     N- S Segments                               Limits
                                                                             ft.)    Classification     Lanes
      Dogwood Rd                    Anza Rd/ 2nd St to SR- 98               126         Primary           4D
      Dogwood Rd                       SR- 98 to Jasper Rd*                 148        Highway            6D
        Kloke Rd                Grant St to All- American Canal             100          Major            2U
        Kloke Rd              All-American Canal to Jasper Rd               100          Major            4U
   Cesar Chavez B1                        Border to SR- 98                  126         Primary           4D
      Imperial Ave                        Border to SR- 98                  126         Primary           4D
          SR- I11                        SR- 98 to Cole Rd                  178        Highway            6D
          SR- 111                     Cole Rd to Jasper Rd                  210      Expressway           6D
          SR- 1 ] 1               Jasper Rd to N. City Limits               210        Freeway            6D
    Rockwood Ave                         2nd St to Cole Rd                   80          Major            4U
      Encinas Ave                         2nd St to SR- 98                   75       Secondary           2U
     E Riviera Ave                        2nd St to SR- 98                   75       Secondary           2U
       Andrade Rd                          1 st St to SR- 98                100          Major           4U
     Meadows Rd                     SR- 98 to N. City Limits                l00         Primary           4D
       Bowker Rd                Anza Rd/ 2nd St to LaVigne Rd               100          Major            4U
       Bowker Rd                        LaVigne to SR- 98                   126        Primary            6D
       Bowker Rd                         SR- 98 to Cole Rd                  l00        Primary           4D
       Bowker Rd                     Cole Rd to Jasper Rd*                  148        Highway            6D
       Bowker Rd                  Jasper Rd to N. City Limits               l00          Major           4U
  Barbara Worth Rd                     2nd St to Jasper Rd                   75       Secondary          2U
   Planned 6- Lane realignment of SR- 98 along Bowker Rd, Jasper Rd, and Dogwood Rd
 D = Divided, U = Undivided
City ef Cal xico General Plan                                                                                      3- 17
                                      revisea tvov. u
  Source: City of Calexico       N                                                    Figure C- 4
                                   ss
                           W            E
                                                      Interim and Ultimate Truck Routes I
                                 cis
                                  S
W
i                       s
                        f9
                            Not to Scale
                                                                   City of Calexico General Plan I
                                                                                    3. 0 Circulation
I
  3. 5 Design Standards
  3. 5. 1  Interstate Highways
                    Interstate highways are intended to carry unimpeded traffic between major
                   traffic generators such as large commercial,       industrial, recreational,   and
                    residential areas. These highways, in general, are part of the overall regional
                    circulation system. The Calexico area is served by Interstate 8, located about 5
                   miles north of the planning area.
  3. 5. 2   Freeways, Expressways, and Highways
                    The freeway, expressway and highway classifications consist of four to eight
                   travel lanes with limited or no vehicular access to the roadway through
                   driveways and streets. The roadway is divided by a raised or striped median
                   with separate left turn lanes. Generally, highways intersect other highways at
                   approximately one- half mile intervals. Intersections with freeways and
                   expressways are spaced further apart and may consist of interchanges. These
                   roadways are expected to carry the majority of the through traffic between
                   adjacent communities and the freeway system. When built to maximum
                   design standards, these roadways are striped for two, three, or four lanes in
                   each direction, with shoulders, painted or raised medians, and left-turn lanes at
                    intersections ( highways and expressways only). Table C- D shows the
                   maximum capacity for all roadway types in Calexico. " Maximum capacity"
                   refers to the physical capacity of the roadway only and does not represent the
                   desired or required LOS on any roadway. Caltrans and the City of Calexico
                   desire a LOS C, which is calculated based on maximum capacity.
  3. 5.3    Primary Arterial
                   Primary arterial roadways are designed to have four travel lanes with limited
                   vehicular access from driveways and streets. The roadways usually have a
                   raised or painted median with separate left-turn lanes, and intersect with other
                   primary roadways, major arterials, and secondary arterials at approximately
                   one- eighth mile intervals. Primary roadways carry large volumes of through
                   traffic and collect traffic from limited secondary roadways. Primary roadways
                   are designed for two travel lanes in each direction with raised or painted
                   medians,     shoulders where right-of-way permits, and left-turn lanes at
                   intersections. When built to standard, this roadway classification has a
                   maximum capacity of 37, 500 vehicles per day ( see Table C- D).
  3. 5.4   Major Arterial
                   Major arterial roadways are planned as four lane undivided roadways with
                   partial control of access. Major streets move moderate volumes of through
                   traffic and serve as routes for local traffic to connect with highways and
                   primary arterials. They serve as access routes for local residents to reach
                   activity areas in the City, and may also provide direct access to commercial
  City of Calexico Genera[ Pian                                                                  3- 18
                                                                                                                         3. 0 Circulation
                        properties. This classification of roadway is striped for two travel lanes in
                        each direction, with on- street curbside parking and left-turn lanes at major
                        intersections. The maximum capacity for limited secondary highways is
                        25, 000 vehicles per day ( see Table C- D).
3. 5.5 Secondary Arterial
                        Secondary arterial roadways are planned as two lane undivided roadways with
                        limited      access.       These       roads      serve      more       local     traffic     from       residential,
                        commercial, and industrial areas and feed into the arterial system. Secondary
                        arteriats provide a necessary connection to the major traffic carriers and have
                        a typical maximum capacity of 17, 500 vehicles per day ( see Table C- D).
         TABLE C- D: MAXIMUM CAPACITY BY ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION
                 Roadway                     Roadway Width                                    Right- of-Way ,           9£- Maximum
                                                                             Section (
              Classification (                       Feet)                                          Feet)                   Capacity*
        8- Lane Freeway -                                                       8F                                           140, 000
       6- Lane Freeway -                                                        6F                                           105, 000
       6- Lane Expressway -                                                     6E -                                          90, 000
       Highway -                                                                4D                80- 148                     56, 300
       Highway 111                                    160                       6D                  200                       60, 000
       Primary                                         80                       4D ]               00- 126                    37, 500
       Major                                          60                        4U                80- 126                    25, 000
       Secondary                                      50                        2U                 70- 75                     17, 500
       2- Lane Divided                                50                        2D                 70- 75                     17, 500
       Collector                                      40                        2U                   60                       16, 200
       Local                                          40                        2U                   60                       12, 500
         These roadway capacities are approximate figures only, and are used at the General Plan level. They are affected by such
       factors as intersections ( numbers & configuration), degree of access control, roadway grades, design geometrics ( horizontal
          vertica] alignment standards), sight distance, level of truck and bus Vaffic, and level of pedestrian and bicycle traffic.
       Average daily traffic (ADT) is used in this modei application as a long range planning tool to assist in determining roadway
       highway classification ( number of thru lanes) needed to meet tra     c demand.
3. 6      Goal, Objectives, and Policie
3. 6. 1     Goal
                        The circulation system should promote the safe, efficient movement of people,
                        goods and vehicles, and protect and enhance the environmental quality of
                        Calexico.
3. 6. 1. 1     Land Use and Circvlation
Objective 1
                        Land use should be planned in conjunction with the circulation so that it does
                        not overburden the City's existing and/ or planned circulation system.
City af Calexic           enera! Plan                                                                                                  3- 19

                                                                                        3. 0 Circulation
   PO ICy 1
                    a        The City shall establish Level of Service "        C"   as    the minimum
                             acceptable    Level   of  Service. No    development    project    shall   be
                             approved that wilt increase the traffic on a planned or existing City
                             street above the street' s existing design capacity at Level of Service
                               C" without adequate mitigation.
                             The City should monitor the impact of development proposals as well
                             as intra- and inter-City land uses on circulation to ensure that the
                             circulation system is not overburdened.
                    c.
                             The City shall work with Calexico Unified School District and other
                             private or public educational institutions to site schools in such a way
                             as to reduce traffic congestion problems at key drop-off and pick-up
                             hours to benefit both the safety of the students and other local
i                            residents.
                             Industrial land uses should be located and site planned to encourage
                             the use of designated truck routes and discourage truck traffic from
                             using non- industrial secondary, collector, and local streets.
                    e        Commercial, civic uses, schools, and services should be located near
                             enough to residential areas to allow for and encourage pedestrian
                             access.
Il
    3. 6. 1. 2 Streef Nefwork and Standards
   Objective 2
                    The General Plan shall establish a system of street classifications and set
                    standards for each.
   Policy 2
                    a.       The City shall utilize Level of Service (       LOS)   as    a  measure    of
                             acceptable traffic flow and operational conditions at intersections.
                    b.       The City shall establish intersection LOS "        C"  as    the  minimum
                             acceptable LOS.
                    c.       The City shall adopt the street classifications described in Sections 3. 4
                             and 3. 5 of the Circulation Element, herein.
                    d.       The City shall require all public rights-of-way to be landscaped and
                             seek funding sources for ongoing maintenance.
   3. 6. 1. 3  Access
   Objective 3
                    Access to highways, primary arterials and major arterials shall be limited to
                    maintain capacity, efficiency and the safety of the traffic flow on the City' s
                    streets.
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                     3- 20
                                                                                        3. 0 Circulation
 i
     Policy 3
                       a.
                               Collector roads and secondary arterials shall be used for access to
                               highways, and primary and major arterials, such as Imperial Avenue.
                               Other existing access points that do not meet this criteria shall be
                               evaluated to determine if they can either have limited or no access.
                       b.     Access to all highways, primary arterials, and major arterials shall be
                              restricted to approved points of ingress and egress.
                       c.      Where access to a highway, or primary or major arterial is considered
                              necessary, access shall be limited to one point for 300 feet of frontage
                              or one point per parcel, if parcel has less than 300 feet of frontage.
                              Highway access points shall be reviewed and approved by Caltrans, on
                              a case by case basis.
                       d.     Combined access between adjacent properties shall be required prior
                              to the allowance of access to highways, primary arterials, and major
                              arterials to reduce the overall number and frequency of access points.
                       e.     Access points along primary, major and secondary arterials should be
                              located a minimum of 100 feet from the end of the curb return at
                              corners on all City roads.
                       f.     Access points shall be coordinated with existing or planned access
                              points on the opposite side of the street and the breaks in medians.
     3. 6. 1. 4  Transportation Systems Management
     Objective 4
                       The City should use state- of-the- art transportation system management
                       planning programs to increase the efficiency on all of Calexico' s street
                       system, while keeping down capital costs. ( See also Section 3. 6. 1. 5, Objective
                       5.)
     Policy 4
                       a.     The City shall encourage ride sharing in both the public and private
                              sectors as a means of reducing overall traffic generation.
                       b.     The City should evaluate proposed development plans and existing
                              sites for areas located near good access points along highways and
1                             primary arterials to designate needed park and ride facility locations.
                       c.     The City shall work with Caltrans to evaluate and implement a feasible
                              and optimal signal timing plan along Highway 111/ Imperial Avenue.
IJ                     d.     The City shall discourage diversion of truck traffic to secondary and
                              collector streets by providing maximum capacity and Levels of
                              Service on primary and major arterials.
                       e.     The City shall establish designated Truck Routes as shown on Figure
                              C- 4 herein. These routes shall be posted with signs; and enforced by
                              Calexico Police Department.
   i
     City     Calexico Gene a[ Plan                                                                  3- 21
                                                                                      3. 0 Circulation
    3. 6. 1. 5  Public Transportation
    Objective 5
                     The City shall develop a transit network capable of satisfying both local and
                     regional travel demand.
    Policy 5
                     a.      The City shall work with IVAG and other local and regional transit
                             agencies to develop an adequate public transportation system that best
                             serves the needs of the entire community.
                     b.      The City should develop a short- range transit plan to implement an
                             efficient and useful public transportation system.
                     c.      By continuing its dial- a- ride demand service bus system, the City
                             should pay particular attention to the needs of transit dependents in the
                             community such as senior citizens, the handicapped, and low and
                             moderate income residents when designing the overall transit plan for
                             the City.
                     d.      Encourage maximum utilization of the existing transit system in
                             Calexico through education and provision of bus shelters and benches.
                     e.      The City should require developers of new industrial, residential, or
                             commercial projects to coordinate with the local transit provider( s) to
                             best incorporate design features that increase the potential for public
                            transit service and provide effective transit use as the City grows.
                     f.     To    assist international  pedestrians   that need    or want   to  reach
                            destinations within Calexico, public transportation should be routed to
                            easily pick up consumers and/ or students within walking distance of
                            the border. Destinations should include major retail centers such as
                            Wal- Mart, Las Palmas, and Price Center for those who may want to
LJ
                             shop, and private schools where international studer ts attend.
                     g.     Require the design of transit stops to be compatible with adjacent
                            development and provide for adequate seating, signs, and shade.
                     h.     To encourage new development to support transit ridership and reduce
                            vehicle traffic on local and regional roads/ highways, and increase
                            funding opportunities for transportation, the City should evaluate the
                            use of "transit village development districts" as defined and regulated
                            by state law ( Government Code sections 65460.3 through 65460. 10).
  I
    Gity of Calexico General Plan                                                                  3- 22
                                                                                  3. 0 Circulation
3. 6. 1. 6 Pedestrian Facilities
Objective 6
                 Pedestrian facilities shall be developed throughout the City to encourage
                 walking as an alternative to the automobile.
Policy 6
                 a.      All urban standard streets should have improved sidewalks on both
                         sides of the road.
                 b.      Rural streets which lead to schools or bus stops should have improved
                         sidewalks on one side of the road.
3. 6. 1. 7 Bicycle Facilities
Objective 7
                 Develop a well- designed bicycle network throughout the City that provides
                 for safe and efficient means of transportation and recreation.
Policy 7
                 a.      The City shall implement the Bicycle Master Plan, September 30,
                         2003, and any amendments thereto, to promote bicycle travel as an
                         alternate mode of transportation.
                 b.      Encourage cycling by planning accordingly and incorporating bike
                         racks when developing new schools, parks, residential communities,
                         and retail/ employment centers.
                 c.      Integrate Master Plan bicycle facilities as part of the design and
                         construction of new roadways and upgrade of existing roadways.
3. 6. 1. 8 Local Streets
Objective 8
                  Local streets should be designed to discourage non- local traffic.
Policy 8
                 a.      Local streets should not be used to link arterial roads and create " short-
                         cuts."
                 b.      Devices such as, but not limited to, landscaped encroachments, traffic
                         circles, or medians may be used to inhibit or slow general traffc in
                         local areas.
                 c.      In the event that the traffic on local streets, particularly within a
                         residential neighborhood, has or may exceed 5, 000 vehicles per day as
                         a result of a new development, the City should require or commission
City of CaEexicc Ge erai Plan                                                                   3- 23
                                                                                      3. 0 Circulation
                           a local traffic study to indicate needed measures to mitigate increased
I
                           traffic levels.
                  d.       The City should explore the feasibility of closing some of the existing
                           through streets in the developed portion of town to reduce through
                           traffic in residential areas.
                  e.       The eventual paving and furthered development of East Railroad
                           Boulevard as an important north/ south arterial for truck traffic shall be
                           encouraged.
                  f.       To help maintain safe speeds on local streets, the City shal discourage
                           long straight streets within residential areas. The City should review
                           all    residential  tract  maps    and   require   one   or    more   traffic
                           slowing/ stopping measures on local streets such as, but not timited to:
                           curvilinear streets, all- way stop signs at tee and four-way intersections,
                           items listed in Policy 8a, above, and reduced street lengths.
                  g.       For safety purposes, cul- de- sacs should not exceed in length or turning
                           radii those that meet Fire Department requirements.
  3. 6. 1. 9 Financing Improvements
  Objective 9
                  The financing of expansion to the City circulation system made necessary by
                  development shall be borne by the proposal applicants, while the maintenance
                  and improvement of the existing street system shall be borne by the City and
                  its residents.
  Policy 9
                  a.       The City shall determine and update, as necessary, the cost of
                           improvements to maintenance of the City circulation system.
                  b.       The City shall adopt and implement appropriate fee ordinances,
                           resolutions,    fnancing districts or other mechanisms that require
                           development proposal applicants to build and/ or to pay appropriate
                             fair share" fees for the improvement of the City circulation system.
                           The City shall also require applicants to include their development
i                          projects in financing mechanisms created to address maintenance of
                           circulation system facilities.
                  c.       The City shall adopt and implement appropriate measures to defray the
                           costs of improvements to the exiting street system through the use of
                           assessment district financing, grants and other sources of revenue.
                  d.       Develop 5- year capital improvement plans to develop the roadway
                           system, as necessary for buildout of the General Plan.
  City f Ca(axico Gene.ral Plan                                                                    3- 24
                                                                                        3. 0 Circulation
   3. 6. 1. 10  Landscaping and City Identity
   Objective 10
                    To create streets, highways, and trails that add to the positive experience of
                    Calexico by drivers, pedestrians and cyclists.
   Policy 10
                    a.     The City shall ensure that streetscape design along roadways creates a
                           strong landscaped edge, provides a coherent high-quality appearance
                           along each route, and enhances the image of adjacent development.
C'                         Coherent design elements can include such things as designated street
                           trees, trails installed pursuant to the Bicycle Master Plan, enhanced
                           paving, lighting, and consistent setbacks.
                    b.     The City shall promote the establishment of entry monument signs as a
                           means of stimulating community, district, and neighborhood identity.
                    c.     The City should coordinate with the railroad to develop and install a
                           landscape plan for the railroad right-of-way in conjunction with the
                           implementation of the trail system identified in the Bicycle Master
                           Plan.
                    d.     To enhance impressions of Calexico at places that serve as entry
                           points, or " gateways",  to the City ( e. g., international border, Hwy. 1 l 1
                           and Jasper Road, SR 98 at Dogwood Road), landscaping and City
                           identification monument signs should be developed at key locations.
J
1  Gity of Cai xicQ General Plan                                                                     3- 25
                                                                     Q.;". (. 7 3 9; S.'s6 F' f;' LC' e` :      i
I 4. 0 PUBLIC FACILITIES/ SERVICES ELEMENT
  4. 1 Introduction
                   A Public Facilities/ Services Element is not one of the state- required
                   elements for inclusion in a General Plan. Typically, many of the issues
                   discussed herein have significant overlap with other elements. However,
                   the City of Calexico is committed to providing adequate public facilities
                   and services to its residents, and thus feels compelled to address these
                   issues in greater detail. The adequacy of public facilities and services is
                   key to providing the City' s residents with the ability to attain a high
                   quality of life. Since the adoption of the last General Plan by the City in
                    1992, the population of Calexico has grown by more than 50% and is
                   expected to continue to grow. It is important to provide adequate public
                   facilities and services to existing residents as well as provide them for new
                   development— these facilities and services are essential for quality urban
                   living and the framework for new development.
                   Public facilities and services are responses by institutions to basic human
                   needs such as safety, health, education, and worship. They include police,
                   hospitals, schools, churches, and safe drinking water. Public facilities and
                   service are provided by all levels of government as well as other public
                   and quasi- public organizations. The degree to which these basic types of
                   needs are met helps to define the character and identity of a community.
                   This element addresses sewer facilities, water systems, and storm drain
                   facilities. It will also address public services in the form of health care,
                   library,    education,   and  police   and   fire   protection.        Other    public
                   facilities/ services such as parks and recreation are discussed in Element
                   6. 0 of this General Plan. A key component of the discussion and policies
                   herein are implementation mechanisms to finance the reyuired capital
                   improvements.
  4. 2 Existing Conditions
  4.2. 1 Public Facilifies
  4.2. 1. 1 Sewers
                   The City' s sewer system is segmented into three " zones" defined, as such,
                   by into which of the three sewer interceptors they discharge. As stated in
                   the current Service Area Plan, as a result of the flat topography, most of
                   the sewer lines are constructed at minimum slope and the interceptors are
                   fairly deep, some as much as 20 feet. Also, the flat topography
                   necessitates the construction of many small lift-stations to provide
                   adequate flow. All sewage flows to the activated sludge wastewater
                                                                                                           4- 1
  City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                           4.     al;        l 3' s.;'€  v.,
                     treatment plant located north of Calexico International Airport and south
                     of the New River. Treated effluent is deposited into the New River.
                     The maximum daily flow capacity for the existing sewage treatment
                     facility is 4. 30 million gallons per day ( mgd). The City operates currently
                     with an average daily flow (" ADF")         of 2. 7 mgd.  Although rain is rare in
                     Calexico, peak wet weather flows (" PWWF")                currently exceed plant
                     capacity at 4. 9 mgd. By 2015, growth is projected such that flow demand
                     will exceed capacity with an ADF of 5. 0 mgd. Bond funding is being put
                     in place now to rectify deficiencies and accommodate future needs. By
                     2010 the treatment plant should be upgraded to a capacity of 8. 5 mgd
                     which will accommodate projected ADF and PWWF at least through
                     2015. Ultimate build-out for the treatment facility ( 2030) according to the
                     2005 Service Area Plan is 18. 4 mgd. However, an accurate assessment of
                     sewage capacity and subsequent policies requires an updated sewer master
                    plan and Service Area Plan updates every five years.
   4.2. 1. 2 Potable Water
                     Calexico receives all of its potable water from the Calexico Water
CI                  Department. The Calexico Water Department purchases its raw water
                    from Imperial Irrigation District ( IID) which acquires its water from the
                    Colorado River via an open canal system. Currently, 2% of IID water is
                    divided among Calexico and other Imperial Valley cities. According to the
                    current Service Area Plan, the raw water from the canal is pumped
                    through a 42- inch pipe into the City' s 25 million gallon reservoir. Three
                    pumps transfer water via a 36- inch pipe from either the reservoir or the
                    canal to the City' s treatment facility and have a maximum daily capacity
                    of 18 mgd. The existing treatment plant has a capacity of 16 mgd. Treated
                    water is transferred and stored in three above ground tanks. These tanks
                    have a combined capacity of 8 million gallons. There is a proposal to build
                    an 6 million gallon tank near Cole Road and Highway 98 to serve current
                    needs and future growth in the City' s Sphere of Influence. As with the
                    sewers, a sufficient assessment of water requirements can only be made
                    within the framework of a 5- year Service Area Plan.
   4. 2. 1. 3 Storm Water
                    Storm water drainage in the City currently utilizes a combination of piping
                    into the New River and discharge through IID main and lateral drains. Due
                    to the precariousness of this arrangement, detention basins are used to
1                   control the amount of water that is discharged into IID canals. The IID
                    canals were originally designed only to handle agricultural runoff, and as
                    such, IID limits the amount of storm water that is discharged into them to
                    prevent downstream flooding. There are also numerous unresolved water
                      City of Calexico Service Area Plan for Wastewater and Water Facilities, 8/ 2005.
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                        4- 2

I
                                                                            c.     F  s.'         r°:
                    quality issues regarding the New River and ultimately the Salton Sea ( the
                    water body to which the river and the canals drain) which prohibits simply
                    diverting all storm runoff from new developments to the river. Currently,
                    there is no lead flood control agency to ensure compliance with the
                    various regulations associated with storm water discharge into the New
                    River or any type of stream bed alterations necessary to accommodate new
                    capacity. A current 5- year Service Area Plan is necessary for an accurate
                    and detailed storm water assessment.
  4. 2. 1. 4 Public Buildings
                    Public buildings are an important part of the City of Calexico. Typically,
                    public buildings refer to those owned by the City, but are also made up of
                    buildings owned by the County of Imperial and IID. Public buildings are
                    used   primarily   as  places  of public     meeting,      assembly,    or   public
                    information. An example of a public building in Calexico is City Hall.
                    Public buildings may also be important socially or culturally, serving as
                    sources of civic pride and enrichment. See Figure PF- 1.
U
  4.2. 2 Public Services
  4. 2. 2. 1 Health Care
                    The City of Calexico currently does not have an operational hospitaL The
                    Heffernan Memorial Hospital officially closed in 1997 after a long history
                    of financial troubles and diminished quality of care issues. The City has
                    five privately- operated medical facilities: Clinicas del Pueblo, Inc., Valley
                   Family Care Centers, Pioneers Health Center, Imperial Valley Women' s
                   Clinic, and the Calexico Medical Center. Residents of Calexico use El
                    Centro Regional Medical       Center and the Pioneers Health Center in
t                  Brawley for hospital services.      The     Heffernan    Hospital      District    and
                   Pioneers    Health    Memorial   Healthcare      District    have     developed      a
                   partnership and have opened an urgent care facility at the site of the
                   former Heffernan Memorial Hospital. The City of Calexico had a% 2 cent
                   sales tax in place for ten years, but its extension was not approved by the
                   voters in November of 2005. The tax expired on March 31, 200b. The
1                  Heffernan Hospital District now has a plan to phase development of a new
                   medical complex and funds the staffing of a second ambulance unit for he
                   City of Calexico Fire Department.
  4. 2. 2. 2 Libraries
                   The Camarena Memorial Library currently serves the City of Calexico
                   along with a branch location at William Moreno Junior High School. The
                   branch library operates with very limited hours. The Camarena Memorial
                   Library has a collection of over 70, 000 books, periodicals, and other
                   materials housed in 12, 000 square feet. This Library has special
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                    4- 3
1

                                                                         E c .    r' s°  r°,
                 collections on Imperial Valley history and Caesar Chavez. Other facilities
                 at the library include internet access, word processing equipment, copy
                 machines, and meeting rooms. The Library also offers a variety of
                 bilingual ( English    and   Spanish)   community     programs         and   classes
                 including: adult literacy tutoring, summer programs, teen                 programs,
                 internet training, and Families for Literacy for children under 5.
                 The Library has a current staff of 4 full- time and 4 part-time workers. The
                 existing facilities are at capacity. The Library Board recognizes the need
                 to expand the main library to 24, 000 syuare feet and eventually build
                 another branch library. Included in the main library expansion would be
                 facilities for arts/ crafts, more   computers,  additional    staff,     and   small
                 conference rooms.
                 Additional library facilities available in the City of Calexico are provided
                 by the San Diego State University Imperial Valley Campus. The
                 university library serves approximately 900 students and contains over
                  110, 000 books and other materials.
                                                                                                4- 4
City of Calexicn General Plan

                                                         NOV.   IV, LUUD.
                                     N
    Source: City of Calexico                                                       I. . . ND                                                        Figure PF- 1
                                                                gg                  HIGHWAY           rT ALLAMERICAVCAVAL
                                       BB
                               W     cts  E
                                                                                    PROPOSED FREEWAY  TT CE1V7' RAL MAIN CANAL
                                                            POLICE
                                                                                    PROPOSED STREET -    NEW RIVER
                                                                                                                               Existing Public Facilities
                                      S
                                                              CITYLIMITS
                                                    I„ -                            RAILROAD
                             0 7501,500   3, 000
A                                                             INTERNATIONAL BORDER  s   Er
tii
                                               Feet                                                                               City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                        f ia; aca€ f`,.} ru€:
  4. 2. 2. 3 Education
                   The City of Calexico is served by the Calexico Unified School District
                    CUSD). CUSD currently has nearly 9, 000 students in 6 elementary
                   schools, 1 high school, 1 continuation high school, 2 junior high schools,
                   and one adult education center. ( See Figure PF- 2.) Table PF- A names the
                   facilities shown on Figure PF- 2. There are 500 certificated personnel and
                   400 staff employed by CUSD. The District was recognized in 1994 by the
u
                   National Association for Bilingual Education and boasts about a 75%      rate
                   of students continuing on to some type of post-secondary education. The
                   schools operated by CUSD are:
                   Hi h Schools
                       Calexico High School ( Grades 10- 12)
                       Aurora Continuation High School ( Grades 9- 12)
                   Junior High Schools ( Grades 7- 9
                       De Anza Junior High School
                       William Moreno Junior High School
                   Elementary Schools ( Grades K-6
                       Blanche Charles Elementary
                       Dool Elementary School
                       Rockwood Elementary
                       Kennedy Gardens Elementary
                       Jefferson Elementary
                       Mains Elementary
                   Adult Education
                       Robert Morales Adult Basis Educational School
                   CUSD has had to cope with tremendous growth and has had issues of
                   overcrowding. Other schools in Imperial Valley have changed to the
                   multi- track year-round schedule to help mitigate overcrowding from
                   burgeoning student populations. CUSD, however, has not been able to
                   change from a traditional school year due to the significant number of
                   students from families of migrant farm workers. Approximately 23%      of all
                   students enrolled in CUSD schools are from migrant families. CUSD has
                   determined that switching to a year-round school year would make it
                   impossible for these students to attend school.
                   CUSD expects to see significant growth in student population; enrollment
                   is predicted to double in the next ten years. With this amount of growth,
                   the district expects to need an additional 9 to 12 new schools in the next
  City of Caiexico General Plan                                                           4- 6

                                                                       ii!;T EC c a,6f EE:,"`«,£'" 4' sf;':
                   0 to 12 years. In an attempt to prepare for this expected growth as well as
                 better serve the needs of current residents, voters in the City approved
                 Measure J in March of 2004. Measure J approved the floating of a$ 30
                 million general obligation bond for the remodeling of existing schools and
                 the construction of new ones. Currently there are plans to renovate
                 Calexico High School, build Caesar Chavez Elementary School ( new),
                 and possibly construct a new junior high school. In addition, the District
                 would like to develop a vocational arts high school program.
                           TABLE PF-A: MAP LOCATOR FOR FIGURE PF- 2
                                    Map Locator No.                                 School
                   Calexico High School                                                  1
                  Aurora Continuation High School                                        2
                  De Anza Junior High School                                             3
                   William Moreno Junior H. S.                                           4
                  Blanche Charles Elementary                                             5
                  Dool Elementary School                                                 6
                  Rockwood Elementary School                                             7
                   Kennedy Gardens Elementary                                            8
                  Jefferson Elementary School                                            9
                  Mains Elementary School                                               l0
                  Vincent Memorial High School                                          11
                   San Diego State University                                           12
                 In addition to the schools provided by the CUSD, there are three private
                 academic institutions within the City. These include Our Lady of
                 Guadalupe School ( K- 8),    Vincent Memorial High School ( 9- 12),                   and
                 Calexico Adventist Mission School ( K- 12).
                 Also located in Calexico is the Imperial Valley branch of San Diego State
                 University. The campus serves over 900 upper- division students, 35%                       of
                 which are enrolled in graduate studies. The students at this campus are
                 78% Hispanic and 70% female. The eight- acre campus is located near
                 Calexico City Hall and includes a 110, 000 volume library, a computer lab,
                 the John Steppling Art Gallery, and numerous other facility buildings.
                                                                                                   4- 7
Gity of Calexico General Plan

                               1. mxd  Mao revised March 7
                                                NOTE:
  Ol     CALEXICO HIGH SCHOOL
                                                Areas shown with land use designations which                        RD
  O2     AURORA CONTINUAT[ ON HIGH SCHOOL       aze located outside ofthe City' s current Sphere
                                                of Influence will be subject to future changes
  O3     DE ANZA JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL
                                                and/ or modifications of use as determined in
  O4     WILLIAM MORENO JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL        e future Sphere of Influence expansion study,
                                                including the addition of an eastem
  OS     BLANCHE CHARLES ELEMENTARY             industrial corridor.
  O6     DOOL ELEMENTARY
                                                                                                                                                       Li
  O7     ROCKWOOD ELEMENTARY
  O8     KENNEDY GARDENS ELEMENTARY
   O JEFFERSON ELEMENTARY
                                                                                             wa ou
         MAINS ELEMENTARY
   Q VINCENT MEMORIAL HIGH SCHOOL
                                                                                                                                               F
         SAN DIEGO STATE UNIVERS[ TY
                                                     Q                 Q              m                                                        A
                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                  Q
                                                              eF
                                                               g •'
                                                                                                                       n
           N
                                                                 C
           EBB
  W       GIS     E
           S
   Not to Scale
Source: Calexico Unified                                                                      LEGEND                                                                     Figure PF- 2
             School District           i      CITYLIhllTS                           ELEMENTARYSCHOOL   ryIGHWAY          Tr ALLAMERICANCANAL
                                                                                        OR HIGH SCHOOL
                                              INTERNATIONAL BORDER                                     pROPOSED FREEWAY   r CEN' 1' RAL MAIN CANAL
                                                                                    HIGH SCHOOL
                                                                                                                                                                           Schools
                                             NEAR- TERM SPHERE OF INFLUENCE —                          RAILROAD —           NEW RIVER
 A L B E R_ T  0.                                                                   WLLEGE
                                                                                                                         Q
                                                                                                                            FU' fURESCHOOL( S)-
WEBB                                   Q AUD-TERM SPE RE OF INFLUENCE                                  STREET
                                                                                                                            I,pCATtON TO BE DETERMINED
a aw aconoisE S                        QLONGTERMSPHEREOFINFLUENCE                                                                                      City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                         r.[ ;       s t',°_.
u
  4. 2. 2.4 Police
                   The City of Calexico receives law enforcement services from the Calexico
                   Police Department. The City' s police station is located at 420 E. 5`" Street
                   with substations at Nosotros and International Parks, and near Meadows
                   Avenue north of SR- 98, see Figure PF- 1.     As of April 2005, there are 43
                   sworn officers working for the department ( however, the City is budgeted
                   for 48 officers), for a staffing ratio of approximately 1. 3 officers per 1, 000
                   residents. The majority of officers work on a beat system which means
                   that they are assigned to patrol a certain section of the City. The current
                   Service Area Plan estimates that the existing police stations will be
                   adequate to accommodate the department' s future growth of personnel
                   through the year 2020. There is, however, a proposed joint-use fire/ police
                   station to be located in the northeast area of the City that will serve
                   proposed new development in that area and maintain quick response time.
  4. 2. 2. 5 Fire Protection
                                                                                                   Stn
                   The city of Calexico currently has two fire stations, located at 430 East
                   Street and at 900 Grant Street, see Figure PF- l. There are a total of 32
                   professional firefighters employed by the Calexico Fire Department:               1
                   chief, 30 firefighters, and an administrative staff.
                   The Department is also working toward adding reserve firefighters in the
                   near future. The Calexico Fire Department is a member of the Imperial
                   Valley Firefghters Strike Force which is responsible to respond to fire
                   emergencies throughout California. The Department is also a member of
                   the Imperial Valley Hazardous Materials Response Team and is available
                   to respond to hazardous materials emergencies throughout the Imperial
J
                   County. The Fire Department presently belongs to Imperial Valley
                   Emergency Communications Authority (" IVECA") and Radio Community
                   Server (" RCS")    which have integrated communications in the Imperial
                   Valley and San Diego County; and will soon include Yuma County, AZ.
  4. 2. 2. 6 Solid Waste
                   Solid waste collection and disposal is contracted through Allied Waste.
                   The collected waste is deposited in a private landfill that is located in the
                   City of Imperial. Estimates by the City' s Public Facilities Director,
                   regarding the capacity of the Imperial landfill, is that the landfill has
                   adequate capacity to accommodate the City' s growth for the next ten
                   years. However, Imperial County is actively seeking a new site on which
                   to build a landfill.
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                               4- 9

J
                                                                     Fa, `  s:    r=   f  r.
  4. 3 Establishing a Vision
                   The Vision for adequate public services and facilities in the City of
                   Calexico is essential for quality urban living. It is also necessary for the
                   future of the city as new growth will require additional facilities and
                   services. The Public Facilities and Services Element is responsive to the
                   City' s vision because it:
                   a.     identifies facilities and services that support the functions that are
                          essential to the future development of the City while retaining and
                          improving existing areas of the City,
                   b.     demonstrates a commitment to this important aspect of community
                          development by our public officials,
                   c.     strengthens the City' s overall sense of "community,"  and
                   d.     adds to the desirability of the community as a place to attract
                          business investment and home ownership.
  4.4 Goal, Objectives, and Policies
  4.4. 1 Goal
                   To provide a full range of the necessary public facilities and services that
                   are convenient to users, economical, and reinforce a quality City identity.
  4.4. 1. 1 Facilities and Services Development
  Objective 1
                   To coordinate planning and development of Calexico' s public facilities
                   and services with the private development sector, Calexico Unified School
                   District, San Diego State University, Imperiat County, and other public
                   agencies.
  Policy 1
                   a.     Establish funding mechanisms to fund the construction or expansion
                          of public services and facilities necessitated by new development.
                          The City should adopt appropriate ordinance( s) that implement
                          impact fees and/ or exactions on developers to fund the construction
                          of public facilities caused by the new development. The ordinance
                          should delineate methods for fee calculation to allow developers to
                          know in advance their expected fee.
                          The City should, where appropriate and feasible, create assessment
                          districts to fund certain public improvements.
                   c      The City should use general obligation and revenue bonds to finance
                          long-term capital improvements.
  City af Ca(exico General Plan                                                           4- 10
1
                                                                          4,   e. t:     c:;€ s-:;.°    i  s
                     d.     Develop joint-use/joint-power agreements with Calexico Unified
                             School District, San Diego State University, and other special
                             districts  or agencies.    Examples of facility agreements include
                             libraries, theaters, learning facilities, and athletic fields.
                     e.     The City shall consider combining agencies that provide similar
                             services in order facilitate acquisition of these services and to
                            prevent similar agencies from performing the same tasks.
    4.4. 1. 2 Sewers
    Objective 2
                     To provide high quality sewage services to existing residents as well as to
                     accommodate future growth and development.
    Policy 2
                     a.     Approve new development only if sewer facilities will be expanded
                            to serve these areas at the expense of the developer or City.
                     b.     Continually monitor the existing sewer system to identify any
                            necessary improvements to maintain high quality service and to
                            ensure compliance with secondary treatment standards.
                            Sewer service shall exist prior to the approval of any new
                            development application which requires community sewer service.
                            Future sewer service expansions should be designed to maintain
                            adeyuate level of service.
                     e.     The extension of sewage transmission lines or pumping services to
                            accommodate new developments should be limited to within one
                            quarter mile of developed areas.
  l                  f.     All improvements to the existing sewer system necessitated by the
                            approval of a new development project shall be financed entirely by
                            the proponent either by fee or actual construction.
                     g.     All future tentative maps should be approved only with conditions
                            based on water and sewer service availability. There shall be no
1                           exceptions, either on occasion or by approval.
    4.4. 1. 3 Potable Water
1   Objective 3
                     To provide high quality potable water services to existing residents as well
                     as to accommodate future growth and development.
     Policy 3
                     a.     The City shall assess existing water capacity when reviewing
                            applications for new development, and comply with Senate Bills
    City of Calexico General Plan                                                                    4- 11

                                                                    a,   a   t° F  r€ iiF  t,.:€.
                         610 and 221 requiring water supply assurance for projects of
                         significant size ( any project requiring water in the amount of or
                         greater than that which would be required by a 500 dwelling unit
                         residential project).
                   b.    All improvements to existing water system that are necessitated by a
                         new development shall be financed entirely by the developer either
                         by fee or actual construction.
                   c.    The dedication, maintenance, and construction of new water storage
                         facilities, pumps, and transmission lines to serve new development
                         shall be reviewed by the City with each new development
                         application.
                   d.    The City shall incorporate measures to promote the conversation of
                         water in new and existing development, specifically best available
                         technologies in new construction and site development, including,
                         but not limited to, water-saving toilets, showerheads, faucets, and
                         water conserving irrigation.
                   e.    The extension of water service facilities such as transmission lines
                         or   pumps    should  be    limited  to one- quarter     mile    across       an
                         undeveloped area when necessitated by new development.
  4.4. 1. 4 Storm Water
  Objective 4
                   To maintain the current system and to provide long-term solutions for
I                  storm water runoff for the City.
  Policy 4
                   a.    The City shall continue to require developers to construct or finance
                         the necessary storm water runoff facilities such as underground
                         storm drains and retention basins.
                   b.    The City should continue to work with the appropriate agencies to
                         develop new arrangements for the discharge of storm water into the
                         New River. To the extent feasible, these arrangements shall be
I                        consistent with the New River Improvement Project referenced and
                         described in Section 5. 2. 5 of the Conservation/ Open Space Element.
                   c.    The City shall continue to work with IID to provide adequate storm
                         water discharge in areas where applicable and in new development.
                         Continually monitor the existing storm water system to identify any
                         necessary improvements to maintain high quality service.
                                                                                                  4- 12
  City of Cafexica General Pian

 1
                                                                       y € -;€          r ry=  r f>  v:
   4.4. l. 5 Public Buildings
   Objective 5
                     The City should encourage a responsible development pattern for any new
                     public buildings, maximize the usefulness of existing buildings, and
                     conserve energy whenever possible.
   Policy 5
IJ
                     a.    The City should allow the use of existing public buildings for other
                           sues that benefit the community, such as clubs, recreation, and
                           charity organizations.
                     b.    The City should attempt to use existing public buildings to create a
                           cultural center far its residents.
                     c.
                            The City should plan any new publicly- oriented buildings to be
                           located near the existing City Hall.
                     d.    The City should encourage the County of Imperial to locate any new
                           public    buildings   that  serve  the Calexico     area  in   the  Local
                           Government Center area.
                     e.
                           The City shall annually asses the energy usage of each public
                           building and develop plans to conserve energy, including retrofitting
                           for energy conservation where feasible.
                     f.    All new public buildings shall be designed to be as energy efficient
                           as is financially feasible.
   4. 4. 1. 6 Healfhcare
   Objective 6
                     To provide adequate hospital and healthcare facilities to meet the demand
                     of existing and future residents.
   Policy 6
                    a.       The City shall support efforts by the Heffernan Hospital District
                             and   Pioneers   Health    Memorial  Healthcare (    or  other   service
                             provider) to create new medical facilities and/ or services in the
                             City, including such services as urgent care, emergency medical,
                             hospital, and clinics.
   4. 4. 1. 7 Libraries
   Objective 7
                    To provide adequate public library facilities, staffing, inventory of items
                    and volumes, up-to- dare technology and related services for all residents
                    of the City of Calexico, within the State of California published
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                               4- 13

                                                                            t' ti;:  r:€ , {° xLL;   i;::'
                   guidelines, including "    California Libraries in the 1980' s: Strategies for
                   Service," or most recent state guidance, as feasible.
  Policy 7
                    a.
                           The City of Calexico, through the Camarena Memorial Library
                           Board of Trustees (" the Library Trustees", shall make all
                           reasonable efforts to provide and maintain the following library
                           facilities and service standards:
                                Library facilities at a ratio of 0. 55 square feet per resident of
                                the City of Calexico;
                                Library facilities accessible for all City of Calexico residents
                                within two miles      distance ( walking distance) or ten ( 10)
                                minutes driving time, whichever is less;
                                A ratio of three ( 3)    public library staff, consisting of one
                                librarian plus two clerical staff, per 6, 000 residents of the City
                                of Calexico and;
                                A ratio of total items in the library inventory of three ( 3) items
                                per resident of the City of Calexico.
                   b.      The City, through the Library Trustees, shall continue to
                           participate in system and networking activities which enable it, in
                           cooperation    with   other   libraries in  Imperial     and  San     Diego
                           Counties,    to provide adequate public library services for the
                           citizens of Calexico.
                   c.      The City of Calexico, in cooperation with the Library Trustees,
                           shall undertake a systematic capital improvements program for the
                           construction of new and expanded library facilities in order to
                           supplement and complement facilities and services provided at the
1                          Camarena Memorial Library. This program shall include:
                                Construction of a new branch library to serve residents on the
                                west side of the City and new developments proposed to the
                                west.
                                Construction of a new branch library to serve residents on the
1                               east side of the City and new developments proposed to the
                                east.
                                    Designation of the Camarena Memorial Library as the
                                    Main Library facility.
                   d.      The library should continue to share services with other libraries or
                           create   other joint use    arrangements with        schools and pursue
                           additional benefcial joint-use arrangements to help meet desired
                           library services standards established in Policy 7a, above.
  City of Galexico General Plan                                                                   4- 14

                                                                       4r    i l€    r P t€=«       a,,
                      e.       The City and the Library Trustees shall continue to provide
                               financial resources to improve and maintain adequate staffing,
                               inventory of items and volumes, computers and related technology
                               and community library services and programs for all residents of
                              the City of Calexico. Review of funding status and availability of
                               staff, services and facilities to meet desired library services
                               standards established in Policy 7a, above, should be thoroughly
                              reviewed every three ( 3) years.
                              Future libraries should be conveniently accessible to pedestrians,
                               automobiles and public transit. Locations where large numbers of
                              potential users gather should be considered desirable site. If
                              possible, these facilities should be combined with other public
                              facilities, parks, shopping centers, or other activity centers in order
                              to encourage the joint use and shared parking in a community
                              facilities campus concept.
                      g.      Library programs should be available to all members of the
                              community and should include services for those who cannot
                              conveniently access a library.
     4.4. 1. 8 Education
     Objective 8
n                     The provision of quality schools is a paramount concern for the City of
                      Calexico. The maintenance and development of new schools must be
                      supported by the City and new development must not degrade current
                      service quality.
     Policy 8
                      a.      The City shall work with Calexico Unified School District to
                              ensure    that  the   desired   pupil  enrollment/ capacity     ratio     is
                              maintained.
                      b.      The City shall submit copies of development proposals to Calexico
                              Unified School District for review and comment.
                      c.      The City shall provide the Calexico Unified School District with
                              regular reports on building permit activity.
                      d.      The City shall assist and cooperate with Calexico Unified School
                              District in their efforts to obtain and annually update residential
                              development school mitigation fees outlined in Government Code
                                Sections 65995. 5- 65995. 7).
                      e.      The City should consider the effect of residential development on
                              the existing and design capacity of all affected educational
                              facilities as defined by the Calexico Unified School District.
l J'
     City of Calexica General Plan                                                               4- 15

                                                                        a. .€°
                                                                                    c€€ t€. - -::
    4.4. 1. 9 Police Protection
   Objective 9
                    To provide the lives, health, and property of all residents, businesses, and
                    visitors to the City of Calexico through adequate levels of law
                    enforcement service.
   Policy 9
                     a.      Police staffing and facilities shall be expanded commensurably to
                             accommodate the needs of Calexico' s growing population.
                             Require new development projects to pay fees proportional to their
                             demand for police services.
                    c.       Periodically evaluate police service based on incidence of crime,
                             emergency response times, and desired levels of service.
                    d.       Provide police facility sites in subsequent Specific Plans based on
1                   e.
                             community need.
                             Achieve and maintain the industry standard ratio of 2 police
                             officers per l ,000 residents.
                    f.       The City should regularly update the police department on new
                             development so that they may evaluate their ability to support said
                             proj ects.
   4. 4. 1. 10 Fire Protection
I  Objective 10
                    To provide an adequate service level of fire protection for all residents,
                    businesses, and visitors to the City of Calexico.
CI
   Policy 10
                    a.     Fire staffing and facilities shall be expanded commensurably to
                           accommodate the needs of Calexico' s growing population.
                    b.     Require new development projects to pay fees proportional to their
                           demand for fire services based on an updated Development Fee
                           Ordinance or other legal and equitable funding mechanism.
                    c.     Provide fire facility sites in subsequent Specific Plans based on
I                          community need.
                    d.     The City should regularly update the fire department on new
                           development so that the fire department may evaluate their ability to
I                          support said projects.
                    e.     Maintain an on- going fire inspection program to reduce the fire
                                                                   buildings,
I                          hazards     associated  with    older               residences,
                           facilities, public assembly facilities, and industry.
                                                                                                critical
   Gity of Calexico General Plan                                                                  4- 16

1
                                                                                     a F'     r =
                     f.    The City should consider adopting a sprinkler ordinance in new
                           residential, commercial, andlor industrial development.
                     g•    With the input of all City departments, periodically review and
                           update the City' s Emergency Preparedness Plan.
1                    h.    Maintain the standard ratio of 1. 5 firefighters per 1, 000 residents.
                     i.    The City shall ensure that fire flows are maintained to meet the
                           following minimum standards during maximum daily flow
                           conditions:   1, 500 gallons per minute ( gpm) for residential; for two
                           simultaneous fires for residential uses 1, 000 gpm; and 2, 500 gpm for
1                          commercial.
    4. 4. 1. 11 Solid Waste
    Objective 11
                     To maintain solid waste collection and disposal services in accordance
                     with the California lntegrated Waste Management Act of 1989 and pursue
                     funding sources so as to reduce the cost of said services in the City.
    Policy 11
                     a.    The City should monitor the operations of the solid waste solid
                           waste collection contractor to ensure an adequate level of service.
                     b.    Encourage and support regional and statewide recycling programs
                           that aim to reduce the solid waste stream.
                     c.    Continue to administer existing recycling programs and enact new
                           ones as necessary to achieve current 50% solid waste diversion goal
                           as set forth by the California lntegrated Waste Management Board.
                     d.    Actively pursue methods of educating the public on solid waste
  I
                           recycling and reuse.
                     e.    The City should support regional efforts to expand and locate new
I                          landfills.
                     f.      Explore the possibility of the development of a Material Recovery
                             Facility ( MRF).
I
I   City of Calexico General Plan                                                              sr
1

                                                                 l.   ct€ c: .:   E€ s';';;
4.4. 1. 12 Electricity
Objective 12
                 To provide reliable electrical service capable of serving existing and future
                 residential, commercial and industrial uses within the City.
Policy 12
                 a.    The City shall coordinate with IID for the provision of adequate land
                       within new developments and throughout the City for electrical
                       substations and transmission facilities.
                 b.    The City should work with hospital and medical care providers to
                       ensure that emergency generators are available onsite in the event of
                       extended power outage.
City of Calexico General Plan                                                               4- 18

                                                                                 esr: r- t.; " c- a ,:
1 5. 0 CONSERVATION/ OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
i 5. 1 Introduction
                    California law requires the preparation of a Conservation/ Open Space
                   Element in a City' s General Plan. California Government Code Section
                   65302 requires that the conservation element address the identification,
                   conservation, development, and use of natural resources. These include,
                   but are not limited to, development of farmland, flood control, water
                   pollution, erosion, and endangered species. The open space element is
                   simply the plan for " the comprehensive and long-range preservation and
                   conservation of open- space land" ( Government Code 65563). In addition,
                   the open space element must also include a plan of action which outlines
                   the means by which open space will be managed and acquired in the
                   future.
                   The City of Calexico is located in a predominantly flat agricultural area
                   with few natural features. The New River and the Imperial Irrigation
                   District (" IID")   canals are the only variations in the otherwise expansive
                   plain that surrounds the City. This element will focus on the important
                   resources that the City must conserve, including, soil, surface and ground
                   water, agricultural land, and open space.
  5.2 Conservation Resource Assessment
  5.2. 1 Agriculture
C                  The City of Calexico is located in Imperial County which is within the
                   7, 500 square mile Colorado Desert. Approximately half of the County' s
                   acreage is undeveloped and under ownership of the federal government.
I                  One fifth of the County' s acreage is used for agricultural purposes and is
                   located in the Imperial Valley. The Valley relies completely on the
                   importation of water from the Colorado River for both potable drinking
                   water and for crop irrigation. Due to a combination of a climate, fertile
                   soils, and readily available water, the Imperial Valley is one of the most
                   productive agricultural areas in the world. In 2003, the Imperial Valley
                   had an overall agricultural production output of over $ 1 billion, and for
                   every $ 1, 000 of total gross produced value, $ 392 of personal income is
                   generated for agriculture- related employment'.
I                   2003 Crop and Livestock Report, Imperial County.
                   http:// www.co. imperial. ca.us/ ag/ Crop% 20Report% 202003. pdf
  City of Calexico General Pian                                                                        5- 1
                                                                         w ( :.       v t' .        rr .;
   5.2. 3 Water Supply and Quality
                    In modern history, water has been plentiful in the Imperial Valley.
                    However,     as    populations    in   the   southwest      continue     to  grow,       the
                    competition     for   limited   water    supplies    will   escalate.     The  Imperial
                    Irrigation District, which supplies water to Calexico, has initiated an
                    agreement to divert some of its water allocation to other urbanized areas of
IJ                  southern    California.    Therefore,    water is a precious commodity and
                    conserving it in the Valley is an important step towards ensuring the long-
                    term viability of the region.
   5.2. 4 Soils
                    Long before the Colorado River was used as a source of water in the
                    Imperial Valley, the River shaped what the Valley would become. After
                    the great inland sea that once covered much of the Imperial Valley
                    receded, the Colorado River meandered across its delta, which was once in
                    the Imperial Valley, until it reached the Gulf of California. As it did, it left
                    silt deposits throughout the Valley ( as deep as 2, 000 feet), which accounts
                    for the rich soil that remains. The soil in the Imperial Valley is a precious
                    resource and must be conserved.
   5.2. 5 Open Space and the New River
                    Currently the only designated open space lands within the City of
                    Calexico, besides parkland, school properties, and agricultural land, are
                    the major water aqueducts or canals ( All American and Central Main)
                    which bisect the City, and the area immediately adjacent to the north side
                    of the Calexico International Airport. This area north of the airport is the
                    lowlands through which the New River flows. Because of the high level of
                    pollutants in the New River (referred to as the most polluted river in North
                                                CRWQCBZ),
                    America in a study by                        this area is also hazardous to public
                    health.   Flowing north from Mexico,            the New River is imbued with
                    industrial waste and raw sewage backflow from Mexicali. The New River
                    is simultaneously one of the areas with the greatest potential for
                    recreational    uses   associated    with   open    space    as  well     as the      worst
                    environmental hazard in the City.
                    Because the New River crosses international jurisdictions, the City has
                    less direct control over its clean- up. However, the U. S. Environmental
                    Protection Agency (" EPA") has recently announced the Border 2012
                    Program which is a bi- national environmental agreement between the U. S.
                    and Mexico. The Program, among other things, contributes $                   13 million
                      USD) to Mexicali II wastewater treatment project which could eliminate
                    2 New River Pollution in Mexico. California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
                    1998, ix.
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                          5- 2
                                                                       r:°    ti;    c; r ::      c:
                  up to 20 million gallons of raw sewage per day from the New River.
                  Currently within the City, there is a local effort toward New River cleanup
                  by the Calexico New River Committee. The group has, among other
                 things, developed a local vision and has sought and received federat and
                  other funding sources aimed at implementing the New River Improvement
                  Project. The purpose of the New River Improvement Project is to provide
                  a regional vision and strategic plan to transform the New Rivers in, and
                  downstream from, the City of Calexico from its current highly polluted
                 condition into a resource with significantly improved water quality that
                 minimizes threats to public health and improves the condition of water
                 flowing into the Salton Sea. At the present time, the following describes
                 the vision for the New River Improvement Project. This project, as
                 described below, is not considered a part of the General Plan for purposes
                 of California Environmental Quality Act ( CEQA) compliance. The New
                 River Improvement Project will require separate review and compliance
                 with the California Environmental Quality Act and the National
                 Environmental Protection Act, as applicable.
                 The main New River Improvement Project components ( e. g. trash screen,
                 river encasement,     and  natural  treatment wetlands)   have evolved from
                 sanitation concepts most recently advanced by the City of Calexico, the
                 City of Calexico New River Committee and the Citizens Congressional
                 Task Force on the New River. The New River Improvement Project
                    Project") is envisioned to be developed and implemented in six phases,
                 as generally described below:
                 Phase 1—    Project Development and Planning: This phase provides a road
                 map to complete the Project in a reasonable and environmentally sound
                 manner. Its major components are preliminary site assessments ( e. g.,
                 hydro- geological investigations and surveying/mapping) and preparation
                 of supporting environmental studies required under NEPA and CEQA;
                 engineering plans and specifications; and Project permits.
                 Phase 2( Option 1) —       Project Headworks:     This phase consists of the
                 construction of and installation of headworks for the proposed river
                 encasements. These will be constructed near the Border where the New
                 River enters the United States, and will protect the integrity of the box
                 culvert, as well as track hydraulic and baseline water quality conditions of
                 the river as it crosses the border.
                 Phase 2( Option 2) — Project Headworks and Disinfection Facilities:              In
                 addition to including items and features identified in Option 1, Option 2
                 would assist in ensuring that discharges of wastes from Mexico do not
                 violate USEPA approved Pathogen Total Maximum Daily Load ( TMDL)
                 for the New River, and it includes two other major components:
City of Calexico General Plan                                                                5- 3

                                                                            s: r  f: s'    c      c; t.
1
                              The necessary flow diversion facilities to capture the average flows
                              from international Drain and route them to the existing Calexico
                              Wastewater Treatment Plant ( WWTP);      and
                              Construction of disinfection facilities to capture the average flows
                              from International Drain flows prior to discharge to the New River.
                     Phase 3— Project Box Culvert: This is the main construction phase of the
                     Project, in which a double culvert ( i. e., two enclosed parallel canals)
                     would be constructed to contain and reroute the New River from the
                     International Boundary, through the developed areas of Calexico and to a
                    point immediately downstream of Highway 98.
                     Phase 4—      Project Wastewater Polishing System: This phase includes
                    construction of a waste wastewater polishing system at the end of the box
                    culverts, just north of Highway 98, to provide treatment of residual
                    pollution from Mexico.
                    Phase 5— Project Wetlands:       This phase includes continued construction
                    of wetlands downstream from the improvements described in phase 4,
                    above, to address overall New River pollution.
1
                    Phase 6—      Project Community Greenbelts and Habitat Restoration: This
                    phase consists of the reclamation of open space for community facilities
                    such as walking and running trails and soccer/baseball field, and
                    preservation/ restoration of natural habitat in the area along the existing
                    river channel in the Calexico area and between Seeley and Brawley. Other
                    appropriate mitigation measures that are identified during Phase 1 of the
                    Project should be incorporated in this Phase.
   5.2. 6 Ecological and Biological Resources
                    Imperial County has numerous plants and animals listed for protection by
1                   the U. S.    Fish and Wildlife Service (" USFWS")
                    Department of Fish & Game (" CDFG").
                                                                            and/ or the California
                                                                In the area surrounding Calexico,
                    agricultural activities or urban development, have long ago destroyed
                    native plant and wildlife habitat. As such, there are no officially listed
                      rare", " threatened", or " endangered" plants or mammals by USFWS or
                    CDFG in proximity to Calexico. However, there may be the existence of
1                   listed fish, amphibians, and reptiles in or around local freshwater habitats
                    created by irrigation and drainage canals. As well, as many as 10 protected
                    birds use the flyway corridors throughout the County.
LJ
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                             5- 4
1

                                                                     5," °  r  re° ta{:  a'  rE : :;::
  5. 2. 7 Landform Features and Scenic Resources
                   One of the most striking and inextricable features that defnes the context
                   of the City of Calexico is the vast agricultural lands that surround it. Vistas
                   of  expansive,    flat, contiguous,    irrigated  cropland set against distant
                   mountains give the City an attractive and decidedly rural feel. These
                   aesthetic resources should be preserved in order for Calexico to retain a
                   significant portion of its character and sense of place.
  5.3 Establishing a Vision
u
                   The Vision for the conservation of natural resources and the preservation
                   and management of open space will allow for the balanced growth and
                   development of the City while protecting the fundamental resources that
                   represent the essence of the City and also enhance the quality of life for its
                   residents. The Conservation/ Open Space Element is responsive to the
                   City' s Vision because it:
                       a.     Protects   the  resources that future generations         will need to
                              prosper; both in terms of life quality and economic issues.
                       b.     Conserves of the area' s natural resources allows the City to
                              retain its character and heritage.
1                      c.     Enhances the overall quality of the City and therefore increases
                              the City' s desirability as a place to invest, possibly strengthening
                              the local economy.
                       a.     Ensures that development is conducted in an orderly manner that
                              recognizes the intrinsic value of natural resources and open
                              spaces.
                       e.     The preserved open spaces could become a source of community
                              pride.
                       f.     Contributes to the overall balance of land uses within our
                              community.
1                      g      Demonstrates the City' s commitment towards preserving its
                              resources.
1
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                      5- 5

                                                                      c:,:   ke € °;    s xr &,     c:€
5.4 Goals, Objectives, and Policies
5.4. 1 Conservation Goal
                 To balance development with the preservation and management of natural
                 and    human- built   open  space  resources,  thus ensuring the long-term
                 viability of the City.
5.4. 1. 1 Water Supply and Qvality
Objective 1
                 Water supply and water quality should be maintained by implementing
                 domestic conservation measures and protecting surface waters.
Policy 1
                     a.    All residential developments shall require low-volume toilets,
                           showers, and faucets.
                           New development projects should install water-conserving
                           appliances ( washing machines, dishwashers).
                     c.    The City shall continue to require the use of primarily drought-
                           tolerant and/ or native plants in new development through the
                           review and approval process by City staff. The use of turf grass
                           for lawns should be limited.
                     d.    Residential projects having common green areas and all
                           commercial, manufacturing, and public projects shall be required
                           to   install  automatic  irrigation  systems.         New commercial,
                           industrial, and housing projects that contain common green belts
                           should use reclaimed " grey" water for irrigation.
                     e.    Promote water conservation, reduce urban runoff, and prevent
                           groundwater      contamination     within     development      projects,
                           property maintenance, City operations, and all other related
                           activities requiring City discretionary approval.
                     f.    Adopt and enforce regulations and engage in educational efforts
                           to eliminate pollution from runoff.
                     g     Participate in any pertinent local, regional, state, and federal
                           programs to protect and enhance water quality.
                     h.    Support efforts to improve the water quality of the New River or
                           other proposals aimed at improving the area surrounding the
                           River,    such as the development and           implementation of an
                           integrated regional water quality management plan that meets
                           the goals and objectives of the Colorado River Basin Regional
                           Water Quality Control Board ( Region 7) for the New River.
City of Calexico General Plan                                                                  5- 6

                                                                         5. 7     n`    t°  a~;:'
                                                                                                   i r$
                                 The usage of drip irrigation shall be required where feasible.
1                        J•       Alternative water conservation systems such as grey water
                                 usage in residences shall be examined and initiated, if feasible.
                          k.    New residential construction shall be preplumbed for reclaimed
1                                water through a dual on- site distribution system. Anticipated
                                 non-potable uses include landscaping, lawn maintenance and
                                 crop   irrigation.  All  reclaimed      water       systems      will    be    in
1                                compliance with the State of California Regional Water Quality
                                board guidelines and basin objectives as well as CEQA and
                                NEPA guidelines.
                                Residential units connected to the community sewage collection
                                 system shall not use salt- based water softeners.
II   5.4. 1. 2 Soil Management
    Objective 2
                     The City shall continue using soil management techniques that minimize
                     soil related problems, including erosion, shrink- swell behavior, and septic
                     tank failure.
    Policy 2
                              In order to reduce or eliminate soil erosion and pollution, the City
1                             shall ensure that construction activity is in compliance with the
                              State' s General Permit for Construction Activities administered by
                             the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, located in
                              Palm Desert ( Region 7).        One condition of this permit is the
                              development and implementation of a site- specific Storm Water
                              Pollution     Prevention   Plan ("    SWPPP")         that    identifies      Best
  J                           Management Practices (" BMPs") to reduce/ eliminate erosion and
                              sedimentation associated with construction.
1                     b.     All development requiring City discretionary approval shall
                             provide a geotechnical investigation by a registered geotechnical
                              engineer     that  discusses,    at   least,    liquefaction,         subsidence,
                              shrink/ swell potential, soil strength, landslide potential, distance to
                             known     fault rupture zones. All geotechnical               studies      shall be
                              submitted to the City of Calexico Building and Safety Department
                              for review and approval.
                     c.       Soils with moderate or high permeability capacity should be left in
                             undeveloped ( perhaps used as open space where appropriate) to
1                            reduce runoff and facilitate groundwater recharge.
                     d.      Agricultural areas should not be disturbed to the extent that erosion
                             will    occur without the      initiation of proper          soil    management
                             measures.
    City af Caiexico General Plan                                                                          5- 7

I
                                                                       a £;€<
                                                                                        c  f  stF        c
   5.4. 1. 3 Ecological and Biological Resources
L' Objective 3
                     Identify,   protect, and   improve    significant       ecological  and  biological
                     resources in and around the City of Calexico.
   Policy 3
                     a.      Support regional and sub- regional efforts to conserve ecological
                             and biological resources in the City and surrounding areas.
                     b.      Support efforts to integrate natural wetlands treatment systems as
                             part of the New River Improvement Project described in Section
                             5. 2. 5.
                     c.      Projects of one acre or mare involving alteration or development of
t                            undisturbed land shall be required to submit a biological survey
                             conducted by a qualified biologist to the City of Calexico. A
                             focused biological study may be required if habitat that could
                             potentially support a listed or threatened species exists on the site.
   5.4. l. 4 Landform Features and Scenic Resources
u
   Objective 4
                     The rural character and scenic features provided by local agricultural
                    juxtaposed with the natural desert environment should be preserved in and
                     around the City.
   Policy 4
                      a.     In the development of the outlying land use in Calexico provisions
                             shall    be made  in the development plans             for large   lot rural
                             residential housing.
                     b.      Development on the outlying areas of the City shall occur in an
1                            orderly and contiguous manner in order to preserve the urban/ rural
                             edge.
                     c.      Encourage high-quality architectural and landscaping designs that
                             complement the City' s visual character.
   5.4.2 Open Space Goal
                     To identify, acquire, and preserve new open space opportunities while
                     adequately maintaining those that currently exist in and around the City.
1                    The preservation of open space will be in accordance with the need to
                     conserve signifcant resources of public interest and benefit.
   Gity of Calexico General Plan                                                                    5- 8

                                                                            G`   r   er+   r; =~    r   k c;.
  5.4. 2. 1 Land Use
  Objective 5
                   The City should act to preserve open space through land use policies that
                   value the importance of open space to the overall betterment of the City.
  Policy 5
                   a.       Noncontiguous or " leapfrog" development should be discouraged
                            to retain open space at the urban edge.
1                  b.       Every land use change should consider the City' s need to preserve
                            open space.
                   c.       Where    possible,      encourage infill development as a means to
                            preserve outlying open space and to conserve resources.
  5.4. 2. 2 Agricultural Land
1 Objective 6
                   The preservation of agricultural lands as community open space has many
                   inherent benefits such as those related to economics, aesthetic beauty, and
                   maintenance of the City' s rural character. The City recognizes that need
                   and shall therefore act to preserve agricultural land wherever possible and
                   minimize conflicts between agricultural and residential land uses.
  Policy 6
                   a.      The     City should preserve Prime Farmland by focusing
                           development on land with lesser- quality soils and maintaining a
                           compact urban form. ( See Figure C/ OS- 1.)             Land designations used
                           on the following map are as follows:
                           P= Prime Farmland: Land with the best combination ofphysical and chemical
                          features to sustain long-term agricultural production.
                           S=   Farmland of Statewide Importance: Similar to Prime except with minor
                           shortcomings such as slopes or less ability to store soil moisture.
                           L= Farmland o Local Importance: Land deemed to be of importance to the
                           local economy by the County Board ofSupervisors.
                          X= Other Land: Land that does not meet the criteria for any other category.
                           Typically includes low- density rural development, heavily forested land, mined
                           land, or government land with use restrictions.
                           D=   Urban or Built Up Land: Land occupied by structures by a density of at
                           least 1 unit per 1. S acres.
                   L.^     Encourage       the    use   of  Williamson       Act     contracts   on   active
                           agricultural lands within the City' s sphere of influence.
                   c.      Minimize the conflicts between agricultural and residential land
                           uses by requiring the use of buffer zones, roads, and other physical
                           boundaries between uses.
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                        5- 9
                                                                 t i   i:. =    r;' °. t   x  e: c;
                 d.      Support public relations and educational workshops between the
                         agricultural industry and non- agricultural businesses, developers,
                         and residents.
                 e.
                         The City should consider adopting a right-to- farm ordinance or the
                         use of other regulatory tools such as zoning or subdivision review
                        to reduce agriculture and non- agriculture land use conflicts.
                 f.     The City should work with the County of Imperial and other
                         surrounding cities, as well as state and local agricultural entities to
                        establish programs related to the conservation of viable agricultural
                         lands.
City ot Calexico General Plan                                                             5- 10

                                                                   N
   Source: State of California, Department of Conservation                                       Figure COS- 1
             Division of Land Resource Protection, 2002
                                                                  ees
                                                           W          E
             Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program              c s
                                                                                Farmland Designation
                                                                   S
cn WEBB '                                                    25 .   5   1
    r .°
       a o :'   n                                                       1 Miles
                                                                                 City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                           ar r°; €:    r  w s r
   5. 5 Conservation/ Open Space Implementation Program
LJ
                     This implementation program provides actions to implement the adopted
                     policies and plans identified in the Conservation/ Open Space Element.
                     Table C/ OS- A describes the responsible department within the City of
                     Calexico and other agencies, funding source( s), time frame to complete
                     the action, and related policies within the Conservation/ Open Space and
                     other Elements of the General Plan.
                                                      TABLE C/ OS- A:
                                       CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                               Responsible
                                  Policy         Agency/        Funding         Time
              Ob' ective       Summa           De artment        Source        Frame  Related Policies
             Objective 1      la. Require   Building          General         Ongoing Conservation/ Open
                             low flow                         Fund for                Space: 1 a— 1g
             Water supply    toilets,                         staff and
             and water       showers and                      public
             quality         faucets                          projects
             should be                                        Private
             maintained                                       Funds
             by                                               Grants    from
             implementing                                     state, federal
             domestic                                         or        local
             conservation                                     water agency
             measures and                                     sources
             protecting
             surface
             waters.
Il
                             lb. Drought    Planning          General         Ongoing Conservation/ Open
                             tolerant       Engineering       Fund for                Space: 1 a— 1g
                             plants                           staff and
                                                              public
                                                              projects
                                                              Private
                                                              Funds
                                                              Grants from
                                                              state, federal
                                                              or local
                                                              water agency
                                                              sources
                             lc. Use of     Planning          General
                             gray water     Engineering       Fund for
                             for irrigation Public Works      staff and
                                                              public
1
                                                              projects
                                                              Private
                                                              Funds
                                                              Grants from
                                                              state or
                                                              federal
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                          5- 12

                                                                        c. r;   r
                                                                                    c  r °,   e£
                                                                                                   t: c, r
                                              Responsible
                                 Policy         Agency/         Funding         Time
               Ob' ective     Summa           De artment         Source        Frame         Related Policies
                                                              sources
                            l d. Promote City Manager' s Ofc. General         Ongoing       Conservation/ Open
                           water         Building             Fund                          Space: 1 a—    1g
                           conservation  Planning
                           throughout    Engineering
1                          City          Public Works
                                         Public Facilities
                            le. Enforce  Building             General         Within 2      Conservation/ Open
                           regulations   Imperial Irrigation  Fund            years         Space: la— lg
                           and educate      District (" IID") Educational
                           to eliminate  Regional Water       Grants
                           polluted
                                         Quality Control
                           runoff        Board (" RWQCB")
                                         Calexico Unified
                                            School District
                           1£    Partia  City Manager' s Ofc. General         Ongoing       Conservation/ Open
                           ipate in      IID                  Fund                          Space: 1 a—    1g
                           programs to   RWQCB
                           protect &
                           enhance
                           water    uali
                           lg. lmprove   City Manager' s      General         Ongoing       Conservation/ Open
                           New River     Office               Fund                          Space: 1 a—    1g
                                         Planning             Grant Funds                   Public Facilities:
                                         Public Works         Federal                       2a —2g and 4a —d
                                         I ID                 State
                                         RWQCB
                                         New River
                                            Commission
             Objective 2   2a. Reduce/   Building & Safety    Generai         Ongoing       Conservation/ Open
                           eliminate     Planning             Fund                          Space: 2a—c
             The City      erosion and   RWQCB                Private
             shall         sedimentation                      Funds                         Safety: lc
             continue      associated                         Federal
             using soil    with                               State
             management    construction                       Grants
            techniques
            that minimize
             soil related
            problems,
             including
             erosion,
             shrink- swell
            behavior, and
             septic tank
             failure.
                           2b. Geotech-  Building & Safety    General         Ongoing       Conservation/ Open
                           nical studies Plannin              Fund for                      S ace: 2 a— c
LJ
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                 5- 13

1
                                                                     a ?', y aFt, wGp"4r. sa 5.". a°' a-
                                                                                                     p   a
                                                                                                           1^   rF' d s'.
                                              Responsible
                                Policy          Agency/        Funding                 Time
              Ob' ective     Summa            De artment        Source               Frame             Related Policies
                           shall be                          Staff
                           submitted                         Private                                   Safety: 1 c
                                                             Funds
                          2c. Permeab-    Planning           General                Ongoing            Conservation/ Open
                           iliTy capacity RWQCB              Fund for                                  Space: 2 a— c
                          considered to                      Staff
                          reduce runoff                      Private                                   Safety: 1 c
u
                          and facilitate                     Funds
                          groundwater
                          recharge
            Objective 3   3a. Conserve    Planning           General                Ongoing            Conservation/ Open
                          ecological      CDFG               Fund                                      Space: 3a —b
            Identify,     and             U. S. Fish &       Private
            protect, and  biological      Wildiife Service   Funds
            improve       resources       County of Imperial Federal
            significant                                      State
            ecological                                       Grants
            and
            biological
            resources in
            and around
            the City of
            Calexico.
                          3b. Required    Planning           General                Ongoing            Conservation/ Open
                          to submit a                        Fund                                      Space: 3a —b
                          biological                         Private
                          surve                              Funds
            Objective 4   4a. Outlying    Planning           General                Ongoing            Conservation/ Open
                          land consider                      Fund                                      Space: 4a— c and
            The rural     large lot rural                    Development                               Sa
            character and residential                        Review Fees
            scenic        housing
            features
            provided by
            local
            agriculture
           juxtaposed
           with the
           natural desert
           environment
            should be
           preserved in
           and around
           the Ci .
                          4b. Outlying    Planning           General                Ongoing            Conservation/ Open
                          areas                              Fund                                      Space: 4a —c and
                          consider                           Development                               Sa
                          orderly and                        Review Fees
                          continuous
                          development
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                               5- 14

                                                                 e e: c r r=&{::` ;,             e
                                            Responsible
                                 Policy       Agency/       Funding        Time
1             Ob' ective      Summa
                           4c. Encour-
                                            De artment       Source
                                                           General
                                                                           Frame      Related Policies
                                                                                     Conservation/ Open
                                         Planning                         Ongoing
                           age high-     Building & Safety Fund                      Space: 4a— c and
                           quality                         Development               Sa
                           architectural                   Review Fees
                           and
                           landscaping
1                          designs
            Objective 5    Sa.           Planning          General        Ongoing    Conservation/ Open
                             Leapfrog"   City Council      Fund                      Space: Sc — by
            The Ciry       development                                               2010; Sa — c; 6a —
            should act to  should be                                                 e; 3a —b
            preserve       discouraged
            open space                                                               Safety: 4c
            through land
            use policies
           that value the
            importance
            of open space
            to the overall
            betterment of
            the City.
                           Sb. Consider  Planning          General        Ongoing    Conservation/ Open
                           the City' s   City Council      Fund                      Space: Sc — by
                           need to                                                   20 ] 0; Sa — c; 6a —
                           preserve open                                             e; 3a —b
                           space in all
                           its forms                                                 Safety: 4c
                           Sc. Encour-   Planning          General        Ongoing    Conservation/ Open
                           age infill    City Council      Fund                      Space: Sc — by
                           development                                               2010; Sa — c; 6a —
                           to preserve                                               e; 3a — b
                           open space
                           and conserve                                              Safety: 4c
                           resources.
                           The City
                           should
                           develop an
                           infill
                           ordinance
                           with
                           incentives
                             e. g.,
                           reduction of
                           fees) if
                           project meets
                             infill"
                           definition
                           established
                                                                                           5- 15
  City af Calexico Generaf Plan

1
                                                                     Crar<   f« t; s f ?,     5:,
i
                                             Responsible
                              Policy          Agency/         Funding       Time
              Ob' ective    Summa            De artment        Source       Frame         Related Policies
            Objective 6    6a. Preserve  City Planning       General       Ongoing        Conservation/ Open
                           Prime         County Agricultural Fund                         Space: 6a —e
            The            Farmland        Commissioner
            preservation                 County Planning
            of                           City Council
            agricultural
            lands as
            community
            open space
            has many
            inherent
            benefits such
            as those
            related to
            economics,
            aesthetic
            beauty, and
            maintenance
            of the City' s
            rural
            character.
            The City
            recognizes
            that need and
            shall
            therefore act
            to preserve
            agricultural
            land
            wherever
            possible and
            minimize
            conflicts
            between
            agricultural
            and
            residential
            land uses.
                           6b. Encour-   City Planning       General       Ongoing        Conservation/ Open
                           age use of    City Council        Fund                         Space: 6a —e
                           Williamson    County Planning
                           Act contracts County Board of
                                            Su ervisors
                           6c. Mini-     City Planning       General       Ongoing        Conservation/ Open
                           mize the      County Planning     Fund                         Space: 6a —e
                           conflicts     County Board of
                           between          Supervisors
                           agricultural
                           and
                           residential
                           land
l
  Gity of Calexico General Pian                                                               5- 16

                                                                              ic; . ar E r      c- ta
                                               Responsible
                                Policy          Agency/          Funding   Time
jl             Ob' ective     Summa           De artment          Source  Frame        Related Policies
                             6d. Public    City Manager' s Ofc. General  Ongoing      Conservation/ Open
                             relations and City Planning        Fund                  Space: 6a —e
                             education     County Planning
                             between       County Board of
                             agricultural     Supervisors
                             industry and
                             non-
                             agricultural
                             uses
                             6e. Adopt     City Manager' s Ofc. General  To be        Conservation/ Open
                             ordinance or  City Planning        Fund     completed    Space: 6a —e
                             consider
                                           City Council                  2010
                             regulatory    County Planning
                             tools to      County Board of
                             reduce           Supervisors
                             agricultural
                                non-
                             agricultural
                             land use
                             conflicts
  I
    City of Calexico General Plan                                                          5- 17

  6. 0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
  6. 1 Introduction
                   Parks and Recreational facilities are key elements of every urban
                   environment.    However, the state of California does not require the
                   inclusion of a Parks and Recreation Element in its list of required General
                   Plan components. The City of Calexico recognizes the importance of
                   parks and is committed to maintaining and improving its parks system and
                   therefore has chosen to include this Element in its General Plan.
                   Historically, parks have been passive areas of greenery that have provided
                   refuge from the concrete environment of urban living by offering
                   amenities such as large grassy areas, trees, and ponds. In more recent
                   history, many cities have taken a decided turn away from providing
                   passive parks to providing those that facilitate active recreation. Active
                   recreation   requires  additional  park  facilities  such   as  soccer  fields,
                   swimming pools, playground equipment, softball fields, and tennis courts.
                   Now, however, many cities have come to realize that an appropriate
                   balance should be sought between active and passive parks. The informal
                   nature of passive parks allows for impromptu activities such as Frisbee or
                   kite   flying.  Achieving    balance   between     park   types  requires    an
                   understanding of the needs of local residents.
                   As more and more land is developed and economic resources become
                   increasingly constricted, land acquisition for new parks and the
                   maintenance thereof has become a challenge for many communities. Yet,
                   parks represent an important resource in Calexico— they are sources of
                   aesthetic beauty and respite from urban living, they are community
                   activity, family recreation, and youth sports centers, and ultimately, a
                   source of civic pride.
J
                                                                                               6- 1
  City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                         t F rk   r;' ;     t; a;
  6. 2 Existing Conditions
  6. 2. 1 Regional Parks and Recreation Areas
                   The City of Calexico benefits from numerous regional recreational
                   facilities. To the east, northeast of the City is the Imperial Sand Dunes
                   Recreation Area, encompassing approximately 40 miles of dunes that
                   reach up to 300 feet high. There are various off-road vehicle recreation
                   opportunities associated with the dunes. To the west, northwest of the City
                   is Anza Borrego Desert State Park, the largest state park with over
                   600, 000 acres. Anza Borrego provides hiking, camping, backpacking, and
                   wildflower viewing. In addition, there are numerous other recreational
                   opportunities outside of the City limits but in proximity, including
                   Crucifixion Thorns Natural Area, Coyote Mountains Wilderness, Fish
                   Creek Mountain Wilderness, Ocotillo Well s State Vehicular Recreation
                   Area, the Colorado River, and many others.
J 6. 2. 2 Citywide Parks
                   As of 2004, the City has 22 parks totaling more than 60 acres. Figure P- 1
                   shows the locations of existing parks within the City and future areas
                   within the SOI where parks should be located. Table P- A list the existing
                   parks, their individual acreage, and selected facilities. Parks are typically
                   categorized by their size and service area which is discussed later in this
                   document. The City has numerous smaller parks that, according to the
                   City park classification ( found in Policy lf of this element), would not
                   qualify as either Neighborhood or Community Parks. The City has voiced
                   its need for a central community park to serve as a focal point of the City
                   and provide various recreational facilities such as a swimming pool,
                   soccer fields, and recreation center.
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                6- 2
    LUU41U4- UU4b\ liiSlpB KSZ_ tSX I1. I11X0 M8p 1' 2VIS2d M2fCt1 I, zuur.
     1        ALEX RIVERA FIELD               NOTE:
                                              Areas shown with land use designations which are                            NEBER RD
     2        AMERICAN LEGION FIELD
                                              located outside of the City' s current Sphere of ,. _
     3        BORDER PARK                     Influence will be subject to future changes and/ or
                                              modifications of use as determined in the future
     4        COMMiJNITY PARK
                                              Sphere of Influence expansion study, including the
                                              addition of an eastem industrial corridor.
     5        CRUMMETT PARK
     6        El1   RSOIV FIELD
      7       FRIENDSHIP PARK
              HEBERPARK
              KENNEDY GARDENSPARK
     10       LAS CASTTAS PARK                                                                           wa   ouci
     11       LIONESSPARK
     12       MIGUEL CORTEZ PARK
                                                                                                                                                       Q
                                                                                                                                      Central Main Canal
                                                                                   Q
                                                                                                  0
              NOSTROSPARKAND                                                                      m
     13
              LITTLE LEAGUE FIELD
     14       RIO VISTA PARK
                                                                                                               co
     15       ROCKWOOD PLAZA PARK
     16       RODRIGUEZ PARK
                                                                                                                                                                    22
     17       EL DORADO PARK
                                                                                                                                                      All American Cana/
     18       MEADOWSPARK ,
                                                                                                      lo
     19       RANCHO FRONTERA PARK `                                       g
                                                                           o
     20       RANCHOELEGANTEPARK
                                                                                                           3524
     21       VII 1. A SANTA FE - %
                                                                                                    GNANT `
     22       CEASAR CHAVEZ PARK
                                                                                                             14
     23       VALLE DE ORO PARK
                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                   N
     Zq       WILLIAMS GREENBELT PARK                                                                       rG,
                                                                                                                                                                                            W'    G¢     E
     j$'      MARTINEZ PARK
                                                    ANZA FD
                                                                                                                                                                                                   s
              zAPATA pAx[c
     26
                                                   All American Cana                                                                                                                         Not to Scale
                                                                                              LEGEND                                                                                        Figure P- 1
   Source: City of Calexico
                                                      INTERNATTONAL BORDER                   LONGTERM SPHERE OF INFLUENCE  Tr      ALL AII  RICAN CANAL
                                                      CITYLIMITS '                    i'     HIGHWAY                       nTr     CENTRALMAINCANAL
                                                                                                                                                                         Parks and Recreation
                                                                                             PROPOSED FREEWAY '                       H' w'  R
                                                      NEAR-TERM SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
    A L B E R  T_  A,                                                                                                                                                                     Facilities
                                              Q119D-TERM SPHERE OF INFLUENCE                    LROAD                              pp
10 WEBB                                                                                                                             FUTIIRE PARK( S)'
   ecnaamc axw,. S                                                                           STREET
                                                                                                                            Q       LOCATION TO BE DETERMINED            City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                                 r ;-:             i€°
                  TABLE P- A: EXISTING PARK ACREAGE AND FACILITIES
                     Map           Public Park or          Acres                Activities
                   locator
                               Recreational Facility
                       1    Alex Rivera Field               3. 5  Baseball Field
                       2    American Legion Field           3. 5  Softball Field
                       3    Border Park ( lnternational)    0. 5  Concessions
                       5    Community Park                   1. 0 Community Center
                       4    Crummett Park                   5. 5  Libraty, Amphitheater, Horseshoes
                       6    Emerson Field                   3. 4  Baseball Field, Concessions
                       7    Friendship Park                 0. 8  Gaming Area
                       8    Heber Park                      2. 0  Gaming Area
                       9    Kennedy Gardens Park            4. 5  Tot Lot, Baseball Field, Basketball
                                                                  Court
                      10    Las Casitas Park                6. 0  Soccer    Field,     Baseball  Field,
                i                                                 Barbeque
                      11    Lioness Park                    2. 3  Fitness Trail
                      12    Miguel Cortez Park              0. 5  Tot Lot, Basketball Court,
                      13    Nosotros   Park   and   Little  8. 1  Baseball fields
                            League Field
                      14    Rio Vista Park                  0. 5  Tot Lot,
                      15    Rockwood Plaza Park             4. 0  Gaming,
                      16    Rodriguez Park                  8. 8  Tennis,  Basketball,   and   Handball
                                                                  Courts, Baseball Field
                      17    El Dorado Park                  7. 7
                      18    Meadows Park                    4. 6
                      19    Rancho Frontera Park            2. 5
                     20     Rancho Elegante Park            3. 0
                     21     Villa Santa Fe                  3. 8
                     22     Cezar Chavez Park
                             proposed)
                     23     Valle De Oro Park               2. 7
                     24     Williams Greenbelt Park         23
                     25     Martinez Park                   0. 8
                     25     Zapata Park
6. 3 Establishing a Vision
                  The Vision for community parks and recreation will ensure their adequate
                  development in a way that reflects the needs of the residents of the City.
                  The Parks and Recreation Element is responsive to the City' s Vision
                  because it:
                  a.     Seeks to create adequate park facilities and recreational services
                         which are necessary components of high quality of life for residents
                         and visitors.
                  b.     Helps to ensure an appropriate balance of new development and
                         associated services.
City of Calexico General Plan                                                                       6- 4

                                                                                   c:
                       c.    Contributes to the physical as well as mental well- being of residents.
 J                     d.    Enhances the overall quality of the City and therefore increases the
                             City' s desirability as a place to invest, possibly strengthening the
                             local economy.
                       e.    Strengthens the City' s overall sense of "community".
                       f.    Fosters inter-governmental agency partnerships and cooperation,
                             especially with the local school district.
                       g     Provides recreational opportunities to all residents, regardless of
                             their age, socioeconomic status, or housing tenure.
l_ 1                   h     Facilitates parks and recreational facilities that could be a source of
                             community pride.
                       i.    Reduce the use of retention basins as public parks.
     6. 4 Goal, Objectives, and Policies
     6. 4. 1 Goal
                       To provide continued investment in existing parks while creating high-
                       quality new facilities that satisfy the underserved and future needs of the
                      community. Park planning will be flexible in nature and therefore be
                      responsive to demographic or other social changes, thus ensuring a high-
                      quality, long-term viable park system.
     6. 4. 1. 1 Facility Types
     Objective 1
                      To provide a variety of parks facilities and recreational services that
1                     satisfies the diverse interests and needs of the community.
     Policy 1
                      a.     Develop a system of parks and recreational facilities that are
                             sensitive to the needs of seniors, children, families, active adults,
                             teenagers, and persons with disabilities.
                      b.     Give similar attention to passive or individual uses ( such as walking,
                             biking, and skating) as is given to formal recreation or sports groups.
                      c.     Offer equal levels of park service to all areas of the community.
                      d.     The City should annually review its parks and recreation facilities
                             and programs and update them accordingly as user needs and
                             preferences change.
                      e.     The City should annually review its parks and recreation facilities
                             and programs and update them accordingly as user needs and
                             preferenceschange.
     City of Calexico General Plan                                                                 6- 5
                                                                             C F       rS °:       r;;-    Ft
                     f.   The City shall allow the use of private parks and recreational
                          facilities to satisfy development park requirements. Private parks
                          should be created and maintained through Community Facilities
                          Districts (" CFD")         or Homeowner' s Association (" HOA").              Uses
                          include, but are not limited to, golf courses, tennis facilities, and
 CJ                       sport courts.
                     g.   The City should add a Commercial Recreation designation to its
                          zoning code which would allow for the development of private
                          recreational      facilities  that are operated  for    profit     through     the
                          collection of user fees.
l                    h.   The City should develop a minimum 20 acre community park,
                          preferably in the center of the City, to meet the current needs. An
                          additional community park shall be developed to serve Calexico' s
                          growing population within the next 10 years.
                     h.   Establish the following park classifications within the City:
                                 Pocket Park. Pocket parks are less than 2 acres in size and are
                                 not necessarily intended to be used for active recreational
                                 activities beyond children' s play equipment. Pocket parks may
                                 be used for, but not limited to, land use buffers, picnic and
                                 sitting areas, and playgrounds.
                                 Neighborhood Park. Neighborhood parks shall be 5- 10 acres
                                 in size. Neighborhood parks serve residents within a% z to 1-
                                 mile radius and the characteristics thereof shall be examined to
                                 determine the proper facilities for each park. Wherever
  1                              possible, neighborhood parks should be tocated at the center of
                                 the residential area that they serve. Standard facility provisions
                                 are as follows in Table P- B:
                                       TABLE P- B: NEIGHBORHOOD PARK
                                      FACILITIES PER RESIDENT SERVED
                                   Facility Type                 Facility/Number Served
                                   Soccer/ Football Field                        1/ 1, 500
                                   Basketball/ Volleyball                           1 / 500
a                                  Tennis Court                                  1 / 2, 000
                                   Children' s Play Area                         1 / 5, 000
                                   Baseball Diamond                            1 / 12, 000
                                   Softball Diamond                              1/ 6, 000
                                   Racquetball Court                             1 / 2, 000
                                 Community Park. Community parks shall be between 20 and
                                 50 acres in size and serve a population of about 20, 000. This
                                 park type serves several neighborhoods within a 2- mile radius.
                                 Community parks can be simultaneously passive and active
    City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                               F       y ;:,>,:
                                recreation areas because of their larger size. Community parks
                                 require adequate parking facilities and should be located at
                                 roughly the center of the target area served.
   6.4. 1. 2 Facility Design and Location
   Objective 2
                    Create high-quality, fully functional, demand- responsive parks that serve
                    the needs of the public in accordance with specific design standards.
                    Parklands and recreational facilities should be compatible with adjacent
                    iand uses.
II
   Policy 2
                    a.    The City shall develop a community park of at least 20 acres that
                          includes such facilities as, but not limited to: lighted playing fields, a
                          swimming      pool,  a  multi- purpose   or  specific- use    trail      system
                         throughout the park, and a passive recreation area.
                    b.    The community park shall be the site of community- wide athletic
                          events and community activities. As such, it should be located, if
                         possible, near the center of the City.
                    c     Wherever possible, community parks should be located near public
                         transportation.
                     l   Incorporate wherever possible or appropriate, public art or historical
                         themes into park design.
                    e.   Design new parks and improve existing ones, where possible, to
                         prevent certain activities such as outdoor facilities, parking areas,
                         nighttime lighting, and other elements from negatively impacting
                         adjacent land uses.
                    f.   Allow no more than 50% of the total parkland requirements of new
                         developments to be met by land used for retention basin purposes.
                    g•   Require all retention basins to be landscaped.
                    h.   Each park classification type shall adhere to the following design
                         standards:
                                All Parks. All parks should be landscaped with drought-
                                tolerant plant materials in an effort to conserve water. In
                                addition, automatic irrigation systems        should be used and
                                provisions made for adequate drainage. All sidewalks shall be
                                constructed   of concrete   or  rubberized    materials.        Biking or
t                               multi- purpose trails are encouraged and may be constructed
                                with materials such      as decomposed      granite or other soil-
                                stabilized material ( see City of Calexico Bicycle Master Plan,
                                2003). As much as possible, parks should be barrier- free to the
                                physicalIy disabled.
 J
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                        6- 7

                                                                        M. F  r c    r'    r,>,
                              Pocket Park. Due to the wide variation              in size and the
                              propensity for pocket parks to be located in irregular and
                              difficult parcels, design standards for pocket parks are limited
                              to those listed above for " All Parks".
1                             Neighborhood Park. Neighborhood parks should be                  5- 10
                              acres in size; no less than 5 acres if adjacent to a school, and at
                              least 10 acres otherwise. They shall have restroom facilities
                              and have at least one designated grassy area measuring, at
                              minimum, two acres in size. Neighborhood parks should not be
                              divided by any natural or human- made barriers. They shall
                              include adequate on- and off-street parking and shall include at
                              some or all of the following recreational facilities, as
                              appropriate: tennis court, picnic areas, children' s play area,
                              trails, basketball courts, hand- ball courts or other active
                              recreation facilities. The Planning Commission shall review all
                              proposed improvements to determine if said improvements
                              meet the needs of the neighborhood upon recommendation by
                              the Parks and Recreation Commission.
                              Community Park. Community parks should have at least 20
                              useable acres, and serve 20, 000 people in approximately a two-
                              mile radius. Off-street parking must be provided at community
                              parks and close proximity to public transportation is strongly
                              sought. Locating community parks adjacent to school facilities
                              could help satisfy parking requirements as well as offer shared
                              use of certain facilities such as gym and swimming pools.
                              Community parks shall include developed playing fields,
                              picnic areas, and a system of hiking trails and bicycle paths,
                              and include other recreational facilities such as swimming
                              pools and those found in 1 leighborhood Parks. The number and
                              types of facilities located at each community park shall be
                              subject to review and approval by the City Council upon
                              recommendation by the Parks and Recreation Commission and
                              the Planning Commission.
                                                                                                   6-$
  City of Calexico General Plan
                                                                               F' rk   r,   c    e°<:
   6. 4. 1. 3 Financing
   Objective 3
                     The City should maintain and expand the current parks and recreation
                     system by implementing financing strategies.
   Policy 3
1                     a.  The City shall continue the implementation of the Quimby Act
                             Government Code 66477, City Ordinance 953) which allows the
                          City to reyuire the dedication of land ( 3 acres of park area for each
                           1, 000 subdivision residents) or cash in- lieu fees ( or a combination of
                          both) as a condition of residential development approval.
C                     b.  The City should acquire new parkland through the capital budget
                          process, the scheduling of the Quimby Act funds, and grants.
                    c.    Consider using eminent domain to acquire additional parkland in
                          instances of greatest need, such as creating a community park in the
                          center of the City.
                    d.    The City should explore increasing parks and recreational facilities
                          through the upgrade of existing open space or the conversion of
                          other public or quasi- public lands, such as utility right-of-ways and
                          the designated open space lands along the New River upon
1                         successful implementation and cleanup of the New River via the
                          New River Improvement Project described in Section 5. 2. 5 of the
                          Conservation Element..
                    e.    Aggressively pursue all forms of federal, state, county, corporate,
                          private foundation, and endowment support to aid in the acquisition,
                          maintenance, programming, and operation of park and recreational
                          facilities.
                    f.    Consider the sale of bonds as a means to acquire new park lands or
                          recreational facilities.
                    g.    Allow     revenue- generating activities on public parkland and
                          encourage, design or facilitate future events that are compatible with
                          the facility' s design. Examples include hosting commercially-
                          sponsored events, granting private concessionary rights, booking
                          private ceremonies, and some commercial advertising.
                    h.    Work with community groups, organizations, clubs, and private
                          businesses to encourage them to take a greater interest and financial
                          responsibility in local parks and recreational facilities. Examples
                          include facility and program sponsorship, facility fnancial support,
                          and goods and services donations.
                    i.    The City Council may considered the construction and operation
                            where appropriate) of private recreational facilities as satisfying the
I1
   City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                                s .:    1=      t;   gE
1
                            parkland dedication requirements set forth in City of Calexico
                            Ordinance 953. The ongoing operation costs of private facilities shall
                            be paid in perpetuity by the owner, a homeowner' s association, a
                            community facilities district (" CFD"), or an assessment district.
                            Private recreational facilities shall meet the same requirements and
                            design standards as similar public facilities.
                     J      The City should pursue acyuiring or preserving open space through
                           the various availabte financing mechanisms. Some of the available
                            mechanisms include:
                                  Infrastructure Financing District ( Uses tax increment funding;
                                  Govt. Code 53395, et. seq.)
                                  Community Facilities District ( CFD)/ Mello-Roos ( Govt. Code
                                  53311)
                                  Special Assessments
                                  Lease- Purchase Agreements
                                  Land Banking/ Lease Back ( Specifically suited for agricultural
  I                               lands)
                                  Transfer of Devetopment Rights
                                 Formation      of a  regional   open   space district ( suited  for
                                  agricultural land)
                                  Open space easements under the Conservation Easement Act
                                   California Code Section 815- 816)
u
    6. 4. 1. 4 Public Facilify Joint Use
    Objective 4
                     Increase the amount of usable park land and maximize the efficiency of
                     recreational    facilities  and    programming     by continuing to seek
                     opportunities to create joinUmultiple use arrangements.
    Policy 4
                     a.    Implement Joint-Use Agreements with Calexico Unified              School
                           District whereas issues such as types and timing of use, liabilities,
                           maintenance, and other responsibilities are addressed.
                     b.    Locate parks wherever feasible adjacent to school property in order
                           to provide the maximum level of usable park acreage and efficient
                           use recreational facilities.
                     c.    Incorporate community service uses such as child day care and
                           senior care centers into park facilities.
    City af Calexico General Plan                                                                  6- 10
                                                                               r  :.;,.;
                 d.      Coordinate recreational activities with other local communities such
                         as El Centro and Brawley at times in which participation would be
                         mutually beneficial.
                 e.      Work    with   Imperial  Irrigation  District (" IID")    to    explore the
                         possibility of converting the land adjacent to the canal to public open
                         space and/ or constructing a walking and/ or biking path along/ within
                         proximity to the canal, or both. The 2003 Ciry of Calexico Bicycle
                        Master Plan proposes a 6. 3 mile Class I bike and multi- use trail
                         along the All American Canal.
6. 4. 1. 5 Maintenance of Recreational Facilities
Objective 5
                 The City shall maintain, renovate, upgrade, and replace its recreational
                 facilities regularly to prevent a state of disrepair.
Policy 5
                  a.    Annually inspect and evaluate all park facilities and equipment for
                        repair needs and every five years for renovation needs.
                         Develop a Capital Improvement Program to pay for the equipment
                        and facilities needing repair or replacement.
6. 4. 1. 6 Community Heritage
Objective 6
                 The community park system should celebrate the City' s natural, historic,
                 and cultural heritage wherever possible.
Policy 6
                  a.    Attempt to incorporate community art, including sculptures, painting
                        and other visual art forms, performing arts, and other exhibitions and
                        special events into park design and programming.
                  b.    Use the public park system for the preservation of historic structures
                        that would otherwise be lost to development, either by acquiring the
                        structure and turning it and the adjacent land into a park, or
                        relocating historic structures to park land, if feasible.
City of Calexico Generai Pian                                                                     6- 11
     7. 0        NOISE ELEMENT
     7. 1    Introd uction
                          The environment is full of both natural and man- made noises. Noise must be
                         regulated for the health and safety of residents.                          Unacceptable noise       is
                         principally caused by the operation of vehicles (                          ground   and  air),   and
                         agricultural and industrial production. In Calexico, vehicular traffic movement
                         on the City' s road system is the predominant cause of high noise levels in the
                          City.
                         The Noise Element is closely related to other elements of the General Plan,
                         particularly the Land Use, Circulation, Housing, Parks and Recreation and
                          Open     Space       Elements.        A    major objective        of the Noise Element is         to
                         encourage noise- compatible                  land    uses.    Effective land use planning can
                         alleviate both perceived and real noise problems.
1
          7.2      Noise Rating System and Terminology
                         The unit of ineasurement used to describe a noise level is the decibel ( dB).
                         The human ear is not equally sensitive to all frequencies within the sound
                          spectrum.       Therefore,       the " A-weighted"            noise  scale,  which   weights    the
l. J                     frequencies to which humans are sensitive, is used for measurements. Noise
                          levels using A-weighted measurements are written dB(A) or dB. Decibels are
                         measured on a logarithmic scale, which quantifies sound intensity in a manner
                          similar to the Richter scale used for earthquake magnitudes. Thus, a doubling
                         of the energy of a noise source, such as doubling a traffic volume, would
                          increase the noise level by 3 dB; a halving of the energy would result in a 3
                         dB    decrease.        A    10 dB increase represents a               10- fold increase in sound
                          intensity, a 20 dB change is a 100- fold difference, 30 dB is a 1000- fold
                          increase, etc.
                         Average noise levels over a period of minutes or hours are usually expressed
                         as dB Leq, or the equivalent noise level for that period of time. For example,
                         Leq 3 would represent a three hour average. When no period is specified, a
                         one- hour average is assumed. Noise standards for land use compatibility are
                          stated in terms of the Community Noise Equivalent Level ( CNEL) and the
                         Day-Night Average Noise Level ( Ldn). CNEL is a 24- hour weighted average
                         measure of community noise. The computation of CNEL adds 5 dB to the
                         average hourly noise levels between 7 p.m. and 10 p.m. ( evening hours), and
                          10 dB to the average hourly noise levels between 10 p. m. and 7: 00 a.m.
                           nighttime hours). This weighting accounts for the increased human sensitivity
                         to noise in the evening and nighttime hours. Ld„ is a very similar 24- hour
                         weighted average, which weights only the nighttime hours and not the evening
     City of Ca(exica General Plan                                                                                   7- 1
     C S2U04t04- OU4bL irtat GP 2-C171Fin2? G!' U,7ci fe47  1' C se Eten nf 2- 7. d: c

                     hours. CNEL is normally about 1 dB higher than La„ for typical traffic and
                     other community noise levels.
  7. 3     Harmful Effecfs of Noise
                    According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
                     Disorders (" NIDCD"), approximately 28 million people in the United States
                    currently have some degree of hearing loss, a third of which is noise- induced.
                     In many of these cases, exposures to very loud, impulsive, or sustained noises
                    caused damage to the inner ear which was substantial even before a hearing
                    loss was actually noticed. To prevent the spread of hearing loss, a desirable
                    goal would be to minimize the number of noise sources which expose people
                    to sound levels above 70 decibels. However, hearing impairment is only one
                    of the harmful effects of noise on people.
                    Noise can also cause other temporary physical and / psychological responses in
                    humans. Temporary physical reactions to passing noises range from a startle
                    reflex to constriction in the peripheral blood vessels, the secretion of saliva
                    and gastric juices; and changes in heart rate, breathing patterns, the chemical
                    composition of the blood and urine, the dilation of the pupils of the eye, visual
                    acuity and equilibrium. The chronic recurrence of these physical reactions has
                    been shown to aggravate headaches, fatigue, digestive disorders, heart disease,
                    and circulatory and equilibrium disorders. Moreover, as a source of stress,
I
                    noise is a contributory factor in stress- related ailments such as ulcers, high
                    blood pressure, and anxiety.
                    Two other harmful effects of noise which are commonly of concern involve
                    speech interference and the prevention or interruption of sleep. Table N-A
                    identifies how excessive background noises can reduce the amount and quality
                    of   verbal    exchange    and thereby impact education, family lifestyles,
                    occupational efficiency and the quality of recreation and leisure time. As
                    shown on Table N- A, speech interference begins to occur at about 50 decibels
                    and becomes severe at about 60 decibels. Background noise levels affect
                    performance and learning processes through distraction,                       annoyance      and
                    irritability, and the inability to concentrate.
                    Several factors determine whether or not a particular noise event will interfere
                    with or prevent sleep. These factors include the noise level and characteristics,
                    the stage of sleep, the individual' s age, and the motivation to waken. I11 or
                    elderly people are particularly susceptible to noise- induced sleep interference,
                    which can occur when intruding noise levels exceed the typical 35- 45 decibel
                    background noise level in bedrooms. Sleep prevention can occur when
                    intruding noise levels exceed 50 dBA.
   NIDCD, " Noise- Induced Hearing Loss", http:// nidcd.nih. gov/ health/ hearing/ noise.asp# who, accessed
  9/ 23/ 2005
     ity f Ca(exicQ General Plan                                                                            7- 2

                                                                                                          i
                                TABLE N- A:         HARMFUL EFFECTS OF NOISE
                                                                        Noise Levels at Which Harmful
                                        Effect                                   Effects Occur
                      Prevention or Interruption of Sleep                        5-   45 dB( A)
                       Speech Interference                                       50 - 60 dB( A)
                      Extra Auditory Physiological Effects                       65 - 70 dB( A)
                      Hearing Loss ( sustained exposure)                         75 -  85dB( A)
                      Source: California Department of Public Health Report to 1971 Legislature)
Cl 7. 4   Land Use Compafibility with Noise
                    Some land uses are more tolerant of noise than others. For example, schools,
                    hospitals, churches, and residences are more sensitive to noise intrusion than
                    commercial       or    manufacturing       activities.  For    this   reason,  land     use
                    compatibility with the noise environment is an important consideration in the
                    planning and design of new developments. As ambient noise levels affect the
                    perceived amenity or livability of a development, so too can the
                    mismanagement of noise impacts impair the economic health and growth of a
                    community by reducing the area's desirability as a place to live, shop, and
                    work.
                    The City of Calexico must make a determination regarding how much noise is
                    too    much.    Figure     N- 1  illustrates   guidelines   for    noise   and  land    use
                    compatibility as generated by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban
                    Development and the California State Office of Noise Control. Figure N-2
                    illustrates the federal exterior noise acceptability criteria for housing. These
                    guidelines are used by local governing agencies to set noise standards.
r
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                       7- 3
                                                                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                 FIGURE N- 1:                            STATE LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
  ILJ
   '                                                                 COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
              LAND USE CATEGORY                                                             Ld„ Or CNEL, dB                                           LEGEND
                                                                      55           60              65      70       75         80
                                                                                t'
             Residential —Low Densiry
             Single- Family, Duplex,                                                                                                                  Normally Acceptable
             Mobile Homes '
                                                                                                                                                      Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon
                                                                                                                                                      the assumption that any buildings involved are
                                                                                                                                                      of normal conventional construction, without
                                                                                                                                                      any speciat noise insulation requirements.
             Residential - Multifamily ,
                                                                       i?
             Transient Lodging —                                                                                                                      Conditionally Acceptable
             Motels, Hotels
                                                                       I                                                                              New construction or development should be
                                                                                                                                                      undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the
                                                                                                                                                      noise reduction requirements is made and
                                                                                      t {,,   rif; j .
                                                                                                                                                     needed noise insulation features included in the
             Schools, Libraries, Churches,
                                                                                                                                                     design. Conventional construction, but with
            Hospitals, Nursing Homes
                                                                                                                                                     closed windows and fresh air supply systems or
                                                                                                                                                     air conditioning will normalty suffice.
                                                                                                                     i
            Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
            Amphitheatres
                                                                                                                                                     Normally Unacceptable
                                                                                                            i                                        New construction or development should
            Sports Arena, Outdoor                                                                                                                    generally be discouraged. If new construction or
            Spectator Sports                                                                                                                         development does proceed, a detailed analysis
                                                                                                                                                     of the noise reduction requirements must be
                                                                                                                                                     made and needed noise insulation features
            Playgrounds, Neighborhood (                                                                                                              included in the design.
            Parks
                                                                                                       i
            Golf Courses, Riding
            Stables, Water Recreation and
            Cemeteries                                                                                                                               Clearly Unacceptable
                                                                                                                                                     New construction or development should
            Office Buildings, Business, ; ;                                                                                                          generally not be undertaken.
            Commercial and Professional '
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                      i
            Industrial, Manufacturing, ;
            Utilities, Agriculture !
                                   CONSIDERATIONS IN DETERMINATION OF NOISE- COMPATIBLE LAND USE
              A.      NORMALIZED NOISE EXPOSURE INFORMATION DESIRED                                            residential uses located in Community Noise Exposure Areas greater than 65 dB should
                                                                                                              be discouraged and considered located within nortnally unacceptable areas.
      Where sufficient data exists, evaluate land use suitability with 2specl to a" normalized"
      value of CNEL or La,,. Nortnalized values are obtained by adding orsubtracting the                               C.    SUITABLE INTERIOR ENVIRONMENTS
      constants described in Table 1 to the measured or calculated value of CNEL or La.
                                                                                                              One objective of locating residential units relative to a known noise source is to maintain
               B.     NOISE SOURCE CHARACTERISTICS                                                            a suitable interior noise environment at no greater than 45 d8 CNEL of Ld,,. This
                                                                                                              requiremeM, coupled with the measured or calculated noise reduction performance of the
      7he land use- noise compatibility recommendatlons should be reviewed in relation to the                 type of structure under consideration, should govem the minimum acceptable distance to
      specific source of the noise. For example, aircraft and railroad noise is nortnally made up             a noise source.
      of higher single noise events than auto traffic but occurs less frequently. Therefore,
      d'rfferent sources yielding the same composite noise exposure do not necessarily create                          D.    ACCEPTABLE OUT        OOR ENVIRONMENTS
      the same noise environment. The State Aeronautics Act uses 65 d8 CNEL as the
l _J  criterion which airports must eventually meet to protect exis6ng residential communities                Another consideration, which in some communities is an overtiding factor, is the tlesire
      from unacceptable exposure to aircraft noise. In order to facilitate the purposes of the                for an acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, more restrictive
      Act, one of which is to encourage land uses compatible with the 65 dB CNEL criterion                    standards for land use compatibility, typically below the maximum considered " nortnally
      wherever possible, and in order to faalitate the ability of airports to comply with the Act,            acceptable" for that land use category, may be appropriate.
                      City of Calexico General Plan                                                                                                                                      7- 4

                               FIGURE N- 2: FEDERAL EXTERIOR NOISE
                              ACCEPTABILITY CRITERIA FOR HOUSING
                                                 EXTERIOR NOISE EXPOSURE
            DEGREE OF
         ACCEPTABILITY
                                                              L' an ( dB)
1                                    55        60         65           70       75        80
      ACCEPTABLE
      NORMALLY
      ACCEPTABLE
      UNACCEPTABLE
      ACCEPTABLE
      The noise exposure may be of some concern but common building construction will make
      the indoor environment acceptable and the outdoor environment will be reasonably
      pleasant for recreation and play.
      NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
      The noise exposure is significantly more severe; barriers may be necessary between the
      site and prominent noise sources to make the outdoor environment acceptable; special
      building constructions may be necessary to ensure that people indoors are sufficiently
      protected from outdoor noise.
IUNACCEPTABLE
      The noise exposure at the site is so severe that the construction cost to make the indoor
      noise environment acceptable may be prohibitive and the outdoor environment still be
      unacceptable.
t
      City of Caiexico General Plan                                                         7- 5
 1
                                                                                                                                   M...
     7. 5   Noise Standards
     7.5. 1 Federal Noise Standards
                     The Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA)                                  has developed a series of
                     maximum design noise levels for various activity categories which are
                     expressed in terms of Leq and L o values ( L o refers to noise levels that are
                     exceeded ten percent of the time). The FHWA design noise levels represent
                     maximum values and incorporate trade- offs between desirable and feasible
                     noise levels. These design levels appear in Table N- B and are to be applied to:
                                Those undeveloped lands for which development is planned, designed,
                                and programmed on the date of public knowledge of the highway or
                                other federally funded construction project.
                                Those activities and land uses in existence on the date of public
                                knowledge of the project.
                                Those areas which have regular human use and in which a lowered noise
                                level would be of benefit.
                                                  TABLE N-B: FHWA DESIGN NOISE
                                                  LEVEL/LAND USE RELATIONSHIPS
                                        Leqa
                      Category                     L, o        Location                         Description of Land
                            A             57        60         Exterior         Tracts of land in which serenity and quiet are
CI                                                                              of extraordinary significance          and  serve an
                                                                                important public need, i. e.,          amphitheaters,
                                                                                parks, and open space.
                            B             67        70         Exterior         Picnic   areas,  recreation     areas,  playgrounds,
IJ                                                                              active sport areas, and parks not included in
                                                                                Category A and residences, motels, hotels,
                                                                                                                 schools,   churches,
                                                                                public meeting rooms,
                                                                                libraries, and hospitals.
                            C             72         75        Exterior         Developed lands, properties, or activities not
                                                                                included in the above categories.
                           D              52        55          Interior        Residences, motels, hotels, public meeting
                                                                                rooms, schools, churches, libraries, hospitals,
                                                                                and auditoriums.
I J'
                      a.         Equivalent Noise Level.
                      b.         Noise levet exceeded ten   ercent of the time.
                      Source:    Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Highway Noise Control Standards and
                      Procedures, Title 23, Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter l, Subchapter J, Part 772, 38, FR 15953, June 19,
                      1973, as amended throu h Ma     29, 1979.
     City ot Gal xic General Plan                                                                                              Q:
1
  7.5. 2 State Noise Standards
                    Section 1092 of Title 25 of the California Administrative Code includes sound
                   transmission control standards which detail specific requirements for new
                   multi- family structures (    motels,   apartments,   condominiums,     and    other
                   attached dwellings) located within the 60 CNEL contour adjacent to roads,
                   rapid transit lines, or manufacturing areas. An acoustical analysis is required
                   showing that the multi- family units have been designed to limit interior noise
                   levels ( with doors and windows closed) to 45 CNEL in any habitable room.
                   Title 21   of the California Administrative Code ( Subchapter 6, Article 2,
                   Section 5014) also specifies that multi- family, attached units incorporate noise
1                  reduction features sufficient to assure that interior noise levels in all habitable
                   rooms do not exceed 45 CNEL.
                   Section 6502( fl of the Government Code specifies that it is the responsibility
                   of the City of Calexico to specify the manner in which the Noise Element,
                   once adopted, also becomes the guideline for determining compliance with the
                   State noise insulation standards discussed above. The Office of Noise Control
                   established by the California Noise Control Act of 1973, has developed
                   criteria and guidelines for local agencies to use in setting standards for human
                   exposure to noise and preparing noise elements.
                   An interior CNEL of 45 dB is mandated by the State of California Noise
                   Insulation Standards ( CCR, Title 24, Part 6, Section T25- 28) for multiple-
                   family dwellings, dormitories, long-term care facilities, apartments, and hotel
                   and motel rooms. A 45 dB CNEL is also typically considered a desirable noise
                   exposure for single- family dwelling units. Since normal noise attenuation
                   within residential structures with closed windows is about 20- 25 dB, an
                   exterior noise exposure of 65 dB CNEL will result in an interior noise level of
                   40 to 45 dB CNEL and therefore, is generally the noise land use compatibility
                   guideline for noise sensitive receiver sites in California.
                   Since commercial and industrial activities are generally conducted indoors,
                   the exterior noise exposure standard for such less sensitive land uses is less
                   stringent.
  7. 6   Existing Noise Conditions
                   As a requisite to the formation of an effective noise control program, the City
                   must be cognizant of the location and extent of local noise problems, namely
                   major noise source locations, the number of persons exposed, and what levels
                   of exposure exist.
                   The two types of noise sources that should be considered are stationary and
                   mobile sources. Stationary sources of noise typically include manufacturing
                   and construction activities, air conditioning/ refrigeration units, whistles or
                   bells, high- level radio, stereo or television usage, power tools, lawnmowers,
                   home appliances,     and barking dogs. Mobile noise sources are typically
  City of Caiexico General Plan                                                                7- 7
C
                      transportation- related and  include:  trains,  airpianes,  automobiles,  trucks,
                      buses,   motorcycles,   and   off-road   vehicles   for  both  recreational   and
                      agricultural use.
   7.6. 1     Mobrle Noise Sources
                      Motor vehicles on area roadways are the major source of continuous noise in
                      and around the City. As a result, they affect the noise environment of both the
                      existing and planned land uses adjacent to the said circulation system.
                      Traffic noise is generated by tire friction on the roadway surface, as well as
                      noise from the vehicle engines and exhaust. Generally, higher noise levels
                      result from higher traffic volumes and higher traffic speeds. The mix of
                      vehicles using the roadway also affects noise levels. For example, a truck
                      route would have higher noise levels compared to another street where truck
                      traffic was prohibited.
                      The Federal Highway Administration ("        FHWA")     has developed a noise
                      prediction model ( FHWA- RD- 77- 108) to estimate the noise levels generated
                      by roadways. This model was used to estimate the current noise impacts from
                      roadways in the City of Calexico and the results are contained in Tables N- C
                      and N- D. For example, in Table N- C, SR I 11 between Heber Road and Jasper
                      Road has a noise level of 71. 9 dBA at 50 feet from the roadway centerline.
                      From the centerline of said roadway to the point where the noise level is 65
                      dBA ( the maximum allowable outdoor noise level for all residential uses in
                      the City of Calexico according to Policy 1( a) below) , the distance is 246 feet.
                      Any distance greater than 246 feet from roadway centerline ( on this road
                      segment) has a noise level less than 65 dBA.
CJ City ofi C alexico Genera! Plan                                                              7_8
             TABLE N- C: EXISTING ROADWAY                                         ORTH-SOUTH NOISE LEVELS
 1         Roadway                                    Segment                     ADT
                                                                                                       Noise Level at
                                                                                                               50 feet
                                                                                                                                Distance to 65
                                                                                                                               dBA Noise Level
                                                                                                                                               Z
                                       Jasper to Cole - - -
       Dogwood Road                   Cole to SR- 98 - - -
                                       SR- 98 to Anza - - -
                                      Jasper to Cole - - -
         Kloke Road
                                       Cole to SR- 98                              900                            56. 1 -
                                       Heber to Jasper                           34000                            71. 9              246
                                      Jasper to Cole                             34000                            71. 9              246
                                      Cole to SR- 98
 1          SR- 111
                                      SR- 98 to Grant
                                                                                 32000
                                                                                 51000
                                                                                                                  71. 7
                                                                                                                  73. 7
                                                                                                                                     231
                                                                                                                                     369
                                      Grant to 7th                               49500                            73. 5              358
                                      7th to 2nd                                 43500                            73. 0              314
                                      Cole to SR- 98                              6000                            64. 4 -
                                      SR- 98 to 7th                               3600                            62. 2 -
       Rockwood Ave
                                      7th to 5th - - -
                                      5th to 2nd - - -
                                      SR- 98 to 7th                               2200                            60. 0 -
           Blair Ave                  7th to 5th - - -
                                      5th to 2nd - - -
                                      SR- 98 to 7th                               5900                            64. 3 -
        Encinas Ave                   7th to 5th - - -
                                      5th to 2nd - - -
                                      Heber to Jasper                              800                            55. 6 -
      Meadows Road                    Jasper to Cole - - -
                                      Cole to SR- 98                              9800                            66. 5               71
                                      SR- 98 to 7th                              6100                             64. 5              44
        Andrade Rd                    7th to 5th                                 4600                             63. 2               33
                                      5th to 2nd                                 3800                             62. 4              27
                                      Heber to Jasper                              800                            55. 6 -
                                      Jasper to Cole                               800                            55. 6 -
                                      Cole to SR- 98                               500                            53. 6 -
         Bowker Rd
                                      SR- 98 to Lavigne                            100                            46. 6 -
                                      Lavigne to 7th - - -
                                      7th to 2nd                                  1200                            57. 4 -
                                      Heber to Jasper                             1000                            56. 6 -
       Barbara Worth                  Jasper to SR- 98                           2000                             59.6 -
                Rd                    SR- 98 to Lavigne                           400                             52. 6 -
n
                                      Lavigne to 2nd - - -
IJ    mL.. _,.,. a__.,._. ,. ,._   i:_,. :,. ,... a ,.,. L,. _,. r _,._....
                                                                     Y.,."` '
                                                                              r _.
                                                                                L....,.
                                                                                _       _..:,.,.
                                                                                        _.       i,._.,. i ,... i,... i,..:_,.
   2- The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations and the numbers listed in
   this column are the distance from the centerline to the 65 dBA contour line. The noise levels at 50 feet were
   calculated and used to estimate the distance to the 65 dBA contour using dB2= dB- 10* log DZ/ D where
   dB= measured dBA at 50', d= 50, and dz= x.
   City af Caiexico              eneral Plan                                                                                           7- 9
               TABLE N- D:            EXISTING ROADWAY EAST- WEST NOISE LEVELS
                                                                                               Noise Level at             Distance to 65
           Roadway                            Segment                             ADT                                                          Z
                                                                                                   50 feet             dBA Noise Level
                                SR- 111 to Meadows                                1000                56.6 -
           Heber Rd             Meadows to Bowker                                 1000                56.6 -
                                Bowker to Barbara Worth                            600                54.4 -
                                Dogwood to Kloke                                  3400                61. 9 -
                                Kloke to SR- 111 - - -
           Jasper Rd            SR- 111 to Meadows                                 100                46.6 -
                                Meadows to Bowker                                  200                49. 6 -
                                Bowker to Barbara Worth                            200                49. 6 -
r                               Dogwood to Kloke - - -
                                Kloke to SR- 111                                 10900                67. 0                      79
            Cole Rd             SR- 111 to Meadows                               18000                69. 2                      130
                                Andrade to Bowker                                 4000                62. 6 -
                                Bowker to SR- 98                                  3800                62. 4 -
                                Hammers to Dogwood                                4400                63. 0 -
                                Dogwood to Kloke                                  9600                66.4                       69
                                Kloke to SR- 111                                 24200                70. 4                      175
                                SR- 111 to Rockwood                              24900 - -
                                Rockwood to Blair                                23400                70. 3                      169
             SR- 98
                                Blair to Encinas                                 21300                69. 9                      154
                                Encinas to Andrade                               16900                68. 9                      122
                                Andrade to Bowker                                 9100                66. 2                      66
                                Bowker to Cole                                   6800                64. 9                       49
                                Cole to Barbara Worth                            13200               67. 8                       95
                                Kloke to Cesar Chavez - - -
            Grant St
                                Cesar Chavez to SR- 111 - - -
             7th St             Blair to East Rivera                              200                49. 6 -
                                SR- 111 to Rockwood - - -
                                Rockwood to Blair - - -
             5th St
                                Blair to Encinas - - -
                                Encinas to Andrade                                1500               58.4 -
                                East of Dogwood                                   800                55. 6 -
           Anza Rd              Dogwood to Cesar Chavez                           800                55. 6 -
                                Cesar Chavez to SR- 111                           800                55. 6 -
                                SR- 111 to Rockwood - - -
                                Rockwood to Blair - - -
                                Blair to Encinas - - -
                                Encinas to Andrade                               3400                61. 9 -
             2nd St
                               Andrade to East Rivera                            3500                62. 0 -
                                East Rivera to Bowker - - -
                                Bowker to Future Rd                              2300                60. 2 -
                                Future Rd to Barbara Worth - - -
     The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations.
     I he roadway centerl ne s usetl as the reterence pomt tor these no se level calculahons ana the numbers l stea m tnis column are the atstance
  from the centerline to the 65 dBA contour line. The noise levels at 50 feet were calculated and used to estimate the distance to the 65 dBA
  contour using dBZ= dB-] 0" log DZ/ Di where dB= measured dBA at 50', d= 50, and dZ= x.
  City of Cafexico General Plan                                                                                                 7- 10
1
   7.6. 2  Other Noise Sources
                  Southern Pacific Railroad Company
                  The railroad is significant in its contribution to the nuisance noise level.
                  Increased rail traffic volumes which have led to additional truck traffic have
1                 made the railroad and its vicinity much noisier than in the past. Noise from the
                 trains using the railroad tracks depends on the number of locomotives per train,
                 the number of cars per train, and the speed of the train. For example, the hourly
                  Leq at a distance of 50 feet from the tracks resulting from 5 trains ( each train
                 with 3 locomotives and 100 rail cars traveling at 30 miles per hour) passing
                 through a certain area would be approximately 72. 7 dBA. If train activity
r                 continues at this pace throughout the day and night, the noise levels could be as
                 high as 79. 4 dBA CNEL. Therefore, this mode of transportation has an impact
                 on the noise levels in the City and must be taken into consideration in land use
                 planning. In terms of land use, the railroad is a significant part of the urban
                 fabric in Calexico. It is also an important part of the industrial, commercial and
                 agricultural economic base of the community.
                  Calexico International Aitport
                 The Calexico International Airport is located west of the City on Anza Road,
                 adjacent to the international border. The nearest residential area to the airport is
                 no closer than 2400 feet. The airport offers its services 365 days a year, and has
                 a monthly average of 1226 arrivals and departures. Five percent of these
                 operations are performed during the hours between 5 pm and 7 am. The type
                 and weight of aircraft that is able to use the airport facilities is limited by its
                 4679- foot runway which runs east- west, away from the residential areas,
                 towards the open agricultural areas to the west. Figure N- 3 shows the noise
                 contours for the Calexico International Airport. Note that the noise contours
                 presented herein are conservative and are based on future 60, 000 annual
                 operations; the Calexico International Airport Master Plan forecasts 27, 200
                                           20202.
                 annual operations by
                 International Border Traffic
                 The City of Calexico is known as the gateway to Mexico. The international
                 border is located in downtown Calexico, not more than half a block from most
                 of downtown' s commercial establishments. State Highway 111 runs north- south,
                 from the border to northern Imperial County. This highway is the principal route
                 for all vehicles traveling to or from Mexico via Mexicali. The traffic on SH 111
                 is continuous throughout the day and into the night. Therefore, limiting the
                 development along the route to land uses that are compatible with a higher noise
                 exposure is necessary.
  2 P& D Aviation, 2001 Calexico International Airport Master Plan
  City of Calexico General Plar                                                             7- 11
                                                                                                 w        s
     w4sv4- uu    ow s a rpori noise. rnxa r aEr rev seo i uv. a. v   o
  Source: Airport Landuse CompatibiGty Plan,                                                          r gure iV- 3
                                                                  N
               Imperial County Airports, Fig. 4G
                                                                          Calexico International Airport
                                                                   BB
                                                           w            E
                                                                  is
                                                                                            Noise Contours
   R L B E R T   A
  WEBB                                                            S
     ra     o v. s
N                                                                                  City of Calexico General Plan I
  7. 7   Future Noise Conditions and Design Considerations
I
                   Growth in and near the City of Calexico will generate increased traffic
                   volumes. As traffic levels rise, existing residences wiil be exposed to higher
                   noise levels. Doubling the traffic volume will increase the need for controlling
                   the noise source whenever feasible and protecting the noise receptors when
                   noise source control measures are inadequate.
                   Table N- E and Table N- F provides an estimate of where the 65 and 70 dBA
                   noise level contour lines occur relative to the roadway centerline. The data
                   contained in these tables can be used as a quick reference to decide if future
                   projects will have the potential to expose sensitive receptors to unacceptable
                   outdoor noise levels without mitigation.
                   Acoustic architectural design involves the incorporation of noise reducing
                   strategies in the design and layout of individual structures. Building heights,
                   room arrangements, window size and placement, balcony and courtyard
                   design, and the provision of air conditioning all play an important role in
                   shielding noise sensitive activities from intrusive noise levels.
r
  City of Caiexico General Plan                                                           7- 13
              TABLE N-E:          FUTURE ROADWAY NORTH- SOUTH NOISE LEVELS
                                                                                                Distance to         Distance to
                                                                              Noise Level
         Roadway                       Segment                    ADT ,                            65 dBA              70 dBA
LJ                                                                             at 50 feet
                                                                                                Noise Level2       Noise Level'
                            Jasper to Cole                       47300             73. 3             342                  108
      Dogwood Road          Cole to SR- 98                       36300             72. 2             262                   83
                            SR- 98 to Anza                       20700             69. 8             150 -
                            Jasper to Cole                        2400             60. 4 - -
        Kloke Road
                            Cole to SR- 98                        9600             66. 4              69 -
                            Heber to Jasper                      93800             76. 3             678                  214
                            Jasper to Cole                       71400             75. 1             516                  163
                            Cole to SR- 98                       68400             75. 0             494                  156
1         SR- 111
                            SR- 98 to Grant                      50000             73. 6             361                  114
                            Grant to 7th                         47600             73. 4             344                  109
                            7th to 2nd                           44800             73. 1             324                  102
O                           Cole to SR- 98
                            SR- 98 to 7th
                                                                  5600
                                                                  3300
                                                                                   64. 1 - -
                                                                                   61. 8 - -
      Rockwood Ave
                            7th to 5th                            2100             59. 8 - -
                            5th to 2nd                            9300             66. 3              67 -
                            SR- 98 to 7th                        10500             66. 8              76 -
         Blair Ave          7th to 5th                            7500             65.4               54 -
                            5th to 2nd                            1600             58. 6 - -
                            SR- 98 to 7th                         5600             64. 1 - -
       Encinas Ave          7th to 5th                            1200             57. 4 - -
                            5th to 2nd                             800             55.6 - -
                            Heber to Jasper                       4000             62. 6 - -
      Meadows Road          Jasper to Cole                       21200             69. 9             153 -
                            Cole to SR- 98                       11700             67. 3              85 -
                            SR- 98 to 7th                        17500             69. 0             126 -
       Andrade Rd           7th to 5th                           11800             67. 3              85 -
                            5th to 2nd                            5500             64. 0 - -
                            Heber to Jasper                       4600             63. 2 - -
                            Jasper to Cole                       26900             70. 9             194                  61
                            Cole to SR- 98                        8600             65. 9              62 -
        Bowker Rd
                            SR- 98 to Lavigne                    17000             68. 9             123 -
 J
                            Lavigne to 7th                        1100             57. 0 - -
                            7th to 2nd                            1100             57. 0 - -
                            Heber to Jasper                       2000             59. 6 - -
      Barbara Worth         Jasper to SR- 98                      4600             63. 2 - -
             Rd             SR- 98 to Lavigne                     7700             65. 5              56 -
                            Lavigne to 2nd                        4900             63. 5 - -
      The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations.
      The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations and the numbers listed in this column
   aze the distance from the centerline to the 65 dBA contour line. The noise levels at 50 feet were calculated and used to estimate
   the distance to the 65 dBA contour using dBZ= dB-] 0* log DZ/ D where dB        neasured dBA at 50', d= 50, and dz= x.
   3- The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations and the numbers listed in this column
   are the distance from the centerline to the 70 dBA contow line.
   Gity ef Calexico Generai Plan                                                                                      7- 14
             TABLE N-F: FUTURE ROADWAY EAST- WEST NOISE LEVELS
                                                                                 Noise        Distance to  Distance to
1     Roadway                       Segment                      ADT         Level at 50
                                                                                  feet'
                                                                                                65 dBA
                                                                                              Noise Level2
                                                                                                             70 dBA
                                                                                                           Noise Level3
                        SR- 111 to Meadows                      10700             66. 9            77 -
      Heber Rd          Meadows to Bowker                        8300             65. 8            60 -
                        Bowker to Barbara Worth                 10100             66. 6            73 -
                        Dogwood to Kloke                        15800             68. 6           114 -
1     Jasper Rd
                        Kloke to SR- 111
                        SR- 111 to Meadows
                                                                19400
                                                                45600
                                                                                  69. 5
                                                                                  73.2
                                                                                                  140 -
                                                                                                  330           104
                        Meadows to Bowker                       38000             72. 4           275            87
                        Bowker to Barbara Worth                 17700             69. 1           128 -
                        Dogwood to Kloke                        23800             70. 4           172            54
                        Kloke to SR- 111                        32200             71. 7           233            74
       Cole Rd         SR- 111 to Meadows                       26700             70. 9           193           61
                       Andrade to Bowker                        15300             68. 4           111 -
                       Bowker to SR- 98                         18800             69. 3           136 -
                       Hammers to Dogwood                        6400             64. 7 - -
                       Dogwood to Kloke                         20900             69. 8           151 -
u
                       Kloke to SR- 111                         31600             71. 6           228           72
                       SR- 111 to Rockwood                      29400             71. 3           212           67
                       Rockwood to Blair                        27400             71. 0           198           63
        SR- 98
                       Blair to Encinas                         27700             71. 0           200           63
                       Encinas to Andrade                       21400             69. 9           155 -
                       Andrade to Bowker                        28400             71. 1           205           65
                       Bowker to Cole                           28200             71. 1           204           64
                       Cole to Barbara Worth                    53400             73. 9           386           122
                       Kloke to Cesar Chavez                     5400             63. 9 - -
       Grant St
                       Cesar Chavez to SR- 111                  10400             66. 8            75 -
        7th St         Biair to East Rivera                       400             52. 6 - -
                       SR- 111 to Rockwood                      13600             67. 9            98 -
                       Rockwood to Blair                        11500             67. 2            83 -
        5th St
                       Blair to Encinas                          8900             66. 1            64 -
                       Encinas to Andrade                        5000             63. 6 - -
                       East of Dogwood                           17Q0             58. 9 - -
      Anza Rd          Dogwood to Cesar Chavez                  20400            69. 7            147 -
                       Cesar Chavez to SR- 111                  29700            71. 3            215           68
                       SR- 111 to Rockwood                      19400            69. 5            140 -
                       Rockwood to Blair                        14300            68. 2            103 -
                       Blair to Encinas                         12900            67. 7             93 -
                       Encinas to Andrade                       10100            66. 6            73 -
       2nd St
                       Andrade to East Rivera                    8300            65. 8            60 -
                       East Rivera to Bowker                     5000            63. 6 - -
                       Bowker to Future Rd                       5000            63. 6 - -
                       Future Rd to Barbara Worth               4000             62. 6 - -
    The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations.
  Foofiote Yor l able N- N' continued from previous page)
1 City of Calexico General Plan                                                                             7- 15
   z- The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations and the numbers listed in this column
   are the distance from the centerline to the 65 dBA contour line. The noise levels at 50 feet were calculated and used to estimate
   the distance to the 65 dBA contour using dB2= dB,-] 0* log DZ/ Di where dB= measured dBA at 50', d= 50, and dz= c.
   3- The roadway centerline is used as the reference point for these noise level calculations and the numbers listed in this column
   are the distance from the centerline to the 70 dBA contour line.
CI
                        Acoustic construction is the treatment of various parts of a building to reduce
                        interior noise levels. Acoustic wall design, doors, ceilings and floors, as well
                        as dense building materials, the use of acoustic windows ( double glazed,
                        double paned, thick, unopenable,                 or   small    with    air-tight   seals)    and    the
                        inclusion of maximum air spaces in attics and walls are all available options.
                        Site planning can also address noise concerns through setbacks, front yards
                        facing streets, and courtyard housing arrangements.
                        Noise barriers are relatively easy to design and are inexpensive. Consequently,
                        they are often used indiscriminately in place of the techniyues discussed
                        above. For example, developments where each road is bordered by six-foot
                        block walts behind which residences are "                  protected"      from excessive noise
                        levels tends to become unsightly and reduces the open, more rural feel that
                        Calexico has had throughout its history. Ideally, noise barriers incorporate the
                        placement of berms, walls, or a combination of the two in conjunction with
                        appropriate landscaping to create an aesthetically pleasing environment.
                        Where space is available, a meandering earth berm is both effective and
                        pleasing. Where space is restricted, a wall is effective. In either case, however,
                        thick landscaping ( utilizing evergreen plants) should be specified to reduce the
                        visual impact of the barrier and retain the rural ambience.
   7.8      Goal, Objectives and Policies
   7.8. l     Goal
                        Maintain the quiet rurat residential nature of the community through the use
                        of sensitive land use practices and appropriate noise mitigation measures.
   7. 8. 1. 1    Acceptable Noise Levels
   Objective 1
                        The City should establish adverse noise levels for various noise- sensitive
                        uses.
   Policy 1
                        a.       65 dBA CNEL is established as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure
                                 level for all private residential areas such as backyards.
                        b.       Indoor noise levels shall not exceed 45 dBA CNEL for single- and
                                 multiple- family dwellings,            dormitories,        hospitals,   nursing homes,
                                 apartments, and hotel and motel rooms.
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                                     7- 16
                                                                                                   f
                      c        70 dBA CNEL is established as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure
                               level for schools ( public and private), libraries, churches, hospitals,
                              nursing homes, parks, and recreation areas.
                              70 dBA CNEL is established as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure
                              level for office buildings, business, commercial, professional, and
                              mixed- use developments.
                      e.      75 dBA CNEL is established as the acceptable outdoor noise exposure
l _l                          level for golf courses, riding stables, water recreation, cemeteries,
                              industrial, manufacturing, utilities, and agriculture.
     7.8. 1. 2  Land Use Compatibility
     Objective 2
                      Land use distribution should account for the noise characteristics of basic uses.
     Policy 2
                      a.      The location and distribution of land uses throughout the City should
                              take into account the compatibility of the different uses and their
                              respective noise levels.
                      b.      The review of development applications shall consider the impact of
                              the use on the noise environment of existing or planned contiguous
                              uses.
                      c.      Where necessary because of incompatibilities, noise attenuation
                              measures shall be required by the City to achieve the acceptable noise
                              exposure levels.
     7. 8. 1. 3 Circulation Compatibility
     Objective 3
  J                   Noise levels generated by arterial and larger classification roadways
                      should be considered when planning improvements to the circulation
                      system.
     Policy 3
                      a.      The potential for increasing the general noise level shall be considered
                              when planning improvernents to the City's circulation system.
                      b.      In the event that it is determined that increased noise levels will result
                              from an improvement to the circulation system, mitigation measures
                              shall be required which reduce the noise levels to those determined
                              acceptable.
                      c.      Traffic speeds shall be regularly monitored to determine the feasibility
                              of lowering the speeds and thus lower the traffic noise generated.
     City of Calexico General Plan                                                            7- 17
                  d.       The City should examine areas where truck traffic should be restricted
                           in residential areas to reduce adverse noise and vibration levels. ( See
                           Circulation Element.)
  7. 8. 1. 4 Requirement for Project Speci c Noise Studies
1
  Objective 4
                  Noise studies shall be required for certain projects which have the
                  potential to increase ambient noise levels or the potential to expose
                  sensitive receptors to unacceptable noise levels.
  Policy 4
                  a.
                          A noise study shall be required for all projects which will be in
                          violation of Policy 1. Tables N- E and N-F will be used as screening
                          tables to determine the estimated outdoor noise levels and if the
                          project is in violation of Policy 1.
                  L:      A noise study shall be required for all projects within 700 feet of
                          railroad tracks ( 350 feet, if there are intervening buildings). In
                          addition, a vibrational analysis should also be required of residential
                          projects within 200 feet of railroad tracks and any projects within 120
                          feet of railroad tracks.
                  c.      A noise study shall be required for all projects proposing to locate
                          commercial or industrial land uses adjacent to residential land uses ( or
                          vice versa) in order to determine the noise impacts to residents.
  7.8. 1. 5  Noise Aftenuation Measures
  Objective 5
                  Noise attenuation measures shall be required to reduce noise levels to an
                  acceptable level.
  Policy 5
                  a.      Where feasible, setbacks should be used to mitigate adverse noise
                          conditions, to ensure an acceptable noise exposure level.
                  b.      Parcels affected by adverse noise levels should be properly site
                          planned to reduce noise through the following measures:
                               Uses that are compatible with higher noise levels should be located
                               adjacent to noise generators to block noise from noise sensitive
                               uses.
                               Clustering of commercial, office, or multi-family uses can reduce
                               interior open space ( e. g., courtyard) noise levels.
  City f Caiexico Ger erai Plar                                                             7- 18
                  c.     Noise    barriers  and  berms    shall  be  required   where   other   noise
                         attenuation measures      fail to   reduce  the  adverse   levels,  or   will
                         significantly increase the costs of continuation of land improvements.
                  d.     Architectural    design  in  adverse noise    areas  should  shield   noise-
                         sensitive uses through:
                             Proper entrance and window location;
                             Proper patio and balcony location; building projections and
                             heights; and
                             Internal arrangement of rooms; and location of air conditioning
                             equipment.
                 e.      Construction techniques should consider the following methods of
                         noise reduction:
                             Acoustical wall design;
                             Use of dense building materials;
                             Use of acoustical windows ( double glazed, double paned, thick and
                             nonoperable windows); and
                             Use of noise- tight doors, ceilings, and floors.
7.8. 1. 6  Noise Ordinances
Objective 6
                 The City' s community noise Ordinance shall be consistent with the Policies in
                 the Noise Element.
Policy 6
                 The City shall update the community noise ordinance to reflect and implement
                 the Policies in the Noise Element.
7. 9    Noise Element Implementation Program
                 This implementation program provides actions to implement the adopted
                 policies and plans identified in the Noise Element. Table N- G describes the
                 responsible department within the City of Calexico and other agencies,
                 funding source( s), time frame to complete the action, and related policies
                 within the Noise and other Elements of the General Plan.
City of Calexico General Plan                                                               7- 19
                                       TABLE N- G: NOISE ELEMENT
                                            Responsible
                                               Agency/    Funding                  Related
       Ob' ective      Polic     Summa      De artment     Source    Time Frame    Policies
   Objective 1          la. 65 dBA CNEL     Engineering None         Complete   Noise:  la— le
                       acceptable outdoor
                                            Planning    required     upon GP
   Maintain the quiet  noise exposure for   Building                 adoption
   rural residential   all private
   nature of the       residential areas
   community
   through the use of
   sensitive land use
C  practices and
   appropriate noise
   mitigation
   measures.
                        1b. Indoornoise     Engineering None         Complete   Noise: la— le
                       levels shall not     Planning    required     upon GP
                       exceed 45 dBA        Building                 adoption
                       CNEL
                        lc. 70 dBA CNEL     Engineering None         Complete   Noise:  la— le
                       acceptable outdoor
                                            Planning    required     upon GP
                       noise exposure for   Building                 adoption
                       schools, libraries,
                       churches, hospitals,
                       nursing homes,
                       parks, and
                       recreation areas
                        ld. 70 dBA CNEL     Engineering None         Complete   Noise:  la— le
                       acceptable outdoor   Planning    required     upon GP
                       noise exposure for   Building                 adoption
                       office, business,
                       commercial,
                       professional, and
                       mixed- use
                       1 e. 75 dBA CNEL     Engineering None         Complete   Noise:  1 a— 1 e
                       acceptable outdoor
                                            Planning    required     upon GP
                       noise exposure for   Building                 adoption
                       golf courses, riding
                       stables, water
                       recreation,
                       cemeteries,
                       industrial,
                       manufacturing,
                       utilities, and
                       agricultural
   Objective 2         2a. Land use         Planning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 2a — c
                       should consider                  Develo ment
LJ
     City of Calexica General Plan                                                        7- 20

                                             Responsible
                                               Agency/      Funding                        Related
       Ob' ective       Polic    Summa       De artment      Source     Time Frame         Policies
   Land use             compatibility of                  Review Fees
   distribution should  different uses &
   account for the      noise levels
   noise
   characteristics of
   basic uses.
                        2b. Noise            Planning     General Fund  Ongoing        Noise: 2a —c
                        environment of                    Development
                        existing or planned               Review Fees
                        contiguous uses
                        2c. Noise            Planning     General Fund
                        attenuation                      Development -
                        measures shall be                 Review Fees
                        required by the                   Private Funds
                        City to achieve the
                        acceptable noise
                        exposure levels
  Objective 3           3a. Increasing the   Engineering Road Impact    Ongoing as     Noise: 3a— d
                        general noise level  Planning    Fees           planning and
  Noise levels          shall be considered              Fed/ state     CEQA/ NEPA
  generated by          in City' s circul-               highway        compliance
  arterial and larger   ation system                     funds          done on roads.
  classification                                         General Fund
  roadways should
  be considered
  when planning
  improvements to
  the circulation
  system.
                       3b. Increased noise   Engineering Road Impact    Ongoing as     Noise: 3a— d
                       levels will result in Caltrans    Fees           planning and
                       mitigation
                                             County      Fed/ state     CEQA/ NEPA
                       measures to reduce    Planning    highway        compliance
                       the noise levels to               funds          done on roads.
                       acceptable                        General Fund
                       3c. Traffic speeds    Engineering Road Impact    Ongoing        Noise: 3a— d
                       shall be regularly    Caltrans    Fees
                       monitored to lower    County      Fed/ state
                                             Police      highway
S
                       the traffic noise
                                                         funds
                                                         General Fund
                       3d. Truck traffic     Engineering Road Impact    Ongoing        Noise: 3a —d
1                      should be restricted
                       in residential to
                                             Caltrans
                                             County
                                                         Fees
                                                         Fed/ state
                       reduce adverse        Police      highway
                       noise and vibration               funds
                                                         General Fund
     Gity of Caiexico Generai Plan                                                              7- 21
1

                                            Responsible
                                               Agency/    Funding                     Related
1       Ob' ective     Polic    Summa       De artment     Source    Time Frame       Policies
   Objective 4         4a. Noise study      Planning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 4a- c;
                       required for all                 Development              1 a- e
   Noise studies shall projects in viol-                Review Fees
   be required for     ation of Policy I
   certain projects
   which have the
   potentiai to
   increase ambient
   noise levels or the
   potential to
   expose sensitive
   receptorsto
   unacceptable
   noise levels.
                       4b. Noise study      Planning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 4a- c;
                       required for all                 Development             1 a- e
                       projects near                    Review Fees
                       railroad tracks
                       4c. Noise study      Ptanning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 4a- c;
                       required for                     Development             1 a- e
                       potentially                      Review Fees
                       incompatible land
                       uses, industrial or
 J
                       other noise-
                       generating uses
   Objective 5         Sa. Setbacks should  Planning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 5]—     e;
                       be used to mitigate                                      2c
   Noise attenuation   adverse noise
   measures shall be
   required to reduce
   noise levels to an
   acceptablelevel.
                       Sb. Parcels affected Planning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 51 —    e;
                       by adverse noise                                         2c
                       should be site
                       planned to reduce
                       noise
                       Sc. Noise barriers   Planning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 51 —    e;
                       shall be required                                        2c
                       where other noise
                       attenuation
                       measures fail
                       Sd. Architectural    Planning    General Fund Ongoing    Noise: 51 —    e;
                       design should        Building                            2c
1                      shield noise-
       ity of   a3exic eneraf Plan                                                         7- 22

1
                                         Responsible
                                           Agency/     Funding                     Related
      Ob' ective      Polic    Summa     De artment     Source    Time Frame       Policies
                      sensitive uses
                      Se. Construction   Planning    General Fund Ongoing       Noise: 51 — e;
                      techniques should  Building                               2c
                      consider noise
                      reduction
1 Objective 6         6a. The City shall Planning    General Fund Within 3 yrs. Noise: la— le;
                      update the                     or Grants                  Sa — e
  The City' s         community noise
                      ordinance
  community noise
  ordinance shall be
  consistent with the
  Policies in the
  Noise Element.
i
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1   City of Calexico Generai Pian -                                                        23
C

1
CI
   8. 0 SAFETY ELEMENT
   8. 1 Introduction
                    The primary purpose of the Safety Element is to identify and assess
                    natural and human- made safety hazards and then minimize their danger to
                    life and property. These hazards have a direct impact on the quality of life
                    and the well- being of residents of Calexico and include both natural and
                    human- induced causes. This element will examine the following public
                    health and safety concerns:
                         Geologic Hazards -    including earthquakes and their secondary hazards
1                        Flooding
                         Fire - both wild land and urban
                         Hazardous materials
                         The New River
                         Peak Load Water Supply
                         Emergency Access
                    The State of California requires the inclusion of a safety element for all
                    General Plans. The following language from California Government Code
                    65302 outlines the necessary topics that must be addressed:
                      A safety element for the protection of the community from any
                      unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically- induced
                      surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and
                      dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides;
                      subsidence and other geologic hazards known to the legislative body;
                     flooding; and wild land and urban fires. The safety element shall
                      include mapping of known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall
                      also address evacuation routes, peak load water supply requirements
                      and minimum road widths and clearances around structures, as those
                      items relate to identifiedfire and geologic hazards.
   8. 2 Existing Conditions/ Hazard Assessment
   8. 2. 1 Geologic
                    The City of Calexico is particularly susceptible to geologic hazards such
                    as earthquakes and the secondary hazards associated therewith. The
                    primary hazard from earthyuakes is significant because of the proximity of
                    major faults and the soil composition of the Imperial Valley.            The
                    secondary impacts are related to the extensive irrigation and drainage as
                    well as other consequences caused by earthquakes such as fires, ground
                    displacement, soil liyuefaction, and environmental contamination.
t  City af Calexico General Plan                                                              8- 1
I
                   Earthquakes are caused by the sudden release of energy stored in the
                   earth' s core. Essentially, rigid plates form a" shell" around the fluidic
                   layer below it. As these plates shift and grind against one another, energy
                   is released which is known as plate tectonics. It is the areas near the
                   boundaries or separations ( faults) in the plates that the majority of energy
                   is released.
                   The State of California is located on the San Andreas Fault which
                   represents a portion of the boundary between the North American Plate
                   and the Pacific Plate. The Imperial Valley is located in what is known as
                   the Salton Trough, bordered on the east by the San Andreas and Imperial
                   Faults, and to the west by the San Jacinto- Coyote Creek and Elsinore-
                   Laguna Salada Faults. The Salton Trough is one of the most seismically
                   active areas in the United States. Figure S- 1 shows the City' s location in
                   relation to the locations of known fault lines.
                   In the last one hundred years, there have been eleven earthquakes that
                   have measured at least magnitude 6. 0 on the Richter scale. In 1940, there
                   was a magnitude 7. 1 earthquake that occurred along the Imperial Fault that
                   killed 7 people, destroyed numerous structures, and caused major crop
                   damage from flooding; the International Canal was moved more than 14
                   feet off its course during that earthquake.
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                8- 2

1
                                                                                                9
    8. 2. 1. 1 Surface Ruptures
1                     Surface ruptures usually occur on fault lines in the event of seismic
                     activity. However, they may occur anywhere within a fault zone. The
                      likelihood of surface ruptures are directly proportional to the magnitude of
CJ                   the earthquake and are caused by the upward fault displacement thrust
                     from the epicenter. Surface ruptures can cause tremendous damage to
                     anything located along its path. The ability to prevent major damage from
                     surface rupture depends on our knowledge of the existence of active faults.
                     California Public Resources Code has created special zones for areas close
                     to active faults called Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning which
                     enforces special building requirements for structures in these areas. The
                     City of Calexico is not located within an Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
                     Zone.
    8.2. 1. 2 Ground Shaking
                     As energy is released along a fault during an earthquake, a shockwave is
                     created that moves through the soil and rock away from the epicenter. This
                     release of energy causes the ground to shake. The severity of the shaking
                     depends on the strength of the earthquake, the distance from where the
                     shaking is felt relative to the epicenter, and the soil composition between
                     the epicenter and the receptor site. Ground shaking can cause damage
                     across vast distances. Calexico is most susceptible to earthquake damage
                     from ground shaking.
    8. 2. 1. 3 Ground Failure
t
                     Ground failure occurs from the shock of an earthquake and is almost
                     exclusively manifest in the form of a landslide. Landslides are caused by
                     the combination of gravity, poor geologic conditions, along with the
                     seismic event. Due to its flat topography, Calexico is not susceptible to
                     landslides.
    8. 2. 1. 4 Liquefaction
                     The soil composition of the Valley adds to the potential seismic risk.
                     Because the Valley' s soil is a result of a deep layer of silt, and it is
                     irrigated for agricultural purposes, it is particularly susceptible to
                     liquefaction. Liquefaction is the loss of stability or strength in certain soil
                     types as a result of a seismic event. Typically liquefaction occurs in
                     granular,   unconsolidated,   saturated soils  like those   deposited   in   the
                     Imperial Valley by the Colorado River. The City of Calexico and the
                     surrounding area is particularly susceptible to liquefaction because of crop
                     irrigation and the geologically young and unconsolidated sediment soil.
t                    Damage caused by liquefaction is the result of the ground becoming
                     liquefied and thus flowing or lurching. The ground may also act like
  i
U
    City of Calexico Generai Plan                                                                   8- 4
                                                                                         9  t?
                  quicksand and cause structures to sink or tilt. Although liquefaction
                 represents a risk to structures, it doesn' t necessarily preclude development.
                 Available mitigation measures such as excavation and replacement of
                 susceptible soils and the use of concrete piles are available.
8. 2. 1. 5 Subsidence
                 Land subsidence is the lowering of the land- surface elevation from
                 activities occurring underground. Typically it is caused by the pumping of
                 water, oil, or gas from subterranean reservoirs or from peat oxidation
                   shrinkage of buried organic matter) or hydrocompaction ( initial wetting
                 of soils that causes the soil to compact under their own weight),          and
                 earthquakes.   Subsidence coutd be a problem in the Imperial Valley
                 because of the irrigation and drainage systems. These systems utilize
                 gravity- fed systems, and even minor alterations in elevation could disrupt
                 these and cause localized flooding. Another source of potential subsidence
                 in Calexico and the surrounding areas are geothermal plants, whose rate
                 and volume of extraction/ injection are key variables that could lead to
                 subsidence.
8. 2. 1. 6 Structure Hazard
                 The Uniform Building Code (         UBC)     has incorporated seismic design
                 standards   since  1943.   Since that time, the     standards have improved
                 dramatically. Recent industry experience has shown that adherence to the
                 aforementioned codes greatly increases the chance that a structure will
                 endure an earthquake with little or no significant damage.
8. 2. 1. 7 Earthquake Risk Assessment
                 Thus far, the specificity with which earthquakes are predictable is that
                 they will occur at certain places sometime in the future. Though we know
                 not when, where, or to what intensity an earthquake will be, we know that
                 they will in fact occur. Modern building codes and construction techniques
                 have greatly improved our ability to withstand an earthquake.
                 Risk assessment is the process of comparing the cost to avoid a risk with
                 potential cost of the damage produced by the hazard. The purpose of
                 evaluating seismic risk is to reduce the risk to an acceptable level based on
                 structure use because it is not possible or practical to eliminate all risk to
                 life and property. While basing planning decisions on risk is difficult, risk-
                 reduction measures can be implemented. We cannot reduce the chance of
                 an earthquake occurring, but we can develop plans to help minimize its
                 impact.
City of Gaiexico Ge eral Plan                                                                  8- 5
                   Acceptable risk as defined by the Council of Intergovernmental Relations
                   guidelines for the General Plan Seismic Safety Element:
1                       The level of risk below which no specific action by government is
                       deemed to be necessary other than making the risk known.
                   When establishing acceptable risk levels, we should consider the
                   importance of the facility after the seismic event for the preservation of
                   public health, and safety, the number of people likely to be in the building,
                   whether its use is voluntary or involuntary, and the cost of eliminating the
                   risk. Certain facilities are very important and must remain usable after a
                   seismic event, such as fire and police stations, schools, public utility
                   facilities, and hospitaIs and other medical facilities. Table S- A shows the
                   allowable risk levels per land use and the estimated cost to achieve the
                   accepted level of risk.
t                  Occupancy levels must be a consideration in determining acceptable risk.
                   Structures with high occupancy levels such as theaters, schools, churches,
                   meeting halls, office buildings, apartment buildings, and shopping centers
                   should have a low level of acceptable risk. Conversely, higher levels of
                   risk may be acceptable in low-occupancy uses such as single- family
                   houses and warehouses.
                   Another factor to be considered when evaluating risk is whether the
                   inhabitants of the structure have a choice as to whether they would
                   otherwise subject themselves to a certain level of risk. Involuntary risk
                   occurs at facilities such as hospitals, schools, and convalescent homes.
                   Persons using these facilities may be restrained or incapable of leaving
                   these during a seismic event, thus only a low level of risk is acceptable.
                   Perhaps the most significant variable in risk reduction is the cost of doing
                   so. Risk reduction must be balanced against the cost thereof. Costs can be
                   either direct, such as the case with extra reinforcement of a building, or
                   indirect, as in zoning land with a high seismic risk as open space. Three
                   common      examples    of  seismic  risk mitigation    are  rehabilitation or
                   demolition of nonconforming structures, requiring extraordinary design
J
                   and construction techniques, and limiting or prohibiting development in
                   dangerous areas.
u
1
J City of Calexico General Plan
                                             TABLE S- A: SCALE OF ACCEPTABLE RISKS
                                  t                             a¢                                      i k!                                       a.
                                              nt    y.
                                                                                         Ihit
                                                                                                                        as
                                                                                                                              1 i tat                                          d      U
                                     s                                                                           i  H                                 z
  J                      r q(        aiw,"       k"
                                                       L' ,
                                                         I '"'                    I.
                                                                                                y
                                                                                                 ii ,,
                                                                                                                      8& F v , '
                                                                                                                                        ua «
                                                                                                                                       ut    1
                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                  x i, y ,. ^'    7 ,
                              t . .^                                 n' I ._,-. . ,                                                             I' ,
                      1. Eaftremel y Low                                             Structures              whose               continued                No set percentage; whatever is
                                                                                     use       is         criticaI           or      failure              necessary to attain ma cimum
                                                                                     catastrophic:              nuclear           reactors,               safety.
                                                                                     large             dams,            manufacturing
                                                                                     plants            that      store           toxic       or
                                                                                     ex ] osive materials.
                      2. Slightly higher than Level                                  Structures              whose               continued                5- 25% of project cos
                      1                                                              use after a seismic event                                 is
                                                                                     important              to      public           health,
                                                                                     safety, and welfare: hospitals,
                                                                                     police and fire stations, utility
                                                                                     centers,                   bridges                   and
                                                                                     ove      asses, smaller dams.
                      3.      Lowest       possible            risk to               High-occupancy                              structures               5- 15% of project cost
                      occupants of structure3                                        whose           continued             use      after       a
                                                                                     seismic              event            would             be
                                                                                     beneficial:            schools, churches,
                                                                                     theaters, large hotels, high- rise
                                                                                     buildings                     with               high-
                                                                                                                        and           other
                                                                                     occupancy,
                                                                                     structures               that             commonly
                                                                                     attract            large            numbers             of
                                                                                     people; civic building, large
                                                                                     sho      in         centers, roads.
                        Ordinary" level of risk to the                               Most                 structures:                  most               1- 2% of project cost
                      occupants of the structure'• 5                                 commercial                    and           industrial
                                                                                     buildings,             small          hotels         and
                                                                                     apartment                 buildings,                 and
                                                                                     sin le famil              residences.
                      Source: Ci           o Calexico General Plan and Zonin                                            Ordinance, 1992.
u
    8. 2. 2 Fire Hazards
I
                     The City of Calexico has a fire hazard rating of 5 from the ISO ( Insurance
                      Service Office) Commercial Risk Services, Inc. The rating is based on a l
                     to 10 scale with 10 being the greatest risk and considers many factors,
                        Failure of a single structure could affect large populations.
                     z Percentage assumption based on the structure otherwise being built in accordance with
                     standard California practice. The estimated additional cost assumes that the structure will
                     remain useful after an event.
                     3 Failure of a single structure would affect only the occupants.
                     4 Percentage assumption based on the structure otherwise being built in accordance with
                     standard California practice. The estimated additional cost assumes that the structure will
                     give reasonable assurance of preventing injury or loss of life but not necessarily
                     remaining useful after an event.
                     5 Resists minor earthquakes without damage; resists moderate earthquakes without
                     structural damage but with some non- structural damage; resists major earthquakes with
                     the intensity of the strongest experienced in California, without collapse but with some
                     structural and non- structural damage. In most structures, it is expected that structural
                     damage even from major earthquakes could be limited to repairable damage ( Structural
                     Engineers Association of California).
    City of Calexico General Plan                                                                                                                                                     8- 7

                                                                                            i   fc:#
                    including adequate water pressure and supply ( in addition to the city' s
                    maximum rate of consumption for purposes other than firefighting), fire
                    equipment     and  personnel,  response time, etc. Downtown Calexico is
                    susceptible to fires because many of the structures were built in the early
                     1900s and are constructed of wood. Additionally, some buildings lack
                    space between them, thus increasing the chances that a fire could spread to
                    numerous buildings. Also, many of the buildings in downtown Calexico
                    have not been retroftted for seismic activity and do not contain sprinkler
                    systems.
                    The City has a low risk of damage from wildfires. The undeveloped areas
                    around and outside of the City are either irrigated farm land or sparsely-
                    vegetated desert land. Therefore there is little risk from wildfires due to
                    lack of fuel.
1                   The City currently has two existing fire stations; one at 430 East 5`h Street,
                    and the other at 900 Grant Street. Of note is that the fire stations are
                    located on either side of the Union Pacific railroad tracks. There is
                    currently a proposal to build a new station in vicinity of Meadows Road
                    and Cole Road.
                    Currently, the Calexico Fire Department has one ( 1) chief, 30 firefighters,
                    one ( 1) fire inspector and an administrative staff. Based on a population of
                    32, 600, the current staffing ratio is 1. 0 personnel for each 1, 000 residents
                    based on professional full-time staff. The desired ratio is 1. 5 per 1, 000 so
                    current staffing levels are considered inadequate.
                    The City' s emergency services providers, such as fire and police, are
                    currently cooperating with IVECA and RCS for the coordinated efforts
                    Valley- wide to integrate communication within the Valley and between
                    Imperial Valley and San Diego County. The Calexico Fire Department is a
                    member of the Imperial Valley Firefighters Strike Force which is
                    responsible to respond to fire emergencies throughout California. The
                    Department is also a member of the Imperial Valley Hazardous Materials
                    Response Team and         is available to respond to      hazardous   materials
                    emergencies throughout Imperial County. The Department also has a Fire
                    Prevention Bureau headed by the inspector and administers inspections,
                    occupancy permits, and various safety programs throughout the city.
1
   8. 2. 3 Hazardous Materials
                    The California Health and Safety Code defines a hazardous material as
                      any material that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or
                    chemical characteristics poses a significant present or potential hazard to
1                   human health and safety, or to the environment." These materials can be in
                    solid, liquid, or gaseous form and include such things as pesticides,
                    herbicides, toxic metals and chemicals, liquefied natural gas, explosives,
                    volatile    chemicals,   and    nuclear    fuels. According     to   the   U. S.
 J
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                   E
                                                                                        s< t:.
                    Environmental Protection Agency ("      EPA"),   hazardous material exhibit
                   one or more of the following properties:
                           Ignitability: Can create fires under certain conditions.
                           Corrosivity: Is acidic and capable of corroding metal.
                           Reactivity: Can create explosions or toxic fumes, gases and/ or
                           vapors when exposed to air or mixed with water.
                           Toxicity: Harmful or fatal when ingested, breathed, or absorbed by
                           the skin.
                   The risk posed by hazardous materials has been a concern for the City.
                   This is due to the fact that there has been heavy border truck and rail
                   traffic with many trucks and rail cars hauling potentially dangerous
                   materials. With the new commercial truck border crossing located east of
                   the City and the completion of SR- 7 connecting SR-98 to I- 8, the risks
                   associated with potentially hazardous materials hauled via truck are
                   reduced significantly. Rail service will continue to pose this risk as it
                   passes through the heart of the City as will trucks that serve industry
                   located within Calexico.
                   The other potential source of hazardous material release is from some of
                   the operations associated with agriculture, such as chemical handling and
                   storage facilities and crop dusting companies. The County Health Services
                   Department, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section
                   25500, must maintain a list of hazardous material handlers and/ or vendors
                   as well as an inventory of materials that is available to City fire
                   departments.
                   In January 2001, the EPA completed " Calexico: Hazardous Materials
                   Commodity Flow Study." The purpose of the study was " to provide a
                   commodity flow study of hazardous materials to aid local, state and
                   federal authorities to understand the volume and nature of hazardous
                   material movements into, out of, and through the region, particularly the
                   City of Calexico." The recommendations of this study have been
                   incorporated into the General Plan as described in Table S- B, below:
i
1
1
  City of Calexico General Plan
1
                                                                                                      f;
  I
                             TABLE S- B: COMPARISON OF EPA HAZARDS STUDY
                                    RECOMMENDATION AND GENERAL PLAN
                              EPA Recommendation                       General Plan Response
                       Restrict truck traffic from using        Figure 5. 7- 1,   Interim and Ultimate
                       East Birch Street ( SR- 98) east of      Truck Routes, identifies short- and
                       Imperial Ave. ( SR- 11  l) and west of long-term truck routes that respect
                      the   intersection   with   Cole   Road.  the    EPA      recommendation.       The
                       The    purpose     being     to   avoid  Land Use Plan and Future Land
                       population center and high school.       Uses, General Plan Figures LU- 1
                                                                and      LU- 2,      eliminate     future
                                                                industrial land uses from the west
                                                                side of Calexico focusing them
                                                                north and east to avoid residential
                                                                areas   and   respond    to  the  eastern
                                                                border crossing. See also Policies
                                                                5( a)  and    5( c)   in  General    Plan
                                                                Section 8. 4. 1. 5.
I_ J                  Encourage     warehouses     and   truck  Although the City of Calexico has
                      transfer stations to move closer to       no jurisdiction over the area EPA is
                      the Calexico-East border crossing         discussing, within the City Sphere
                      to minimize truck traffic within the      of Influence, the Land Use Plan and
                      City.    The    purpose    to    provide  Future Land Uses,          General   Plan
                      needed      infrastructure     so    that Figures LU- 1 and LU- 2, eliminate
                      development could occur along SR-         future industrial land uses from the
                      7 south of SR- 98.                        west side of Calexico focusing them
                                                                north and east to avoid residential
                                                                areas   and   respond    to  the  eastern
                                                                border crossing. See also Policies
                                                                5( a)  and    5( c)   in  General    Plan
1                                                               Section 8. 4. 1. 5.
                      Reassess the location of hazardous        Policy 5( d) in Section 8. 4. 1. 5 was
1                     incident response resources within
                      the county. Since the greatest risk
                                                                included    in   the   General
                                                                address this recommendation.
                                                                                                 Plan    to
                      of a hazardous material incident in
1                     Imperial County is near the border
                        Calexico), hazardous material spill
                      response     equipment      should     be
                      located close to this area.
1
                      Complete SR- 7 between SR- 98 and         This section of State Route 7 has
                      I- 8.                                     been built to Caltrans Expressway
                                                                standards.
     City of Calexico General Plan                                                                       8- 10
                                                                                                F
   8. 2. 4 The New River
  8. 2. 4. 1 Pollution
                    In many cities, the presence of a river can be a source of valuable open
                    space, recreational opportunities, or development potential. In Calexico
                    however, the presence of the New River represents one of the City' s
                    greatest environmental hazards and challenges. The New River flows
                    north from Mexicali through the City of Calexico and discharges into the
                    Salton Sea, approximately 60 miles north of the City. According to a 1996
                    study by the U. S. Department of Health and Human Services ("         USDHS"),
                    about one third of the cumulative water flow of the New River is
                    generated in Mexico. Of that portion of water from Mexico, based on
                    information as current as May 2005, the State Water Resources Control
                    Board (" SWRCB") indicates that almost 70% of the pollution comes from
                    agricultural chemical runoff from the Imperial Valley agricultural
                    operations, and 29% is from the City of Mexicali, Mexico as human
                    waste.   A    remaining   small  percentage (    1%)     is  attributed to   the
                    manufacturing plants operating in Mexico. The amount of untreated or
                    partially-treated sewage often surges during times of sewer system failures
1                   at Mexican treatment facilities.
                    The previously mentioned study by USDHS identified the presence of
                    many dangerous substances found in the river. Among the many materials
                   found in the New River at unacceptable levels are: fecal coliforms, fecal
                    streptococci, and pathogenic microorganisms that are capable of causing
                   polio, typhoid, cholera, and tuberculosis. There was also the presence of
                   over twenty- five metals exceeding acceptable levels, including arsenic,
                   lead,   and   cadmium.    The New     River  also     contains  volatile organic
                   compounds ("     VOCs") and various pesticides. Therefore, the New River is
                   a major threat to public health for the City of Calexico.
                   Another hazard that affects land uses near the New River is the presence
                   of foam that frequently forms on the surface of the river. In 1980, the
                   California     Regional   Water Quality Control Board (" CRWQCB")
                   investigated the composition and source of the foam. The results of the
                   CRWQCB study found that the foam was primarily composed of
                   detergents discharged in Mexico, but was unable to determine whether
                   they were industrial or domestic in origin. The foam can be blown by the
                   wind and onto adjacent land uses and has been found to contain high
                   levels of fecal coliform.
                   The risks created by the pollution of the New River are human contact
1                  with or the ingestion of the water, unpleasant odors, blowing foam, the
                   consumption of fish and wildlife living in the river, and the possibility that
                   the mosquitoes ( Culex trsalis) that live in the New River are vectors for
                   encephalitis.    In addition, the blight associated       with the New River
1
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                   8- 11
                     represents a missed opportunity to gain needed recreational lands in the
                     City.
   8.2.4.2 Flooding
                    Flooding is a natural hazard that is unlikely to affect the City of Calexico
                     under normal    rain  and run- off conditions.   The Federal Emergency
                    Management Agency ( FEMA) hazard area map of the Catexico area
                    shows that the 500 year floodplain of the New River within the City is
                    contained within the area north of the Calexico International Airport that
                    is currently zoned as Open Space land.         See   Figure  S- 2. However,
                    conditions upstream in Mexico do affect the river. As the Mexicali area
                    becomes more urbanized with nothing heretofore having been done to
                    control urban runoff there, the potential for flooding could increase in
                    downstream areas such as Calexico.
                    As mentioned in Section 8. 2. I, flooding could result from seismic damage
                    to a major IID canal. The City of Calexico is traversed by two major
                    canals: the All American and the Central Main.
   8. 2. 5 Peak Load Water Supply
   Calexico receives all of its potable water supply from the Calexico Water Department
                      CWD). The CWD receives the water from Imperial Irrigation District
                      IID)  which is brought from the Colorado River. Currently, about 2
                    percent of IID water is divided among nine Imperial Valley communities.
                    The city of Calexico' s current daily maximum water output is 9 million
                    gallons of potable water. The peak demand of the City of Calexico is
                     10, 481 gallons per minute ( gpm) and can be handled by the existing
                    electric pumps which have a capacity of 12, 200 gpm. The CWD also has
                    an additional 5, 000 gpm fire flow suppression delivered by 2 natural gas
                    driven pumps. CWD has purchased property and is in the process of
                    designing a 6 million gallon ( mg) tank near Cole Road and Highway 98 to
                    stabilize and loop the existing water system and serve future development
                    to the east of the City' s existing boundaries. According to the " 2000
                    Urban Water Management Plan for Imperial Irrigation District ( IID) and
                    the Cities of Brawley, Calexico, and El Centro," the projected water
                    demand for Calexico will be 2,068 mg annually in 2020 and the project
                    water supply will be 2, 200 mg annually. The City has the necessary
C'                  capaciTy to supply enough water in the event of a disaster. However, a
                    severe earthquake or other natural disaster could destroy portions of the
                    water transmission system, thus causing a short-term water shortage. The
                    Imperial County Office of Emergency Services requires a ten- day storage
                    holding capacity for cities, so interruptions in transmission can be
                    managed.
   City of Calexico General P(an                                                              8- 12
                                    revisea nnarcn i, zuu.
                                                                  N
   Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2002                                           Figure S- 2
                                                                  EBH
                                                           W     GIS   E
                                                                         Flood Zone Designations
    F L B  E N T    A                                             S
   WEBB                                                     Not to s a e
Lw        a   o ti, s
                                                                            City of Calexico General Plan I
     8. 2. 6 Evacvation/ Emergency Access
                      Evacuations and the need for emergency access can become necessary on
                      a localized or City-wide basis depending on the type of emergency
                      situation. Local evacuations and the need for emergency access occur, for
u                     example, when a building is on fire. A larger area may need to be
                      evacuated for more catastrophic events such as an earthquake that causes
                      major damage andlor flooding. Should an event occur that would
                      necessitate the mass evacuation or dispersal of people from the City, the
                      surrounding agricultural land is favorable because it is uninhabited and
                      open. The major evacuation routes are Highways 111, 98, and Interstate 8.
                      All primary local streets in the City connect to the county road system
                      outside of the City.
                      Localized emergency access relates to things such as adequate roadway
                      widths and turning radii, spaces around buildings, and distances to fire
                      hydrants. The City of Calexico Zoning Ordinance establishes setbacks
                      which provide for safe access around buildings associated with all types of
                      land uses. The General Plan Circulation Element, Section 3,           includes
                      policies addressing local street design and appropriate access on major
                      streets. The Circulation Element plan for streets is based on providing
                      adequate cross sections of streets to accommodate through traffic. All new
                      development is subject to these policies and standards. In older areas of
                      the City where such requirements are substandard, the City is working to
                      correct and improve less than ideal access.
     8. 3 Establishing a Vision
                      The Vision for safety in the City of Calexico will ensure one of the most
                      fundamental expectations— that lives and property will be protected from
                      human- made and natural hazards to the extent feasible. The Safety
                      Element is responsive to this Vision because it:
                      a)      Provides a sense of security and well- being to our residents.
I_ J
                      b)       Identifies facilities and services that support safety functions that
                              are essential to the future development of the City.
                      c)      Offers some measure of assurance to those who would invest in the
                              City that their investment will be protected to the extent possible
                              and feasible.
                      d)      Demonstrates a commitment to this important aspect of community
                              development by our public officials.
                      e)      Adds to the desirability of the community as a place to attract
                              business investment.
     City of Calexico General Plan                                                                8- 14

                                                                                                  t` '
r
   8. 4 Related Plans and Programs
                     There are other agencies with plans and programs related to the purpose of
                    the Safety Element. These plans have been developed and adopted by
                     various levels of government and are administered by agencies with
                    powers to enforce state and local laws.
                    Multi- agency Cooperative Programs
                    The City' s emergency services providers, such as fire and police, are
                    currently cooperating with the coordinated efforts Valley-wide to integrate
                    communication within the Valley and between Imperial Valley and San
                     Diego County. The Calexico Fire Department is a member of the Imperial
                    Valley Firefighters Strike Force which is responsible to respond to fire
                    emergencies throughout California. The Department is also a member of
                    the Imperial Valley Hazardous Materials Response Team and is available
                    to   respond   to   hazardous      materials  emergencies    throughout      Imperial
                    County. The Department also has a Fire Prevention Bureau headed by the
                    inspector and administers inspections, occupancy permits, and various
                    safety programs throughout the City.
                    imperial County Emergency Plan
 J
                    Imperial County has an Emergency Plan that addresses Imperial County' s
                    planned response to extraordinary emergency situations associated with
                    natural disasters, technological incidents, and nuclear defense operations.
                    The County Emergency Plan focuses on potential large- scale disasters that
                    can    generate    unique      situations  requiring    unusual     responses.     The
                    Emergency Plan also identifies the sources of outside support which might
                    be provided by other jurisdictions, state and federal agencies, and the
                    private sector through mutual aid and specific statutory authorities.b
                    Calexico International Airport Master Plan
                    The Calexico International Airport is subject to the Calexico International
                    Airport Master Plan, 2001, prepared by the City of Calexico. The plan
                    identifies future improvements for the airport to meet future aviation
                    needs. The plan also addresses land uses surrounding the airport. The type
                    of development occurring in the airport environs impacts the safety of
                    aircraft operations. In the reverse, it also impacts the number of people
                    exposed to aircraft hazards such as airplane crashes. The General Plan
                    reflects the future airport expansion plan and the currentlfuture safety
                    hazards in the Land Use Element.
                    Imperial County Airport land Use Plan
                    The Calexico International Airport is also subject to the Airport Land Use
                    Compatibility Plan — Imperial County Airports,                 1996,    prepared by
1                   6
                      County of Imperial, final Program Environmental Impact Report for the County of
                    Imperial General Plan, Volume I, October 1993.
I  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                        8- 15

                      Imperial County Airport Land Use Commission. The plan identifies areas
                      impacted by aircraft operations and includes policies to allow for the
                      continued operation of county airports, while protecting public safety. The
                      Hazards Element of the General Plan addresses these issues and policies.
                      The Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan is updated on a periodic basis to
                      reflect the California Department of Transportation' s Airport Land Use
                      Planning handbook. The City will review its General Plan to ensure
                      consistency when the airport plan is updated.
                      Calexico Codes and Ordinances
                      The City has adopted the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical
                      Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement of
                      Dangerous Buildings, and the Uniform Fire Code, all of which contain
                      structural requirements for existing and new buildings. The codes are
   J                  designed to ensure structural integrity during seismic and other hazardous
                      events to prevent personal injury, loss of life, and substantial property
                      damage. To protect public safety, development in Calexico is subject to
                      these codes. Calexico has also adopted a Flood Damage Prevention code
                      and an Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings code to
                      address safety issues directly associated with flooding and earthyuakes.
1                     California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and Guidelines
                      The California Environmental Quality Act was adopted by the State
                      legislature  to  provide   public   disclosure   of the   substantial  adverse
L.
                      environmental effects of proposed development within the State. The
                      CEQA Statutes ( Public Resources Code           Section 21000, et seq•) and
                      Guidelines ( California Code of Regulations Title 14, Chapter 3, Section
                       15000, et seq•) include disclosure of and mitigation for safety hazards as
                      environmental impacts. Continued implementation of CEQA will ensure
                      that City officials and the general public have information describing and
                      mitigating    potentially  significant    safety  impacts    associated   with
                      discretionary private and public development projects.
                      Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
                      Pursuant to the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, the State Geologist through
                      the California Geological Survey unit of the Department of Conservation
                      compiles maps identifying seismic hazard zones throughout the State.
                      Development in seismic hazard areas is subject to policies and criteria
                      established by the State Mining and Geology Board.               Approval   of
                      development located within a seismic hazard area requires the preparation
                      of a geotechnical report and local agency consideration of the policies and
                      criteria set forth by the State ( Public Resources Code Section 2690 et
                      se .). The City requires geotechnical reports for development throughout
                      the City due to the high risk for seismic activity in the area.
                                                                                                  8- 16
     City af Calexico General Plan

                                                                                            f fY
                   Alquist- Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act
                   The Alquist- Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the State
                   Geologist to identify earthquake fault zones along traces of recently and
                   potentially active major faults. The General Plan includes Figure S- 1
                   which shows the location of these faults. The Alquist-Priolo Zones are
                   usually one- quarter mile or less in width. Proposed development plans
                   within these fault zones must be accompanied by a geotechnical report
                   prepared by a geologist describing the likelihood of surface rupture and
                   other seismically induced hazards.
                   Cobey-Alquist Floodplanin Management Act
                   The    Cobe- Alquist    Floodplain   Management     Act  encourages    local
                   governments     to  plan,  adopt,  and  enforce  land  use regulations    for
                   floodplain management in order to protect people and property from
                   flooding hazards. This act also identifies requirements which jurisdictions
                   must meet in order to receive State and financial assistance for flood
                   control.
1                  National Flood Insurance Administration Program ( NFIP)
                   The NFIP which is administered by the Federal Emergency Management
1                  Agency ( FEMA), provides federal flood insurance and federally financed
                   loans for property owners in flood prone areas. To qualify for federal
                   flood insurance and assistance, the City must identify flood hazard areas
J                   Figure S- 2) and implement a system of protective controls. The Safety
                   Element, Land Use Element, and Title 15, Chapter15. 54 of the Municipal
                   Code fulfill these requirements.
                   County of Imperial General Plan
                   The County General Plan identifies potential hazards that could impact
                   persons and property in the unincorporated portion of the City' s planning
                   area. The City cooperates with the County in emergency situations
                   affecting both jurisdictions and has mutual aid arrangements. Until
                   annexation into the City occurs, unincorporated areas are subject to the
                   County General Plan and other policies addressing safety.
                   City of Calexico Emergency Disaster Plan
1                  The City of Calexico has adopted a Standardized Emergency Management
                   System ( SEMS) Multi Hazard Functional Emergency Operations Plan
                    SEMS Operations Plan). It provides guidance for the City to respond to
                   extraordinary emergency situations associated with natural disasters, man-
                   made disasters, technological incidents, and war emergency operations
                   within the City. As stated above, the City cooperates with the County in
                   emergency situations affecting both jurisdictions and has mutual aid
                   arrangements and the CiTy' s SEMS Operations Plan allows it to be
                   prepared to be part of the statewide emergency management system.
  City of Ca(exico Generai Plan                                                               8- 17
                                                                                                t'c:.
    8. 5 Goal, Objectives, and Policies
  i
    8. 5. 1 Goal
                     To identify and minimize, to the extent possible or feasible, the risks to
                     persons and property caused by natural and human- induced hazards.
    8. 5. 1. 1 Levels of Risk
    Objective 1
L                    To maintain acceptable risk levels when conducting land use planning.
    Policy 1
                     a.      The Scale of Acceptable Risk for New Structures shall continue to
                             be used to determine the type and location of future land use.
                              Table S - A)
                     b.       Land uses should not be subjected to greater risk than the level the
                             scale suggests unless no other alternative exists.
                     c.
                             The City shall require a geologic/geotechnical investigation for all
                            projects whose uses or intensities attain a Level of Acceptable Risk
                             rating that exceeds " Ordinary" levels ( Levels 1, 2&      3— Refer to
                             Table S- A),  and must contain    a  site- specific evaluation of peak
                            horizontal ground acceleration.
    8. 5. 1. 2 Seismic Hazards
    Objective 2
                     All development in the City shall adhere to standards for grading and
                     construction which reduce the potential of seismic hazards.
    Policy 2
                     a.     The City may consider design and construction standards that
                            exceed the minimums set forth in the uniform building code ( UBC)
                            due to the area' s high potential for seismic acceleration.
                     b.     Consultation with a qualified engineering geologist shall be
                            reyuired for all development.
                     c.     The City shall maintain standards to identify and mitigate seismic
                            hazards.
                     d.     The City shall continually inform the residents of the community
                            of the potential seismic hazards that exist and what the best
                            methods are for reducing loss or injury caused by them.
    City of Calexica Generai Pfan                                                                  8- 18

1
  8.5. 1. 3 Emergency Preparedness
  Objective 3
                   Minimize the potential hazards to public health, safety, and welfare and
                   prevent the loss of life and property damage from natural and human-
                   induced phenomena.
  Policy 3
                       a.  The City shall ensure the        adequacy    of existing  emergency
                           preparedness plans to handle      effectively and efficiently known
                           hazards and emergencies.
                       b.  The City shall review evacuation procedures to make sure that in
                           case of an evacuation, the residents of Calexico will be quickly
                           notified and the evacuation will be orderly.
                       c.  The City shall work with the Calexico Water Department to ensure
                           that an adequate supply of water will be available in the event of
                           an emergency and to help create and maintain an emergency water
                           supply.
                       d.  The Calexico Fire Department should review an update the need
                           for additional fire hydrants and shall work with the Calexico Water
                           Department to ensure that adequate water pressures for fire flows
                           are maintained.
                       e. The City shall require the heads and staff of each department to
                          participate    in the maintenance of a City- wide emergency
                          preparedness plan.
                          The City shall cooperate with IID to prepare or update an
                          emergency plan for the rapid removal and repair of downed power
                           lines and/ or damaged/ breeched water facilities in the event of an
                          earthquake.
                       g. The City of Calexico shall work with the Calexico International
                          Airport and the Johnson Brothers private airstrip operators to
                          review and identify improvements to airport facilities and
                          takeoff/landing procedures to reduce the risk associated with
                          airfield operations. The City shall also continue to participate in
                          the airport land use plan revisions for existing airport facilities and
                          operations, future airports, and airport extensions.
                      h.  The City shall implement the City of Calexico SEMS
                          Operations Plan in case of extraordinary emergency situations,
                          including updates and reviews to keep the information current
                          and responsive to community needs.
  City of Calexico Generai Plan                                                                8- 19
                                                                                              t}
  8. 5. 1. 4 The New River
  Objective 4
                   The City shall make every effort to protect its residents from the potential
                   hazards associated with the New River, including restricting access and
                   participating in any multi jurisdictional efforts to improve it.
  Policy 4
                   a.      The City shall continue to restrict access to the river and maintain
                           bilingual signs that warn of the dangers of contact with the water.
                   b.      The City shall continue to seek county, state, or federal funds to
                           cover costs incurred by the City for work done to restrict public
                           access to the river or any other measure associated with the river
                           due to its pollution or risk to public safety.
                   c.      The City shall cooperate with internationat, federal, state and
                           regional responsible agencies in projects aimed at cleaning up or
1                          encasing the New River through the implementation of the New
                           River    Improvement      Project  as    described   in 5. 2. 5 of  the
                           Conservation Element.
                   d.      The City shall prohibit land development near the New River in
                           order to reduce exposure of its residents to the potential contact
                           with the water, odors, and airborne foam.
  8. 5. 1. 5 Hazardovs Materials
  Objective 5
                   To ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and guests of
                   Calexico through strict regulation and planning for the safe transport,
                   storage and usage of hazardous materials in the Calexico area.
  Policy 5
                    a.     Discourage the transport of hazardous materials through residential
                           areas and critical facilities and limit transport through heavily
                           developed    areas   as   much    as   possible. (  See  Truck   Route
                           designations, figure G3, in the Circulation Element.)
                   b.      Prohibit incompatible land uses near sites that use, store or produce
                           hazardous materials.
                   c.      Plan future industrial parks to the east, north, and northeast of the
                           City such that the industrial uses, along with the Port of Entry
                            East Border Crossing), United States and Mexico International
                           Border, will    reduce   truck  traffic,  especially those containing
                           hazardous materials, as they will be diverted from the center of the
                           City.
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                  8- 20
  8. 6 Safety Implementation Program
                   This implementation progrann provides actions to implement the adopted
                   policies and plans identified in the Safety Element. Table S- C describes
                   the responsible department within the City of Calexico and other agencies,
                   funding source( s), time frame to complete the action, and related policies
                   within the Safety and other Elements of the General Plan.
I
  Gity of Calexico General Plan                                                             8- 21
                                               TABLE S- C:    SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                      Responsible
                                        Policy           Agency/      Funding     Time         Related
                  Ob' ective          Summa           De artment       Source    Frame         Policies
               Objective 1      la. Scale of          Building &   General Fund  Ongoing  Conservation/ Open
    l                           Acceptable Risk       Safety       and Project            Space:  2b
               To maintain      shall continue to be  Planning     Review Fees
               acceptable risk  used for location of                                      Safety: 1 a— c
               levels when      future land use
              conducting
               conscientious
               land use
              planning.
                                 lb. Land uses        Building &   General Fund  Ongoing  Conservation/ Open
                                 should not be        Safety       and Project            Space: 2b
                                 subjected to greater Planning     Review Fees
                                 risk than the level                                      Safety: 1 a— c
                                the scale suggests
                                 1 c. Require a       Building &   General Fund  Ongoing  Open Space: 2b
                                 geologic/            Safety       and Project
                                geotechnical
                                                      Planning     Review Fees            Safety: 1 a— c
                                 investigation for
                                projects that attain
                                 a rating that
                                exceeds
  I
 J                                 Ordinary"
              Objective 2       2a. The City may      Building &   General Fund  Ongoing  Safety: 2a — d; 1 c
                                consider design       Safety       Private Funds
              All development   and construction                   Development            Open Space: 2b
              in the City shall standards that                     Review Fees
              adhere to         exceed the UBC                     Redevelopment
              standards for     due to high                        Fees
              grading and       potential for
              construction      seismic
              which reduce      acceleration
              the potential of
              seismic hazards.
                                2b. Qualified         Building &   General Fund  Ongoing  Safety: 2a —d; ]  c
                                engineering           Safety       Private Funds
                                geologist shall be                 Development            Open Space: 2b
                                required for all                   Review Fees
                                development                        Redevelopment
                                                                   Fees
                                2c. Maintain          Building &   General Fund  Ongoing  Safety: 2a— d; Ic
                                standards to          Safety       Private Funds
                                mitigate seismic                   Development            Open Space: 2b
                                hazards                            Review Fees
                                                                   Redevelopment
                                                                   Fees
              Objective 3       3a. Ensure the        City         General Fund  Within 1 Safety: 3a - g
                                ade    uac  of        Mana er' s   State          r.
i     City of Calexica Genera( P(an                                                              8_22

1
                                                 Responsible
                                   Policy           Agency/        Funding     Time         Related
              Ob' ective        Summa            De artment          Source   Frame         Policies
           Minimize the     existing emergency   Office          Federal
           potential        preparedness plans   All City
           hazards to                            Departments
           public health,                        Calexico
           safety, and                           Water Dept.
           welfare and                           IID
           prevent the loss                      Calexico Int' 1
           of life and                           Airport
           property damage
           from natural and
           human- induced
           disasters.
                            3b. City shall       City            General Fund Within 1 Safety: 3a - g
L'
                            review evacuation    Manager' s      State        yr.
                            procedures to make   Office          Federal
                            sure Calexico will   All City
1                           be quickly notified
                            and evacuation will
                                                 Departments
                                                 Calexico
                            be orderly           Water Dept.
                                                 IID
                                                 Calexico Int' 1
                                                 Airport
                            3a Calexico Water    Calexico        General Fund Within 1 Safety: 3a - g
                            Dept. ensure that    Water Dept.     State        yr.
                            an adequate supply   I1D             Federal
                            of water will be
                            available in the
                            event of an
                            emergency
                            3d. Calexico Fire    Fire Dept.      General Fund Within 1 Safety: 3a— g
                            Dept. should         Calexico        Development  yr. and
                            review an update     Water Dept.     Impact Fees  ongoing
                            the need for         Engineering
                            additional fire
                            hydrants and
                            Calexico Water
                            Dept. to ensure that
                            adequate water
                            pressures for fire
                            flows are
                            maintained
                            3e. City shall       City            General Fund Annually Safety: 3a —g
1                           require the heads
                            and staf' of each
                                                 Manager' s
                                                 Office
                            department to        All City
                            participate in the   Departments
                            maintenance of a     Calexico
                            Ci -  wide           Water De t.
                                                                                              8- 23
   City of Calexico General Plan

                                                                                                 3:°
t
                                                    Responsible
                                      Policy           Agency/          Funding    Time        Related
J                Ob' ective         Summa           De artment           Source   Frame        Policies
                                emergency           IID
                                preparedness plan   Calexico Int' 1
1                                                   Airport
                                3f. City shall      City             General Fund Ongoing Safety: 3a— g
1                               cooperate with IID
                                to prepare
                                                    Manager' s
                                                    Office
                                emergency plan for  All City
                                the rapid removal   Departments
                                and repair of       Calexico
                                downed power        Water Dept.
                                lines and/ or       IID
                               damaged/ breeched    Calexico Int' I
                               water facilities     Airport
             Objective 4       4a. Restrict access  Border           General Fund Ongoing Open Space: 6d
                               and maintain         International     tate
             The City sha11    bilingual signs that Agency           Federal              Safety: 4a —d
             make every        warn ofthe           RWQCB
             effort to protect dangers of contact   New River
             its residents     with water           Commission
             from the                               Building &
             potential
                                                    Safety
             hazards                                Police
             associated with                        Fire
            the New River,                          Planning
             including
            restricted access
            and participating
             in any multi-
            jurisdictional
             efforts to
             improve it.
                               4b. Seek county,     U. S. Border     General Fund Ongoing Open Space: 6d
                               state or federal     Patrol           State
                               funds to cover       RWQCB            Federal              Safety: 4a —d
                               costs for work       New River
                               done to restrict     Commission
                               public access or     Building &
                               other measures to    Safety
                               protect public       Police
                                                    Fire
  J
                                                    Planning
                               4a Cooperate with    RWQCB            General Fund Ongoing Open Space: 6d
                               federal agencies to  New River        State
                               clean up or re-      Commission       Federal              Safety: 4a — d
                               route river          Planning         Grants
u                              4d. Prohibit land    Planning         General Fund Ongoing Open Space: 6d
                               develo ment near     Coun    Ai   ort
u
    City of Calexico General Pfan                                                                8- 24
 J

                                                                                      c's      St§
                                                  Responsible
                                    Policy          Agency/        Funding     Time            Related
1             Ob' ective         Samma            De artment         Source   Frame            Policies
                             New River            Land Use                                Safety: 4a —d
                             reducing exposure    Commission
                             of residents to
                             potential noxious
                             contact
           Objective 5       Sa. Discourage       EPA            General Fund Ongoing     Safety: Sa— c
                             transport of         Police         Federal
           To ensure the     hazardous            Planning       State
r          health, safety
           and welfare of
                             materials through
                             residential areas,
                                                  Caltrans
           the residents and critical facilities,
           guests of         and heavily
           Calexico          developed areas
           through strict
           regulation and
           planning for the
EJ         safe transport,
           storage and
           usage of
           hazardous
           materials in the
           Calexico area.
                             Sb. Prohibit         Planning       General Fund Ongoing     Safety: Sa — c
                             incompatible land    County Airport
                             uses near sites that Land Use
                             use, store, or       Commission
                             produce hazardous
                             materials
                             Sc. Plan future      Planning       General Fund Ongoing     Safety: Sa — c
                             industrial parks
                             east, north and
                             northeast of City to
                             reduce hazardous
                             materials truck
                             traffic and avoid
                             center of Ci
 J
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                   8- 25

9. 0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
9. 1     Economic Development Element
                   Successful economic development for the City of Calexico can be
                   achieved through maintaining a fiscally healthy and balanced economy
                  that builds upon existing economic development efforts and establishes
                  policies for future economic growth. Economic growth and awareness of
                  regional economic development activities will assist in developing logical
                   strategies to address more intense economic development efforts. A
                  healthy economy not only provides local workers with adequate income to
                  afford a better quality of life, but it also provides local government with
                  adequate public revenues to maintain a better quality of public services.
                  The Economic Development goals and policies should be recognized as a
                  long term commitment that provides an organizational framework and
                  process that can guide ongoing development efforts. Recognizing that
                  economic development is an ongoing process, the goals and policies
                  should provide direction to guide development activities while at the same
                  time maintaining flexibility to respond to changing economic trends and
                  local market conditions.
                  Through economic diversification combined with its geographic locations
                  along the United States and Mexico International border, a broader tax
                  base will provide the City with long-term benefits and economic stability.
                  In the short- term, key improvements to the City' s economic development
                  should focus on four general areas: 1)       the concentration of mixed use
                  development in key locations of the City, 2) the development of
                  commercial and mixed use development along Interstate 111, State Route
                  98, Jasper Road and Cole Road 3) revitalization of the downtown area,
                  and 4) smart sustainable conversion and development of agricultural land
                  to non- agricultural land. In the long-term, the Silicon Border and Eastern
                  Industrial Corridor projects may provide engines for economic growth in
                  the region closest to Calexico. Through future expansion of its Sphere of
                  Influence, economic incentive programs, and cooperation with the County,
                  the City can realize the benefits of an Eastern Industrial Corridor.
9. 2     Economic Challenges
                  Calexico faces continuing economic challenges to the planning and
                  implementation of the future growth and development of the City. Two
                  key regional factors are vital to this planning effort: 1) Retention of the
                  large number of retail customers and consumers who commute from
                  Mexicali, Mexico to Calexico and other communities to purchase goods
                  and services at a high daily rate, and 2) Calexico' s contributing role in the
                  County' s mega- agricultural industry.
City of Calexico General Plan                                                                 9- 1
                  Significant contributors to the local economy are winter visitors (            or
                    snowbirds"),    Mexico/ LJ. S. border crossings, and the North American Free
                  Trade    Agreement (" NAFTA").            However,      due to  the prevalence of
                  unskilled agricultural and retail occupations, median income in Calexico
                  has remained low. The high proportion of employment in the retail
                  industry, which is aimed at the Mexicali consumer, has left the City
                  vulnerable to fluctuations in the relative strengths of the Mexican Peso
                  versus the U. S. Dollar. When Peso devaluation occurs, making American
                  goods more expensive, retail purchases decline and force many individuals
                  into unemployment. The combined decline in retail business employment
                  and the seasonal nature of the agricultural industry causes a high non-
                  seasonally adjusted unemployment rate. Table ED- A, identifies general
                  economic and demographics data for the City of Calexico and Imperial
                  County. This data provides an economic comparison between the City and
                  county. A significant economic factor according to the California
                  Employment Development Department (` BDD")                   is the unemployment
                  rate in this area, which in May of 2005 was I S percent for Calexico, and
                  13. 2 percent for Imperial County as a whole.
                                              Table ED- A
                              General Economic-Demographics Data
                              City of Calexico and Imperial County
                                        U. S. Census Data, 2000)
                                                        Calexico                 Imperial Cou
 Total Population                                         27, 109                     142, 361
     Gender
         Male                                               46. 6%                      52. 2%
         Female                                             53. 4%                      47. 8%
         Median Age ( Years)                                29. 2                       31. 0
     Majority Race
         Hispanic                                           953%                        72. 2%
         Non- Hispanic                                       4. 7%                      27. 8%
     Marital Status
         Married                                            54. 0%                      56. 6%
         Non- Married                                       46. 0%                      43. 4%
     Employment'
         Totat Work Force of Population                     9110                        57, 300
         Employed                                           73. 7%                      80. 6%
         Unemployed                                         26. 3%                       9. 4%
     Median Household Income ( in $000)                     29. 0                       31. 9
     Total Housing Units                                   6984                      43, 891
         Detached Units                                     64. 0%                      57. 3%
         Multiple Units                                     36. 0%                      42. 7%
     Median Home Values ( in $000)                         108. 2                      100. 0
    Employment Data Source: Catifornia Employment Developrnent Department
City Qf Calexico General Plan
                                                                            i  •          i- •
                       To meet these and other economic challenges, the City continues to take a
                       proactive approach by participating in various State Economic Incentive
  t                    Programs and Federal programs. Some of the programs in which the City
                       participates consist of: 1)     Enterprise Zone: a defned geographic area
                       within which businesses can obtain tax benefits and other incentives
                       designed to stimulate business investments. A Targeted Employment Area
                          TEA") provides for the establishment of employment areas comprised of
                       census tracts that have at least 51 % of its residents at low or moderate
                       income levels. The purpose of TEA designation is to encourage businesses
                       in the Calexico Enterprise Zone to hire eligible residents with the most
                       need and allows the Enterprise Zone companies to earn tax credits; 2)
                       Manufacturing Enhancement Area (" MEA"): intended to stimulate job
                       creation in areas experiencing triple the State' s unemployment rate. It
                       provides    for state  and   local   tax  incentives   to  encourage    business
                       investment    and   promote    job   creation; 3)   HUB     Zone (  Historically
                       Underutilized Business Zone):       a federal program aimed at stimulating
                       economic growth in urban and rural areas. The program gives federal
                       contract preferences to small businesses that are certified by maintaining
                       an office in one of the designated HUB Zones and employing staff who
                       live locally. The entire county of Imperial is a designated HUB Zone and
                       therefore any certified business in Calexico may participate; and 4)
                       Foreign Trade Zones (" FTZs"):        provide special customs procedures to
                       U. S. plants engaged in international trade- related activities. Duty- free
                       treatment is accorded to items that are processed in FTZs and then
                       reexported, and duty payment is deferred on items until they are brought
                       out of the FTZ for sale in the U. S. market.
    9. 3     Revitalization of the Downtown Area
                       While the City has grown at a steady rate over the past decade in terms of
                      jobs, retail sales, and average household income, certain areas of the City
                       need economic attention and revitalization. Due to the older nature of the
                       downtown, revitalization      is important to create      a sense of place    in
                       Calexico and to promote economic development and expansion.
                       The downtown area should be a focal point that promotes the City' s
l                      image. An important component to creating excitement for the downtown
                       area is to establish a lively and active environment that attracts people to
                       utilize the area. Mixed- use residential and commercial land uses can
                       contribute to this success. Creating a pedestrian- oriented environment,
                       community facilities, and mixed-use land use projects with cohesive
                      residential, retail, and office space are keys to a successful downtown.
    City of Calexico General Plan

     9.4      Preserving an Image to Remember
                       The City' s artistic values provide the basis for cultural identification
                       throughout the City' s planning efforts. Public awareness is important for
                       encouraging and supporting the arts and cultural development of the City.
                       Also, through direct support given to City- sponsored activities and
                       facilities, the City also plays an important role in helping to encourage and
                       enhance activities that support the arts. Through active involvement and
                       support, the City can offer a better understanding, appreciation,           and
                       enjoyment of the arts and history within Calexico.
                       Within the City, a downtown revitalization strategy should include the
                       development of an Arts Program, which focuses on providing a
                       welcoming and stimulating environment for practicing artists to present
                       their art to the community. A concerted effort can be undertaken to make
                       art a more integral part of citizens' lives by encouraging the expansion of
                       the arts in the school system, establishing new educational activities, and
                       inviting broader participation of students and designers in local public arts
                       opportunities in local parks as well as downtown.
     9.5 Establishing a Vision
                       Inclusion of an Economic Development section in the City' s General Plan,
                       enables the City to be better able to plan and regulate the type of future
                       development envisioned for the City. It also is better able to identify
                       potential economic impacts that may effect the City' s long-range policy
                       decisions relative to land use, public services, population and growth.
                       Economic development must sustain a plan that establishes a high priority
                       to the assets and values of the City and its citizens.
                       The Economic Development Element is responsive to the City' s Vision
                       because it:
L..'
                       a)       stimulates economic revitalization in key areas of the City.
                       b)       creates the opportunity for economic options at strategic points to
                                the City.
                       c)       offers   economic    potential  that   seeks  to   achieve   regional
                                recognition, strengthen the economic base of the City, and provide
                                direct and indirect stimulation of other economic investments in
LJ
                                the City.
                       d)       provides job opportunities for local workers, and overall fiscal
                                benefits for maintaining the highest level of public services to local
                                residents.
                       e)       provides economic      leverage to make resources available that
                                enhance stability in the operations and services provided by City
                                government.
     City of Cafexico General Plan                                                                 9- 4
                                                                                     t .    i
   I
J
                                 contributes to the City' s economic development potential by
                                providing a choice of housing opportunities.
                                contributes to the overall balance of residential and non- residential
                                 land uses within the City.
                                develops and recruits new businesses that create job opportunities
                                and utilize local skills.
1                               builds on the existing economic resources provided by Mexico.
                                provides adequate public services and facilities to support current
                                and future development.
                                provides the opportunity to include arts and cultural development
                                into the downtown revitalization plan.
                       1)       provides the opportunity to create a historical theme to the
                                downtown area and inclusion of that theme into the downtown
                                revitalization plan.
                       m)       creates   strategies   to   maximize    economic      results such  as
                                transitioning agricultural land to non- agricultural land.
                       n)       provides counseling and assistance to local businesses and
                                developers to ensure their success through the practice of sound
                                business principles.
                       o)       continues to support existing local businesses, labor workforce and
                                entrepreneurs as new business development occurs.
                       p)       continues to attract and retain a wide range of businesses which are
ii
                                compatible with regional resources, including a dependable water
                                supply, clean air, and transportation facilities.
     9. 6     Goa, Objectives and Policies
                       The City of Calexico is located in a key location of the Imperial Valley,
                       along the U.S. and Mexico International border. The City' s location and
                       accessibility offers the opportunity to benefit as a regional location for
                       retail, commercial, industrial and tourism activity. Also, its Iocation offers
                       opportunities for encouraging the development of industries in emerging
                       markets and new technologies.
il   9. 6. 1    Goal
                       The City should promote a healthy and diversified economic base by
                       continuing to welcome Mexico' s resources, attracting quality businesses,
                       and encouraging existing businesses to expand their sales, facilities, and
                       employment.
     Ci±y of Calexico Genera! Plan                                                                 9- 5

   9. 6. 1. 1  Image
   Objective 1
                     The City' s image can     have a profound impact on economic development
                     activities. The image     presented by the City can determine the location
                     decision of a new or       relocating business. Existing businesses are more
                     likely to expand and      reinvest in a City with a positive self-image and
                     strong sense of civic pride.
   Policy i
                     a.       Emphasis shall be made to promote and preserve the qualities and
                              resources that contribute to Calexico' s attractiveness and make the
                              City unique.
                     b.       Emphasis shall be made to promote and preserve the City' s cultural
                              heritage.
l_                   c.       The City shall promote safe and well- maintained communities and
                              neighborhoods.
                     d.       The City shall emphasize the environmental qualities essential to the
                              economic health of the region.
 1                   e.       The City shall plan and develop a well- designed and effective
                              circulation system.
                     f.       The City shall recognize the importance of streets and " gateways" in
                              creating the initial impression or image of the City.
                     g.       The City shall promote downtown as the economic and arts/ cultural
                              center of the City.
L
   9. 6. 1. 2  Fconomic Base
   Objective 2
                     A successful economic base is maintained through a healthy and balanced
                     City economy, and the flexibility to respond to economic change.
   Policy 2
                     a.       The City shall promote a team approach in developing economic
                              development strategies and utilize key departmental staff.
                     b.       The City shall continue to build effective local, regional and
                              international business partnerships.
                     c.       The City shall promote and continue to use technology to
                              disseminate economic data.
   City of Calexico General Plan
                                                                                                    s
                        d.       The City shall encourage a proactive approach in the retention of
                                 existing businesses and the recruitment of new businesses,
L
                                 particularly those which generate and broaden employment
                                 opportunities.
                        e.       The City shall provide business assistance to retain and expand
                                 existing local businesses.
                        f.       The City shall prepare, distribute, and routinely update a marketing
                                 package     consisting  of     site- specific
                                                                                property    profiles     for
                                 developable    parcels,    local    demographics,     and    information
                                 describing the regulatory environment and potential economic
                                 incentives.
                        g        The City shall encourage and promote infill development.
                        h        The City shall develop a package of economic incentive programs
                                 which benefit developers of infll projects.
                                 The City shall promote opportunities to attract retirees and
                                 seasonal residents by facilitating the development of quality
LJ                                         homes,                                                in
                                 second              condominiums,       and   hotels/ motels         close
                                proximity to shopping areas.
                       j.        The    City shall encourage and facilitate highway- serving
                                 commercial development along Highway 111 and State Route 98,
                                within the City limits. Some highway- serving commercial may be
L_J                             appropriate along Jasper Road and Cole Road but should be sited
                                 so as not to be incompatible with adjacent proposed residential
                                areas.
  J                    k.       The City shall establish and implement strategies that gain and/or
                                expand City access to the Interstate 8 corridor and promote the
                                development of commercial service facilities.
                       1.       The City shall encourage mixed land use development projects and
                                land annexations and ensure that they are fiscally neutral or
                                beneficial to the City.
   1
                       m.       The City shall continue to encourage and promote economic
                                incentives for existing and new businesses.
                       n.       The City shall establish an expedited development review and
                                approval process for new commercial and industrial projects that
                                are consistent with the General Plan Land Use designations.
                       o.       The City shall work with the local K- 12 school district, the
                                County, Imperial Valley College and San Diego University to
                                develop a skilled labor force including, but not limited to, high
                                tech training.
     9. 6. 1. 3  Economic Opportunifies
1    City of Calexico General Pla i
LJ
     Objective 3
                       The City should look to combine funds from property tax revenues with
                       alternative methods to fund infrastructure and other public facilities, as
r--,
                       well as other programs. Calexico, like other local governments, must rely
Ij
                       upon a mixture of various funding sources to finance capital facilities.
     Policy 3
                       a.       The City shall encourage planning of capital improvements and
                                prioritization of infrastructure investments.
                       b.       The City shall promote the use of redevelopment to finance
                                revitalization of the downtown and other redevelopment areas of
                                the City.
L                      c.
                                The City shall pursue a variety of funding approaches, including
                                impact fees, assessments, transportation funds, and other programs
                                to revitalize and upgrade infrastructure.
L_
     9. 6. I. 4  Revitalization of the Downtown Area
r    Objective 4
                       The City should pursue all opportunities to revitalize the downtown area
                       to further enhance its image.
     Policy 4
                       a.       The City shall explore economic development opportunities in
                                targeted growth areas that could meet the City' s economic needs,
                                while following guidelines that ensure compatibility with the
                                City' s long- range economic strategy.
                       b.       The City shall encourage diversity of housing opportunities of
                                varying densities to reinforce the downtown character.
                       c.       The     City shall encourage the design, maintenance, and
                                revitalization of the downtown area that enhance the quality of life.
                       d.       Preserve architecturally important historic structures that are
                                capable of being adapted for viable use.
                       e.       The City shall encourage public/private efforts to remove old and
                                dilapidated signs and billboards.
                                The City shall promote a pedestrian- friendly and safe environment.
                       g.       The City shall explore opportunities to create " pedestrian zones"
                                with increased landscaping, use of traffic reduction methods,
                                adequate separation from automobile traffic, increased lighting
                                along sidewalks.
     City of Calexico Gener l Pian
                                The City shall provide sufficient, conveniently located public
                                parking in the downtown area to support a pedestrian business
                                clistrict.
                                The City      shall promote    the   use  of  alternative  modes  of
                               transportation, including bus, bicycling and walking.
                               The City shall promote cultural and artistic awareness as a way to
                               enhance the Quality of life for residents and visitors.
                               The City shall provide an improved sense of community through
                               the integration of the arts into the civic identity, through cultural
                               programs, facilities and events, and all aspects of the arts.
                               The City shall encourage cooperation between the schools and
                               community cultural and arts organizations to increase exposure to,
                               appreciation of, and participation in, our cultural activities and
                               heritage.
   9. 6. 1. 5   Regional Coordinafion
   Objective 5
                     Calexico       will   need to become       competitively  aware of economic
                     opportunities to achieve its economic development objectives. Economic
                     development tools, including state legislative changes, may be necessary
                     to recruit and create business opportunities.
   Policy 5
                     a.        The City shall encourage and improve coordination of regional
                               economic development activities.
                     b.        The City shall promote networking, information sharing,           and
                               coordination     among     local    public   economic     development
                               organizations,    educational and job training organizations,     and
LJ                             business groups.
                     c.        The City shall pursue legislative changes that would allow greater
                               local flexibility and assist in achieving economic development
                               objectives.
                     d.        The City shall continue to coordinate and cooperate with the
                               county, state, and federal governments, as well as Mexico, to
                               support the development of the Eastern Industrial Corridor project
                               and the Silicon Border project.
   City of Calexieo Generai P[ an
                                                                            1  f '.. .    f .
  9. 0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
  9. 1     Economic Development Element
                    Successful economic development for the City of Calexico can be
                    achieved through maintaining a fscally healthy and balanced economy
                    that builds upon existing economic development efforts and establishes
                    policies for future economic growth. Economic growth and awareness of
                    regional economic development activities will assist in developing logical
                    strategies to address more intense economic development efforts. A
                    healthy economy not only provides local workers with adequate income to
                    afford a better quality of life, but it also provides local government with
                    adequate public revenues to maintain a better quality of public services.
                    The Economic Development goals and policies should be recognized as a
                    long term commitment that provides an organizational framework and
t                   process that can guide ongoing development efforts. Recognizing that
                    economic development is an ongoing process, the goals and policies
                    should provide direction to guide development activities while at the same
                    time maintaining flexibility to respond to changing economic trends and
                    local market conditions.
                    Through economic diversification combined with its geographic locations
                    along the United States and Mexico International border, a broader tax
                    base will provide the City with long-term benefits and economic stability.
                    In the short- term, key improvements to the City' s economic development
                    should focus on four general areas: 1)       the concentration of mixed use
                    development in key locations of the City, 2) the development of
                    commercial and mixed use development along Interstate 111, State Route
                    98, Jasper Road and Cole Road 3) revitalization of the downtown area,
                    and 4) smart sustainable conversion and development of agricultural land
                    to non- agricultural land. In the long-term, the Silicon Border and Eastern
                    Industrial Corridor projects may provide engines for economic growth in
                    the region closest to Calexico. Through future expansion of its Sphere of
                    Influence, economic incentive programs, and cooperation with the County,
                    the City can realize the benefits of an Eastern Industrial Corridor.
  9. 2    Economic Challenges
                    Calexico faces continuing economic challenges to the planning and
                    implementation of the future growth and development of the City. Two
                    key regional factors are vital to this planning effort: 1) Retention of the
                    large number of retail customers and consumers who commute from
                    Mexicali, Mexico to Calexico and other communities to purchase goods
                    and services at a high daily rate, and 2) Calexico' s contributing role in the
                    County' s mega-agricultural industry.
  City of Ca{exico General Pian                                                                 9- 1
1
 C]
                      Significant contributors to the local economy are winter visitors (             or
                        snowbirds"),     Mexico/ LJ. S. border crossings, and the North American Free
                      Trade    Agreement (" NAFTA").            However,     due to  the  prevalence  of
                      unskilled agricultural and retail occupations, median income in Calexico
                      has remained low. The high proportion of employment in the retail
                      industry, which is aimed at the Mexicali consumer, has left the City
                      vulnerable to fluctuations in the relative strengths of the Mexican Peso
                      versus the U.S. Dollar. When Peso devaluation occurs, making American
                      goods more expensive, retail purchases decline and force many individuals
                      into unemployment. The combined decline in retail business employment
                      and the seasonal nature of the agricultural industry causes a high non-
                      seasonally adjusted unemployment rate. Table ED- A, identifies general
                      economic and demographics data for the City of Calexico and Imperial
                      County. This data provides an economic comparison between the City and
                      county. A significant economic factor according to the California
                      Employment Development Department (" EDD")                  is the unemployment
                      rate in this area, which in May of 2005 was I S percent for Catexico, and
                      13. 2 percent for Imperial County as a whole.
                                                   Table ED-A
                                  General Economic- Demographics Data
                                  City of Calexico and Imperial County
                                            U.S. Census Data, 2Q00)
                                                            Calexico
     Total Population                                         27, 109
         Gender
             Male                                               46. 6%                      52. 2%
             Female                                             53. 4%                      47. 8%
             Median Age ( Years)                                29.2                        31. 0
         Majority Race
             Hispanic                                          95. 3%                       722%
             Non- Hispanic                                       4. 7%                      27. 8%
         Marital Status
             Married                                            54. 0%                      56. 6%
             Non- Married                                      46. 0%                       43. 4%
         Employment'
             Total Work Force of Population                    9110                        57, 300
             Employed                                           73. 7%                      80.6%
             Unemployed                                        263%                         19. 4%
         Median Household Income ( in $000)                    29. 0                        31. 9
         Total Housing Units                                   6984                      43, 891
             Detached Units                                     64. 0%                      573%
             Multiple Units                                     36. 0%                      42. 7%
         Median Home Values ( in $000)                        1082                        100. 0
        Employment Data Source: California Employment Development Deparhnent
CJ
    City af Calexico Generai Plan                                                                    9- 2
                         To meet these and other economic challenges, the City continues to take a
                         proactive approach by participating in various State Economic Incentive
                         Programs and Federal programs. Some of the programs in which the City
                         participates consist of: 1)    Enterprise Zone: a defned geographic area
                         within which businesses can obtain tax benefits and other incentives
                         designed to stimulate business investments. A Targeted Employment Area
                            TEA") provides for the establishment of employment areas comprised of
                         census tracts that have at least 51%     of its residents at low or moderate
                         income levels. The purpose of TEA designation is to encourage businesses
                         in the Calexico Enterprise Zone to hire eligible residents with the most
                         need and allows the Enterprise Zone companies to earn tax credits; 2)
  IJ                     Manufacturing Enhancement Area (" MEA"): intended to stimulate job
                         creation in areas experiencing triple the State' s unemployment rate. It
                         provides for state and local        tax  incentives   to encourage  business
                         investment and promote job          creation;  3)  HUB    Zone ( Historically
                         Underutilized Business Zone):      a federal program aimed at stimulating
                         economic growth in urban and rural areas. The program gives federal
                         contract preferences to small businesses that are certified by maintaining
                         an office in one of the designated HUB Zones and employing staff who
                         live locally. The entire county of Imperial is a designated HUB Zone and
    J                    therefore any certified business in Calexico may participate; and 4)
                         Foreign Trade Zones (" FTZs"): provide special customs procedures to
                         U. S. plants engaged in international trade- related activities. Duty- free
                         treatment is accorded to items that are processed in FTZs and then
                         reexported, and duty payment is deferred on items until they are brought
                         out of the FTZ for sale in the U. S. market.
i
      9. 3     Revitalization of fhe Downtown Area
                         While the City has grown at a steady rate over the past decade in terms of
                        jobs, retail sales, and average household income, certain areas of the City
                         need economic attention and revitalization. Due to the older nature of the
                         downtown, revitalization     is important to create a sense of place in
                         Calexico and to promote economic development and expansion.
                         The downtown area should be a focal point that promotes the City' s
r                        image. An important component to creating excitement for the downtown
                        area is to establish a lively and active environment that attracts people to
                        utilize the area. Mixed- use residential and commercial land uses can
                        contribute to this success. Creating a pedestrian- oriented environment,
                        community facilities, and mixed- use land use projects with cohesive
                        residential, retail, and offce space are keys to a successful downtown.
      City of Calexico General Plan                                                                9- 3
i
1
  9. 4     Preserving an Image to Remember
                    The City' s artistic values provide the basis for cultural identification
                    throughout the City' s planning efforts. Public awareness is important for
                    encouraging and supporting the arts and cultural development of the City.
                    Also, through direct support given to City- sponsored activities and
                    facilities, the City also plays an important role in helping to encourage and
                    enhance activities that support the arts. Through active involvement and
                    support, the City can offer a better understanding, appreciation, and
                    enjoyment of the arts and history within Calexico.
                    Within the City, a downtown revitalization strategy should include the
                    development      of an Arts Program, which focuses on providing a
                    welcoming and stimulating environment for practicing arfists to present
                    their art to the community. A concerted effort can be undertaken to make
                    art a more integral part of citizens' lives by encouraging the expansion of
                    the arts in the school system, establishing new educational activities, and
                    inviting broader participation of students and designers in local public arts
                    opportunities in local parks as well as downtown.
  9.5 Establishing a Vision
                    Inclusion of an Economic Development section in the City' s General Plan,
                    enables the City to be better able to plan and regulate the type of future
                    development envisioned for the City. It also is better able to identify
                    potential economic impacts that may effect the City' s long-range policy
                    decisions relative to land use, public services, population and growth.
                    Economic development must sustain a plan that establishes a high priority
                    to the assets and values of the City and its citizens.
                    The Economic Development Element is responsive to the City' s Vision
                    because it:
J                   a)       stimulates economic revitalization in key areas of the City.
                    b)       creates the opportunity for economic options at strategic points to
                             the City.
                    c)       offers   economic    potential  that   seeks  to   achieve   regional
                             recognition, strengthen the economic base of the City, and provide
                             direct and indirect stimulation of other economic investments in
                             the City.
                    d)       provides job opportunities for local workers, and overall fiscal
                             benefits for maintaining the highest level of public services to local
                             residents.
                    e)       provides   economic    leverage to make resources available that
                             enhance stability in the operations and services provided by City
                             government.
  City of Calexico General Plan                                                                 9- 4
                              contributes to the City' s economic development potential by
                              providing a choice of housing opportunities.
                              contributes to the overall balance of residential and non- residential
                               land uses within the City.
1                             develops and recruits new businesses that create job opportunities
                              and utilize local skills.
                              builds on the existing economic resources provided by Mexico.
Ll
                              provides adequate public services and facilities to support current
                              and future development.
                              provides the opportunity to include arts and cultural development
                              into the downtown revitalization plan.
1                    1)       provides the opportunity to create a historical theme to the
                              downtown area and inclusion of that theme into the downtown
                              revitalization plan.
                     m)       creates   strategies   to  maximize     economic     results such   as
                              transitioning agricultural land to non- agricultural land.
                     n)       provides counseling and assistance to local businesses and
u                             developers to ensure their success through the practice of sound
                              business principles.
II
                     o)       continues to support existing local businesses, labor workforce and
                              entrepreneurs as new business development occurs.
                     p)       continues to attract and retain a wide range of businesses which are
                              compatible with regional resources, including a dependable water
                              supply, clean air, and transportation facilities.
   9. 6     Goal, Objectives and Policies
                     The City of Calexico is located in a key location of the Imperial Valley,
                     along the U. S. and Mexico International border. The City' s location and
                     accessibility offers the opportunity to benefit as a regional location for
                     retail, commercial, industrial and tourism activity. Also, its location offers
                     opportunities for encouraging the development of industries in emerging
                     markets and new technologies.
   9. 6. 1    Goal
                     The City should promote a healthy and diversified economic base by
                     continuing to welcome Mexico' s resources, attracting quality businesses,
                     and encouraging existing businesses to expand their sales, facilities, and
                     employment.
CI
   City of Calexico General Plan                                                                9- 5
                                                                         t .           t-+.
  9. 6. 1. 1  Image
L Objective 1
                    The City' s image can     have a profound impact on economic development
                    activities. The image     presented by the City can determine the location
                    decision of a new or       relocating business. Existing businesses are more
                    likely to expand and      reinvest in a City with a positive self-image and
                    strong sense of civic pride.
  Policy 1
                    a.       Emphasis shall be made to promote and preserve the qualities and
                             resources that contribute to Calexico' s attractiveness and make the
                             City unique.
                    b.       Emphasis shall be made to promote and preserve the City' s cultural
                             heritage.
                    c.       The City shall promote safe and well- maintained communities and
                             neighborhoods.
                    d.       The City shall emphasize the environmental qualities essential to the
                             economic health of the region.
                    e.       The City shall plan and develop a well- designed and effective
                             circulation system.
                    f.       The City shall recognize the importance of streets and " gateways" in
                             creating the initial impression or image of the City.
                    g.       The City shall promote downtown as the economic and arts/ cultural
                             center of the City.
  9. 6. 1. 2  Economic Base
  Objective 2
                    A successful economic base is maintained through a healthy and balanced
                    City economy, and the flexibility to respond to economic change.
  Policy 2
                    a.       The City shall promote a team approach in developing economic
                             development strategies and utilize key departmental staff.
                    b.       The City shall continue to build effective local,        regional and
                             international business partnerships.
                    c.       The City shall promote and continue to use technotogy to
                             disseminate economic data.
  City af Galexico General Plan
 1
                                                                             w. .
                        d.      The City shall encourage a proactive approach in the retention of
                                existing businesses and the recruitment of new businesses,
                                particularly those which generate and broaden employment
                                opportunities.
                        e.      The City shall provide business assistance to retain and expand
                                existing local businesses.
                        f.      The City shall prepare, distribute, and routinely update a marketing
                                package     consisting   of    site- specifc   property    profles    for
                                developable     parcels,   local    demographics,     and    information
                                describing the regulatory environment and potential economic
                                incentives.
                        g•      The City shall encourage and promote infill development.
                        h.      The City shall develop a package of economic incentive programs
                                which benefit developers of infill projects.
                                The City shall promote opportunities to attract retirees and
l _J                            seasonal residents by facilitating the development of quality
                                second    homes,    condominiums,       and   hotels/ motels    in close
                                proximity to shopping areas.
                       j.       The    City shall encourage and facilitate highway- serving
                                commercial development along Highway 111 and State Route 98,
                                within the City limits. Some highway- serving commercial may be
                                appropriate along Jasper Road and Cole Road but should be sited
                                so as not to be incompatible with adjacent proposed residential
                                areas.
                       k.       The City shall establish and implement strategies that gain and/ or
                                expand City access to the Interstate 8 corridor and promote the
                                development of commercial service facilities.
                       l.       The City shall encourage mixed land use development projects and
                                land annexations and ensure that they are fiscally neutral or
                                beneficial to the City.
                       m.       The City shall continue to encourage and promote economic
                                incentives for existing and new businesses.
                       n.       The City shall establish an expedited development review and
                                approval process for new commercial and industrial projects that
1                               are consistent with the General Plan Land Use designations.
                       o.       The City shall work with the local K- 12 school district, the
                                County, Imperial Valley College and San Diego University to
                                develop a skiiled labor force including, but not limited to, high
                                tech training.
     9. 6. 1. 3  Economic Opportunities
     City of Calexico General Pian                                                                   9- 7

i
                                                                          i           f.
   Objective 3
                     The City should look to combine funds from property tax revenues with
                     alternative methods to fund infrastructure and other public facilities, as
                     well as other programs. Calexico, like other local governments, must rely
                     upon a mixture of various funding sources to finance capital facilities.
   Policy 3
                     a.
                              The City shall encourage planning of capital improvements and
                              prioritization of infrastructure investments.
                     b.       The City shall promote the use of redevelopment to finance
                              revitalization of the downtown and other redevelopment areas of
                              the City.
                     c.       The City shall pursue a variety of funding approaches, including
                              impact fees, assessments, transportation funds, and other programs
                              to revitalize and upgrade infrastructure.
   9. 6. 1. 4  Revifalization of the Downtown Area
Cl Objective 4
                     The City should pursue all opportunities to revitalize the downtown area
                     to further enhance its image.
   Policy 4
                     a.       The City shall explore economic development opportunities in
                              targeted growth areas that could meet the City' s economic needs,
                              while following guidelines that ensure compatibility with the
                              City' s long-range economic strategy.
                     b.       The City shall encourage diversity of housing opportunities of
                              varying densities to reinforce the downtown character.
                     c.       The     City shall encourage the design, maintenance, and
                              revitalization of the downtown area that enhance the quality of life.
                     d.       Preserve architecturally important historic structures that are
                              capai le of being adapted for viable use.
                     e.       The City shall encourage public/private efforts to remove old and
                              dilapidated signs and billboards.
                              The City shall promote a pedestrian- friendly and safe environment.
                     g.       The City shall explore opportunities to create " pedestrian zones"
                              with increased landscaping, use of traffic reduction methods,
                              adequate separation from automobile traffic, increased lighting
                              along sidewalks.
   Cily at Calexico General Plan
                                The City shall provide sufficient, conveniently located public
                                parking in the downtown area to support a pedestrian business
                                district.
                                The City shall promote the use of alternative               modes  of
                                transportation, including bus, bicycling and walking.
                                The City shall promote cultural and artistic awareness as a way to
                                enhance the quality of life for residents and visitors.
                                The City shall provide an improved sense of community through
                                the integration of the arts into the civic identity, through cultural
                                programs, facilities and events, and all aspects of the arts.
                                The City shall encourage cooperation between the schools and
                                community cultural and arts organizations to increase exposure to,
                                appreciation of, and participation in, our cultural activities and
                                heritage.
     9. 6. 1. 5  Regional Coordination
     Objective 5
                       Calexico will need to become competitively aware of economic
                       opportunities to achieve its economic development objectives. Economic
l _J                   development tools, including state legislative changes, may be necessary
                       to recruit and create business opportunities.
     Policy 5
                       a.       The City shall encourage and improve coordination of regional
                                economic development activities.
                       b.       The City shall promote networking, information sharing,           and
                                coordination     among    local    public   economic     development
                                organizations,   educational and job training organizations,      and
                                business groups.
                       c.       The City shall pursue legislative changes that would allow greater
                                local flexibility and assist in achieving economic development
                                objectives.
                       d.       The City shall continue to coordinate and cooperate with the
C                               county, state, and federal governments, as well as Mexico, to
                                support the development of the Eastern Industrial Corridor project
                                and the Silicon Border project.
     Citv of Cafexico Generai Plan
