                                                                       GROWTH
                                                MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
     The Growth Management Element contains policies for the planning and provision of traffic
     improvements that are necessary for the City’s orderly growth and development. The policies and
     programs presented in this Element are for the establishment of traffic Level of Service (LOS)
     standards, a development mitigation program, a development phasing program, and an annual
     monitoring program.
     Orange’s Vision for the Future, presented in the General Plan introduction, includes the following
     objectives related to the Growth Management Element:
         The City will build upon existing assets to create a living, active, and diverse environment that
          complements all lifestyles and enhances neighborhoods, without compromising the valued
          resources that make Orange unique.
         Orange recognizes the importance of managing development in a manner that ensures
          adequate public services and infrastructure and limits impacts on the natural environment.
     Policies, plans, and programs outlined within this Element are designed to improve residents’
     quality of life by ensuring that needed roadway and circulation improvements are completed in
     step with both new development and future infill development.
Purpose of the Growth Management Element
     The purpose of the Growth Management Element is to mandate that (1) growth and development
     be based upon the City’s ability to provide an adequate circulation system, and that (2) such
     growth and development meet the requirements of the Orange County voter-approved Revised
     Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance, also known as Measure M.
Scope and Content of the Growth Management Element
     The Growth Management Element comprises three sections:
     1) Introduction;
     2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and
     3) Growth Management Plan.
     The Issues, Goals, and Policies section provides guidance to the City with regard to complying
     with Measure M growth management requirements. Contents of the Growth Management
     Element describe the City’s approach to managing future growth concurrently with transportation
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 GM-1

GROWTH MANAGEMENT
      infrastructure. The Plan also explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and
      implemented.
      The Growth Management Element applies to all new development within the City with the
      possible exception of approved vested projects or projects with development agreements. Those
      projects would require individual legal review to determine Growth Management Element
      applicability. The City may consider, on a case-by-case basis, future project exemptions to
      encourage redevelopment activities or the development of affordable housing. Privately initiated
      Land Use Element amendments, zone changes, and other discretionary projects will be specifically
      reviewed for consistency with the Growth Management Element policies.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
      A major goal of the Growth Management Element is to ensure that the management and
      implementation of traffic improvements within the City are coordinated and timed concurrently
      with anticipated development and redevelopment projects, consistent with policies and plans set
      forth in the Land Use, Circulation & Mobility, Housing and Infrastructure Elements. This Element
      does not replace or supersede other General Plan elements—such as the Circulation & Mobility
      Element—that also specify goals and policies for transportation and circulation issues. Instead,
      the Growth Management Element addresses, amplifies, and supports traffic Level of Service (LOS)
      standards included in the Circulation & Mobility Element and provides a means to implement the
      City’s Master Plan of Streets and Highways.
      Similarly, the Growth Management Element supports the vision, conditions, and parameters under
      which future development and redevelopment may occur, as expressed within the Land Use
      Element. The Growth Management Element consists of goals, objectives, and policies to serve as a
      guide for the selection of mitigation measures and conditions of approval for projects processed in
      the City. It has been crafted to minimize duplication of Measure M and Congestion Management
      Program (CMP) requirements.
      The Growth Management Element works in tandem with the Housing Element to direct housing to
      the most appropriate sites. It also describes the desired relationship between the phasing and
      construction of development and roadway infrastructure to serve new development. Similarly, the
      Infrastructure Element describes the City departments and other service providers responsible for
      providing sewer, water, storm drains, and dry utilities to future development within Orange’s
      planning area.
Definitions
      For the purposes of this Element and compliance with Measure M, several terms used throughout
      the Element are defined in Table GM-1.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                GM-2

                                                                                             GROWTH MANAGEMENT
                                                          Table GM-1
                                           Growth Management Terms Defined
          Term                                                           Definition
Capital Improvement    A 7-year list of capital projects to meet, maintain, and improve the City’s adopted traffic Level of service
Program (CIP)          (LOS) and performance standards. The CIP includes: 1) the description of the proposed project
                       improvements, 2) the anticipated funding source, and 3) the estimated cost in current dollars.
Critical Movement      Any of the conflicting through or turning movements at an intersection which determine the allocation of
                       green signal time.
Deficient Intersection A trust fund that may be established to implement necessary improvements to existing intersections
Fund                   which do not meet the LOS standards adopted in this Element. Such a fund may be established from
                       transportation fees, mutually agreed upon by the Growth Management Element in which the deficiency
                       exists.
Deficient Intersection A list of intersections that: 1) do not meet the City’s LOS standards for reasons that are beyond the
List                   control of the City (e.g. ramp metering effects, traffic generated outside the City’s jurisdiction,) and 2) are
                       not brought into compliance with the LOS standard in the most current 7-year CIP. Additional
                       intersections may be added to the list only as a result of conditions that are beyond the City’s control.
Development Phasing    A program which establishes the requirement that building and grading permits shall be approved or
Program                issued in a manner that assures implementation of required transportation improvements through either
                       construction of said improvements and/or timely provision of mitigation fees as determined by the City
                       during the development’s approval process. The City shall specify the order of improvements and/or
                       timing of payment of the required mitigation fees (as they relate to the number of dwelling units, square
                       feet of development, or trip generation), based, at a minimum, on mitigation measures adopted in
                       conjunction with the environmental documentation and other relevant factors.
Growth Management      Subregions of Orange County established by the Regional Advisory Planning Committee to promote
Areas (GMAs)           inter-jurisdictional coordination to address infrastructure concerns and implement needed improvements.
                       GMAs are comprised of elected officials and staff from local agencies whose jurisdictions are covered, at
                       least in part, by the GMA. The City of Orange is included in three of 11 Growth Management Areas (#3,
                       #4, and #7) in the County, requiring representatives of the City to meet regularly with the surrounding
                       communities of Anaheim, Santa Ana, Villa Park, Irvine, Tustin, Garden Grove, and Yorba Linda.
Growth Management      The Growth Management Element of the City’s General Plan as required by the Orange County voter-
Element                approved Revised Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance, also known as Measure M.
Level of Service (LOS) A qualitative measure of the relationship between the volume and capacity of a roadway, usually
                       described by the letters “A” through “F.” LOS A describes freely flowing traffic conditions and LOS F
                       describes congested roadways. LOS D is usually considered the industry standard for traffic analysis
                       purposes.
Local Transportation   The body responsible for the implementation of Measure M as designated by the Orange County Board of
Authority              Supervisors and the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA).
Measurable Traffic     A traffic volume resulting in a one percent increase in the sum of the critical movements at an
                       intersection.
Measure M              The Revised Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance adopted by Orange County voters
                       on November 6, 1990. The Measure authorized the imposition of a half-cent retail sales tax for a period of
                       20 years effective April 1, 1991. A November 2006 ballot measure renewed the program through 2031.
                       The sales tax increase will be allocated to local Orange County jurisdictions for use on local and regional
                       transportation improvements and maintenance projects.
Performance            A comprehensive road improvement and financing plan which monitors the level of service requirements
Monitoring Program     in this Element while taking into account measurable traffic impacts on the circulation system. This
(PMP)                  program will annually review the status of public and private roadway improvements associated with the
                       7-year CIP and Development Phasing Programs to assure that the City is taking appropriate actions to
                       achieve the LOS standards described in this Element.
                                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                              GM-3

GROWTH MANAGEMENT
Measure M Requirements
     In 1990, Orange County voters approved Measure M, authorizing a half-cent retail sales tax
     increase for a period of 20 years effective April 1, 1991. County voters approved the renewal of
     Measure M, extending the half-cent sales tax increase through 2031.
     Revenue generated by Measure M is returned to local jurisdictions for use on local and regional
     transportation improvements and maintenance projects. To qualify for this revenue, each
     jurisdiction must comply with the Countywide Traffic Improvement and Growth Management
     Program. The Countywide Growth Management Program is designed to foster a cooperative
     process among local Orange County jurisdictions to coordinate and implement traffic
     improvements, and to promote stronger planning on a countywide basis, while maintaining local
     authority over land use decisions. It is also designed to maintain local authority regarding
     performance standards, such as traffic LOS, while considering regional impacts.
     Specifically, to receive an allocation of Measure M funds, the City of Orange must submit a
     statement of compliance with the growth management components of the program.
     Requirements include the following:
         adoption of a Growth Management Element that includes:
          o traffic LOS standards;
          o a development mitigation program; and
          o a development phasing and annual monitoring program;
         participation in interjurisdictional planning forums;
         development of a 7-year CIP;
         addressing housing options and job opportunities; and
         adoption of a Transportation Demand Management Ordinance.
     The City’s compliance with these components has been addressed elsewhere in the Growth
     Management Element or is referenced where adopted by a separate action in a separate document.
     Implementation of the Growth Management Element is incorporated throughout the City’s
     established development review and monitoring process where possible. The processes related to
     the Element are also crafted to be compatible with regional programs, including applicable
     Congestion Management and Air Quality Management Plans. This element will be reviewed
     annually to determine if appropriate changes are needed based on experience and changed
     circumstances.
ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
     The City of Orange’s population is projected to increase by approximately 27.5 percent between
     2008 and 2030, based upon buildout of the City’s General Plan. Strong demand for transportation
     facilities and services will require continued reinvestment by the City and other service providers.
     It is important to balance future growth within Orange with roadways and other transportation
     services and facilities. The goals and policies of the Growth Management Element address two key
     issues: 1) reducing traffic congestion and 2) ensuring provision of adequate regional
     transportation facilities. These goals and policies tie together all development goals under the
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   GM-4

                                                                     GROWTH MANAGEMENT
unifying theme of growth management, and indicate Orange’s commitment to continue to work
with other jurisdictions to address regional concerns.
GOAL 1.0:        Reduce traffic congestion within the City.
Policy 1.1:      Establish LOS D as the level of service standard for traffic circulation within the
                 City for both roadway segments and peak-hour signalized intersection
                 movements.
Policy 1.2:      Ensure completion of transportation improvements as agreed upon by the City
                 and developer prior to completion of a development project.
Policy 1.3:      Ensure that new development pays its fair share of street improvement costs,
                 including regional traffic mitigation. New revenues generated from Measure M, if
                 available, shall not be used to replace private developer funding which has been
                 omitted for any project.
Policy 1.4:      Continue to collect transportation impact fees for improvements within the City
                 boundaries and work with adjacent jurisdictions to determine that an appropriate
                 level of transportation impact fees are maintained within the established County
                 GMAs.
Policy 1.5:      Require new development projects to link issuance of building permits for the
                 appropriate portion of the development plan to roadway improvements required
                 to achieve the appropriate LOS. Monitor the implementation of this requirement
                 for each new development project on an annual basis.
Policy 1.6:      Integrate land use and transportation           planning     to    provide  adequate
                 transportation system service standards.
Policy 1.7:      Promote the expansion          and    development    of  alternative     methods  of
                 transportation.
Policy 1.8:      Encourage the development of housing within close proximity to jobs and
                 services.
Policy 1.9:      Ensure that new developments incorporate non-motorized and alternative transit
                 amenities such as bike racks, bus benches and shelters, and pedestrian
                 connections.
Policy 1.10:     Apply traffic calming measures, where appropriate, to residential neighborhoods
                 affected by cut-through traffic in accordance with the City’s Residential
                 Neighborhood Traffic Management Program.
Policy 1.11:     Adopt and maintain a 7-year CIP in conformance with the provisions of Measure
                 M for the purpose of maintaining the LOS standards established in this Element.
Policy 1.12:     Promote traffic reduction strategies through the measures adopted within the
                 City’s Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Ordinance.
GOAL 2.0:        Provide for adequate regional and local transportation facilities.
Policy 2.1:      Cooperate with other agencies to address regional issues and opportunities
                 related to growth, transportation, infrastructure, and other planning issues.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            GM-5

GROWTH MANAGEMENT
      Policy 2.2:      Plan for future maintenance and expansion of the City’s roadway and bikeway
                       systems and other infrastructure on an annual basis. Anticipate changes in
                       funding availability, project priority, and project feasibility.
      Policy 2.3:      Continue to work toward achieving a balance between residential, industrial,
                       commercial, and public land uses. Support programs that match Orange residents
                       with local jobs to reduce long commutes and improve the fiscal and public health
                       of the community.
      Policy 2.4:      Explore infill development or mixed-use opportunities wherever possible as
                       developable space becomes more limited.
      Policy 2.5:      Continue to work with OCTA and other regional transit agencies to provide such
                       amenities as bus shelters, shade, and other special streetscape treatments at
                       transit stations that encourage the use of regional bus and train services.
      Policy 2.6:      Participate in interjurisdictional planning forums within the City’s established
                       GMAs as adopted by the Regional Advisory Planning Council.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
      The Growth Management Element expresses the City’s approach to managing future growth.
      Consequently, although there is some overlap among the policies presented in this Element and in
      other General Plan elements, this Element is defined as the key resource document for growth
      management policies and issues and Measure M compliance. The following section presents the
      key growth management challenges facing the City in coming years and the City’s approach to
      addressing the challenges.
Interjursidictional Coordination and Cooperation
      The City recognizes that federal and state highways are a significant part of Orange’s
      transportation system, and therefore greatly influence operation of the City roadway system. The
      City is bisected by the Costa Mesa Freeway (SR 55) in addition to being ringed by the Riverside
      Freeway (SR 91) to the north, the Orange Freeway (SR 57) and Santa Ana Freeway (I-5) to the
      west, the Garden Grove Freeway (SR 22) to the south, and the Eastern Transportation Corridor (SR
      241) to the east. The state and federal highway and freeway systems are therefore an integral part
      of the City’s transportation planning process. Coordination with Caltrans and the Transportation
      Corridor Agencies regarding future improvements to these roadways is imperative to prevent
      unintended traffic impacts on the City’s roadway system.
Growth Management Areas
      A significant effort in the transportation planning process will be undertaken by the City in its
      involvement in the GMAs established by the Regional Advisory Planning Committee. The purpose
      of the GMAs is to enable local jurisdictions to focus their mutual concern, coordinate
      improvements, and implement those improvements through an interjursidictional process. City
      staff will work with staff from other cities represented in each of the GMAs to address the
      transportation issues identified by mutual consensus of the representatives of each GMA.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   GM-6

                                                                              GROWTH MANAGEMENT
      In addition, the City will continue to work with adjacent cities through existing formal agreements
      to fulfill any obligations not covered by the GMA activities. GMA activities do not supersede prior
      participative planning agreements between respective agencies.
Freeway System Deficiencies
      Many of the transportation problems facing the City and Orange County are based on the
      inadequate capacity of freeways to serve peak period travel demands. This lack of capacity has
      resulted in poor levels of service, characterized by severe congestion and low travel speeds, as well
      as diversion to local streets during peak periods. The most severe congestion on the freeway
      system that affects the City’s roadway system occurs at the “Orange Crush,” where the Santa
      Ana, Orange, and Garden Grove Freeways come together. In addition, the Riverside Freeway is
      severely congested by commuters coming from the Inland Empire to jobs in the South Central
      Orange County area during peak periods. As freeways become more congested, additional impacts
      result on the City’s roadway system.
City Roadway Deficiencies
      The Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH) defines an arterial highway system
      intended to support and serve existing and projected land uses within both incorporated and
      unincorporated areas of the County. The arterial system is designed to serve as part of a balanced
      transportation system (autos, trucks, buses, bicycles, pedestrians, and emerging technologies).
      Smart Streets, Principal, Major and Primary Arterial Highways are intended to accommodate the
      bulk of intra-regional traffic and complement both the freeway system and the local street
      network. Secondary Arterials and Commuter Streets serve mainly as collectors which move traffic
      from local streets to the Smart Street, Principal, Major and Primary Arterial system.
      As congestion continues to increase on the freeway system, more drivers will switch to using City
      arterials, particularly those parallel to freeways, or arterials serving the same trip destinations as
      the freeways. Consequently, these arterials, such as Tustin Street and Lincoln Avenue, will
      become increasingly congested at peak hours, pending improvements to the freeway system.
      Likewise, arterials providing access to the Costa Mesa and Garden Grove Freeways, such as
      Chapman, Katella, Lincoln, and Taft Avenues, are experiencing similar congestion. The Garden
      Grove Freeway has recently undergone a major renovation to add capacity and enhance safety.
      Chapman Avenue east of the Costa Mesa Freeway acts as the absent easterly extension of the
      Garden Grove Freeway, attempting without adequate capacity to serve a major population and
      recreational demand in east Orange and the South County area.
      Level of Service Standards
      Level of service is a qualitative measure that characterizes traffic congestion on a scale of A to F
      with LOS A representing a free-flow condition and LOS F representing extreme congestion. The
      LOS standard for traffic circulation in the City is LOS D for all roadway segments and signalized
      intersections. The circulation system shall be implemented in a manner that is designed to achieve
      LOS D or the current level; whichever is the farthest from LOS A. Intersections exempt from this
      standard include facilities under the jurisdiction of another City or the state; facilities that are part
      of the Orange County Congestion Management Program (CMP); or those included on a Deficient
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                    GM-7

GROWTH MANAGEMENT
     Intersection List established by a GMA in which the City participates. LOS will be measured
     according to the procedures outlined in the LOS Policy Implementation Manual established by
     OCTA.
     In order to achieve this standard, the City will require that the necessary improvements to
     transportation facilities identified as adversely impacted shall be completed prior to completion of
     a development project.
     Achieving the adopted LOS standard and implementing exacted transportation improvements will
     also take into consideration extraordinary transportation circumstances that may affect identified
     intersections and/or timing of the required improvements. An example of an extraordinary
     circumstance would be when arterial roadways serve temporarily as substitute freeway access
     (thus affecting LOS performance) while construction of additional freeway improvements is
     underway.
Development Mitigation
     New development in accordance with the policies of the Land Use Element may occur throughout
     the planning area over the next 20 years. Most new development will occur either within one of
     eight focus areas identified in the Land Use Element, or within the eastern portion of the planning
     area.
     Infill Development within Focus Areas
     Infill is the development of vacant sites in previously built-up areas. Infill development in Orange
     may occur in the future within eight focus areas as described in the Land Use Element. Much of
     this infill development will take the form of mixed-use residential, office, and commercial projects,
     designed to provide opportunities for people to live, work, and shop within more compact
     locations or districts. However, potential exists for infill development to further degrade traffic
     congestion on some of the City’s major arterial roadways, including South Main Street, Chapman
     Avenue, Katella Avenue, Tustin Street and La Veta Avenue. Growth management strategies for
     these areas focus on timely development of circulation system improvements related to infill
     development projects. Strategies emphasize use of alternative transportation methods, particularly
     transit, within the focus area corridors.
     New Development in East Orange
     Most new development in Orange’s planning area will occur in currently undeveloped areas
     located generally east of Jamboree Road. This area is well served by the SR 241 and SR 261 toll
     roads, and future improvements to Santiago Canyon Road will provide arterial connections
     between the toll roads and future residential and commercial recreation areas. This circulation
     system provides beneficial connections to those living in east Orange who travel north to
     Riverside County or south to Irvine or other destinations in the South County. Growth
     management strategies for new development in east Orange focus on collecting transportation
     impact fees and ensuring that needed roadway improvements are completed in step with new
     development as new homes and businesses are occupied.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  GM-8

                                                                         GROWTH MANAGEMENT
     Traffic Impact Analysis and Fees
     To ensure that traffic impacts associated with new development are adequately addressed, the
     City will require a Traffic Impact Analysis of all new projects, as required by the City’s Traffic
     Impact Analysis Guidelines or at the discretion of the City Traffic Engineer when insufficient
     information is available to make a preliminary assessment of a proposal’s traffic impacts. The City
     will also ensure that new development pay for or implement its fair share of street improvement
     costs associated with development, including regional traffic mitigation. The City will not use any
     new revenues generated from Measure M to pay for improvements incurred by a private
     development project.
     The City will continue to collect transportation impact fees for improvements within its
     boundaries and will work with adjacent jurisdictions to ensure that an appropriate level of
     transportation impact fees is maintained within the GMAs. In the future, the City may also give
     consideration to a Deficient Intersection Fund Fee on all development contributing measurable
     impacts to intersections on the Deficient Intersection List of the Orange County CMP. This fee, if
     determined necessary, shall be approved by the jurisdictions in the GMA and locally administered
     as part of the City’s CIP.
Development Phasing
     New development in the City will be required to establish a Development Phasing Program that
     links issuance of building permits for portions of the development plan to roadway improvements
     required to achieve the appropriate LOS. During the development approval process, it will be
     determined whether to link to construction of the designated improvement(s) by others and/or
     link to construction of the designated improvement(s) at a certain time designated by the City.
     The phasing plan must include an overall buildout plan which can demonstrate the ability of the
     infrastructure to support the planned development. The phasing plan for new projects will be a
     component of the development review and entitlement process and must be approved prior to
     issuance of building or grading permits.
Annual Monitoring
     The City will monitor the implementation of the Development Phasing Program for each new
     development projects on an annual basis and prepare an annual report, which will indicate the
     status of development approval in relationship to the status of the required traffic improvements.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT IMPLEMENTATION
     The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of City
     plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing collaboration
     with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation measures for this
     Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 GM-9


                                                                     ECONOMIC
                                                         DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
        Orange is recognized as a desirable area in which to do business, and therefore supports and
        sustains a diverse range of businesses in the City’s distinct industrial, commercial,
        institutional, and office areas. This diversity in the business climate reflects the gradual
        transition of Orange from an agricultural community served by rail to its position for many
        years as an outer-ring suburb of the rapidly growing Los Angeles metropolitan area, to its
        position today at a major crossroads of Orange County, at the convergence of major
        freeways, and serviced by a major commuter rail line. The City’s economic environment
        cultivates and promotes both large corporate enterprises as well as smaller business
        entrepreneurs. At the outset of the 21st century, Orange’s economic development strategies
        focus on preserving jobs and maintaining a diverse economic base.
        To maintain the City’s economic diversity, Orange encourages light manufacturing and
        industrial uses in the northwestern area, and larger institutional, corporate office and retail
        uses in the southwestern portion. The City provides opportunities for boutique and family-
        owned stores in Old Towne Orange, as well as in key commercial areas along Tustin Street,
        Katella Avenue, Chapman Avenue, and Lincoln Avenue, where regional and national retailers
        can also be found. Orange will continue to encourage educational and medical institutions
        and other industries that bring higher wage employment opportunities. The City also draws
        revenues from entertainment and hospitality industries.
        Encouraging continued economic development in Orange will require a coordinated
        response to strong demands for industrial and commercial businesses. In addition, it will
        require provision of attractive, vibrant, and safe retail centers, and promotion of mixed-use
        developments in walkable environments. Understanding that the City will soon be a fully
        developed community facing competition from its neighbors, Orange will continue to
        support economic development activities through consolidation and redevelopment of
        properties and through adaptive reuse and rehabilitation of older buildings. The Economic
        Development Element outlines goals and policies that promote sustainable, market-driven
        economic growth and activity without compromising the City’s identity, heritage, or the
        quality of life of those who live, work, and play in Orange.
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  ED-1
REV. GPA NO. 2014-0001 (12/2015)

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
     Orange’s Vision for the Future, described in the General Plan Introduction, describes the
     importance of finding an appropriate balance between residential, commercial, and industrial
     demands. The vision encourages the City’s retail districts to seek incremental improvement,
     and promotes visually attractive commercial development, active public areas, high quality
     streetscapes, and innovative design within the public realm along major thoroughfares such
     as Chapman Avenue, Tustin Street, Katella Avenue, and Main Street. The vision includes the
     following objectives related to economic development:
         The City will strive to provide for a range of businesses including small, family-owned
          businesses and larger businesses that serve a regional market.
         The appearance and variety of commercial, retail, industrial, and employment centers will
          reflect the pride that residents have for Orange, as well as the long-term investments the
          City has made in its infrastructure.
         Orange will tap into the entertainment and hospitality markets by enabling development
          of high quality facilities strategically located near other regional tourist draws.
         Orange will continue to support educational and medical institutions and other industries
          that provide high paying jobs and are major contributors to the community.
Purpose of the Economic Development Element
     The purpose of the Economic Development Element is, first, to identify desirable economic
     development conditions and land uses that will enhance and promote business activity,
     employment growth, and economic stability. Second, it provides goals and policies that will
     foster economic growth and increase employment opportunities. The goals and policies
     established in the Element are intended to cultivate economic growth and fiscal
     improvement, while providing a flexible framework that adjusts to changes in the
     marketplace. This Element creates a framework for the City in which to initiate specific
     strategies and implementation programs.
     The Economic Development Element outlines economic strategies that allow the City to
     attract new businesses, promote retention and expansion of existing businesses, maintain a
     strong economic base, establish and reinforce its image and identity within the region, and
     identify future needs for infrastructure and capital facilities to foster new economic
     development opportunities. By analyzing the City’s General Fund expenditures and recurring
     revenues, this Element establishes policies focused on improving the City’s financial well-
     being. Based on land uses set forth in the Land Use Element, this Element generally
     addresses the City’s expected range of fiscal benefits (e.g., property tax, sales tax, and other
     revenue sources). Likewise, this Element outlines the anticipated General Fund operating
     expenditures (e.g., police and emergency services, fire protection, public works, community
     services, and general government services) that the City can expect. Economic Development
     Element policies also support the provision of housing suitable for Orange’s workforce.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   ED-2

                                                                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Scope and Content of the Economic Development Element
    The Economic Development Element forms the basis for the City’s overall economic policy
    related to business activity, employment growth, and fiscal balance. The Economic
    Development Element addresses employment stability and existing business retention, and
    encourages development of programs to recruit new businesses. Economic development
    policies can help preserve the culture and establish or refine the identity of commercial
    corridors and surrounding neighborhoods by retaining businesses that give character to the
    community. These policies can also help maintain a wide range of goods, services, and
    activities, and respond to local and regional commercial, retail, and industrial demands.
    The scope of the Economic Development Element also includes discussion regarding the
    types and intensities of land uses within key focus areas, addresses their appropriateness
    given forecasted market conditions, and discusses the role that land use policy plays in the
    economic health and stability of the community.
    The Economic Development Element is not a required element under State General Plan law.
    Nevertheless, the City recognizes the integral role and relationship that economic
    development has with the other elements of the General Plan in maintaining a high quality
    business and residential environment, and in promoting fiscal stability in Orange.
    The Economic Development Element consists of three sections:
    (1)      Introduction
    (2)      Issues, Goals, and Policies
    (3)      Economic Development Plan
    This Introduction describes the Element’s intent, organization, and relationships to other
    General Plan elements. Issues describe the key economic trends and factors that contribute
    to the economic growth and development of the community. Goals describe ideal outcomes
    regarding Orange’s economy as expressed by both private and public interests, and Policies
    provide recommendations to achieve the stated goals. The goals and policies are
    purposefully general. They establish a framework for more detailed implementation
    programs, initiatives, and strategies, which can be revised on an ongoing basis, responding
    to changes in market conditions or the City’s needs. The Economic Development Plan
    generally explains the programs that can be implemented according to Economic
    Development Element policies. Detailed descriptions of the various implementation
    programs recommended within this Element can be found in an Appendix to the General
    Plan.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
    The contents of all the General Plan elements are complementary and must be integrated to
    provide comprehensive and consistent guidelines. The issues, goals and policies addressed
    within the Economic Development Element are correlated with those in the Land Use,
    Growth Management, Infrastructure, Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation, Circulation
    & Mobility, Urban Design, and Housing Elements. Together, these elements address and
    minimize barriers to economic growth such as inadequate infrastructure or transportation
    systems, or physical conditions that may discourage investment in the City.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              ED-3

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
     The Land Use Element describes development within the built environment, such as land use
     designations, types of activities allowed, and densities/intensities for various locations in the
     City’s planning area. The Land Use Element sets forth plans to refine, and in some cases
     intensify, land uses within eight focus areas, some of which are located along many of the
     City’s most traveled roadway corridors. The focus areas, and the proposed land use plans
     within them, are designed to maximize the economic potential of long untapped or
     underutilized resources within the City, such as commuter rail, Chapman University, medical
     centers near South Main Street and on East Chapman Avenue, and freeway and transit
     access. Economic development and growth within these areas is enabled by the General Plan
     land use plan, and is the key to achieving the long-term fiscal objectives of the City.
     The goals and policies of the Growth Management and Infrastructure Elements ensure
     adequate circulation and infrastructure capacity to mitigate any undesired effects of growth
     by monitoring and phasing development, so it is concurrent with provision of infrastructure.
     Since many of the goals and policies expressed in these elements are implemented through
     tax revenues received by the City, the content of the Economic Development Element
     correlates directly to funding of public services.
     Business retention efforts of the Economic Development Element recognize the need to
     preserve the identity and culture of the City. Since much of the fundamental charm and
     attraction of Orange lies in the preservation of cultural and historical identity, the Cultural
     Resources & Historic Preservation Element should be read as a companion to this Element.
     Road capacity goals and policies addressed in the Circulation & Mobility Element also affect
     the type and mix of uses identified in the Economic Development Element. Changes in land
     use policy that promote economic development goals may result in congestion and reduce
     quality of life for residents, if not serviced with adequate road capacity.
     Physical deterioration of an area may discourage investors and developers from continuing
     business there. The appearance of industrial, commercial, and retail properties and
     streetscapes reflects the level of community pride and stewardship of Orange, and conveys a
     message about the quality of the community. For this reason, the contents of the Urban
     Design Element are coordinated with those of the Economic Development Element.
     The ability to attract new employers and to further develop existing ones is dependent on
     the provision of housing options that can accommodate a range of users. The Housing
     Element provides an assessment of suitable locations for residential in-fill development,
     identifies barriers to the development of affordable housing, and establishes policies and
     programs that direct infrastructure investments to support residential growth.
ISSUES, GOALS AND POLICIES
     Recognizing that economic development is a multi-faceted process that responds to
     changing demographic trends, the goals and policies of the Economic Development Element
     address seven issues: (1) maintaining fiscal diversity and balance among land uses; (2)
     retaining and expanding retail businesses and attracting new retail businesses to the City; (3)
     removing barriers to economic development; (4) improving the appearance of the City’s
     commercial, industrial, and office corridors; (5) strengthening the City’s economic base and
     stimulating employment growth; (6) ensuring the adequacy of technology and utility
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  ED-4

                                                                          ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
    infrastructure to support businesses; and (7) providing adequate local housing for
    employees.
Fiscal Diversity and Balance
    Orange’s local economy has expanded rapidly in recent years, diversifying in both services
    and retail sales. The following goals and policies allow the City to continue to promote a
    diverse range of retail, commercial, institutional, and industrial businesses, and to achieve a
    balance between revenue generation and service demands of land uses.
    GOAL 1.0         Sustain a diversified economic base and strong fiscal stability.
    Policy 1.1:      Provide for land uses that allow a variety of retail, service, manufacturing,
                     institutional, office, and recreational businesses to locate in Orange.
    Policy 1.2:      Retain the small, independent business character of Old Towne and other
                     areas where smaller, family-owned businesses flourish, while accommodating
                     national and regional retailers along major commercial corridors, and
                     encouraging corporate headquarters and offices in the City’s prominent
                     office and commercial areas.
    Policy 1.3:      Retain industrial land for businesses that provide jobs for manufacturing and
                     processing of goods and create local revenue sources.
    Policy 1.4:      Encourage physical expansion of manufacturing operations and research and
                     development businesses within light industrial and manufacturing areas.
    Policy 1.5:      Encourage new development and businesses that supplement smaller
                     components of the City’s retail base, such as apparel retailers, food stores,
                     and home furnishings and appliances.
    Policy 1.6:      Continue to utilize redevelopment as a financing tool for City-initiated
                     revitalization and to encourage and promote private investment.
    Policy 1.7:      Pursue a variety of funding approaches, including grants, impact fees,
                     assessments, and transportation funds in order to support public services,
                     municipal programs, and capital investments that support City businesses.
Retail Business Retention and Expansion
    Current employment trends indicate that retail activity ranks second to service industry in
    Orange. Both large corporate retailers and smaller independent businesses have been part of
    Orange for decades. To retain existing businesses, to encourage new retail developments
    and emerging industries, and to respond to changing community demographics, the City will
    work with both types of property owners to renovate and improve the appearance of
    existing retail centers. The City will increase development potential within key retail corridors
    to provide additional capacity for anticipated retail growth.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                ED-5

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
     GOAL 2.0         Cultivate a business environment that is conducive and appealing to the
                      commercial and retail industry, including smaller entrepreneurs.
     Policy 2.1:      Encourage public-private partnerships that will support business and
                      employment growth.
     Policy 2.2:      Increase local tax revenues by providing performance-based financial
                      assistance to new and existing businesses in Orange.
     Policy 2.3:      Periodically evaluate local sales tax, transient occupancy tax, business license
                      fees, and building permit fees to determine the effect of fees on local
                      businesses, or as a deterrent to new businesses, as well as to ensure
                      adequate revenues for the City.
     Policy 2.4:      Maintain adequate infrastructure, transportation systems, and physical
                      conditions that encourage retailers to invest in the City.
     Policy 2.5:      Encourage retention of existing retail businesses that will complement,
                      and/or locate within, new or larger retail businesses or centers.
Commercial and Industrial Base
     As of 2005, about 40 percent of people employed in Orange worked in the service industry,
     and around 10 percent worked in the manufacturing industry. In other words, nearly half of
     the employment force in Orange works in the service and manufacturing sectors. The City
     seeks to meet the needs of commerce and industry by strengthening and expanding the
     existing economic base. The proposed land uses described in the Land Use Element are
     anticipated to result in approximately 70.6 million square feet of nonresidential development
     at build-out, 35.7 million square feet more than current conditions. In addition, the Land Use
     Element advocates creation of a variety of mixed-use environments ranging from
     neighborhood-scale to urban scale.
     GOAL 3.0         Strengthen the City’s economic base and stimulate employment through
                      new commercial and industrial development and expansion.
     Policy 3.1:      Utilize the City’s Redevelopment resources to help make commercial and
                      industrial construction and development financially feasible.
     Policy 3.2:      Encourage public and private sector investments that promote commercial
                      development and expansion opportunities.
     Policy 3.3:      Provide a venue for businesses to discuss economic issues and opportunities
                      and to inform the public of various economic development and
                      redevelopment programs.
     Policy 3.4:      Encourage higher density residential and mixed-use projects to provide a
                      community-based workforce and market for industrial and commercial areas.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               ED-6

                                                                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Encouraging Economic Development
    Although the primary development of Orange has largely already taken place, the City can
    maximize its economic potential by identifying development opportunities on vacant or
    underutilized properties. The City can increase revenue and expand its employment base by
    refining development intensity within focus areas and by providing fiscal, zoning,
    infrastructure, and environmental support for business expansion. A key part of achieving a
    strong business climate and potential redevelopment of sites is to establish a friendly,
    professional environment to attract and retain businesses. Marketing and business outreach
    through various communication channels with both commercial tenants and property
    owners is vital. Available programs need to be flexible and should have the ability to adapt
    quickly to opportunities so as to retain important revenue-generating businesses in the
    community.
    GOAL 4.0         Encourage economic development efforts through                outreach  and
                     maintenance of a pro-active business environment.
    Policy 4.1:      Monitor land uses by business type ranging from entertainment to industrial
                     uses to help identify citywide growth opportunities and target markets.
    Policy 4.2:      Through land use policy and redevelopment efforts, work to reduce
                     deficiencies within prominent commercial corridors such as vacant and
                     underutilized land, irregularly shaped lots, deteriorated or outdated public
                     improvements and facilities, traffic congestion, excessive noise, poor air
                     quality, and deficient parking.
    Policy 4.3:      Where appropriate, consolidate inadequately sized land or land owned by
                     multiple owners into parcels suitable for integrated development with
                     improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
    Policy 4.4:      Maintain an active presence in the business community and engage in
                     outreach efforts with property owners, tenants, brokers, community
                     stakeholders, and local residents.
    Policy 4.5:      Encourage an environmentally friendly business atmosphere that maintains
                     local regulations favorable to clean industry, and provides assistance to
                     industries seeking to comply with environmental regulations.
Aesthetic Improvements
    The appearance of industrial, commercial, and retail properties and of the City as a whole
    reflects Orange’s level of community pride and stewardship. Financial assistance for property
    and façade improvements will provide an incentive for private reinvestment in businesses,
    which in turn can increase City sales tax revenues which can be reinvested in infrastructure.
    Aesthetic improvements may include signage, landscaping, and façade renovation on private
    properties as well as rehabilitation of public rights-of-way and context-oriented street
    lighting. These types of improvements will enhance the image of the City’s business districts
    for visitors and residents, and will improve business conditions in Orange.
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               ED-7

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
     GOAL 5.0          Improve economic viability of business districts through aesthetic
                       enhancement, reconstruction, rehabilitation, and elimination of physical
                       deterioration.
     Policy 5.1:       Eliminate and prevent physical deterioration and economic obsolescence by
                       implementing the Orange Merged and Amended Redevelopment Plan.
     Policy 5.2:       Improve the long-term economic viability of Katella Avenue, Chapman
                       Avenue, and Tustin Street by promoting upgrades to façades and aesthetics
                       of retail properties, as well as the streetscape in the public right-of-way.
     Policy 5.3:       Improve the long-term economic viability of Old Towne, South Main Street,
                       Katella Avenue, Uptown Orange, The Outlets at Orange, and the Town and
                       Country Road area by introducing mixed-use residential, commercial, and
                       office projects that are visually and economically compatible with their
                       surroundings.
     Policy 5.4:       Redevelop and rehabilitate underutilized and vacant lands and public rights-
                       of-way to stimulate development, and consider conversion of vacant lands to
                       community amenities.
     Policy 5.5:       Develop design guidelines, as needed, to encourage attractive development
                       and clear signage, without increasing costs or barriers to economic
                       development.
Infrastructure
     Economic growth depends on provision of adequate infrastructure. Office, educational, and
     institutional facilities rely on the Internet and fiber-optic technology to transmit information
     and maintain daily business operations. Retail, commercial, and industrial businesses rely on
     well-maintained road, sewer, and water infrastructure to transport goods, support
     operations, and maintain a strong customer base. Provision and maintenance of needed
     utilities and infrastructure will ensure long-term economic growth while improving efficiency
     and productivity of businesses.
     GOAL 6.0          Provide sufficient infrastructure         to  support    anticipated     economic
                       development and growth.
     Policy 6.1:       Provide and maintain infrastructure adequate to support growth and
                       expansion of commercial, industrial, and institutional areas, including water,
                       sewer, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drains, access, and parking
                       improvements.
     Policy 6.2:       Provide public improvements to support commercial, industrial and
                       institutional uses.
Housing for Employees
     Future uses proposed in the Land Use Element may result in about 66,850 housing units in
     Orange’s planning area. Much of the new housing will be part of mixed-use projects located
     near expanding retail, commercial, and office areas. To provide an affordable supply of
     housing for those employed in the City, development incentives will be allotted to
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 ED-8

                                                                          ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
    developers who include affordable workforce housing, consistent with the provisions of the
    City’s Housing Element. Since mixed-use developments combine housing and jobs in
    proximity to each other, they improve the ability of Orange residents to live closer to work,
    entertainment, and amenities, and could significantly decrease travel expenses and time lost
    to commuting, all ultimately improving quality of life in the community.
    GOAL 7.0         Encourage development and preservation of affordable workforce housing
                     to increase housing opportunities and improve quality of life for workers in
                     Orange.
    Policy 7.1:      Identify and market sites appropriate for housing development for all income
                     groups that will support adjacent commercial development.
    Policy 7.2:      Encourage mixed-use developments to provide housing close to employment
                     hubs for employees in all income segments and household types.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
    Orange provides a wide range and diversity of commercial, industrial, and institutional
    activities to local and regional consumers while maintaining its local culture and identity. The
    City benefits from proximity to major freeways and access to neighboring communities in the
    County of Orange. The City’s commercial districts and regional shopping centers are
    attractions for local tourists seeking a retail, dining, and entertainment destination. Two such
    destinations are The Block at Orange and the City’s Old Towne area, which is recognized as
    the largest historic district in California. The City’s economic health and continued growth will
    generate revenue and allow for funding increases to support public services and
    infrastructure.
    Orange will continue to attract visitors and enhance the quality of life of its residents by
    building on existing assets that include the City’s location, the historic charm of Old Towne,
    commuter rail, regional medical centers, educational institutions, and substantial natural
    areas. Part of the City’s economic development efforts will focus on identifying underutilized
    and vacant sites for development, and renovating and rehabilitating older or dilapidated
    buildings. Redeveloping blighted areas will also expand development opportunities. By
    carefully analyzing types of uses that generate revenue and demand for public services, and
    by implementing programs to address the needs of the business community, Orange will
    continue to grow and develop economically without compromising its character and charm.
    To strengthen the City’s economic profile, the City will:
       encourage mixed-use developments in strategic locations along and near major arterial
        corridors;
       continue to promote a diverse range of land uses that will sustain a strong economic tax
        base for the community;
       create a communication strategy to highlight economic development achievements and
        opportunities;
       conduct economic development and redevelopment workshops for the business
        community, including brokers, developers and community members;
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 ED-9

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
        support continued growth of commercial, institutional, and industrial businesses that
         contribute both high-wage employment opportunities and point-of-sales revenues; and
        provide policies that guide City decision makers through the budget process.
Focus Area Objectives
     The Economic Development Plan works within provisions of the Land Use Element that
     establish mixed-use areas, refining and in some cases increasing the development capacity of
     commercial and industrial areas. Targeting key focus areas in the City allows specific planning
     to enhance economic development activities.
     Each focus area presents varying constraints and opportunities that guide different
     approaches to land use and economic development objectives. Following is a summary of
     specific objectives for each area. Detailed descriptions of each area and maps depicting
     proposed land uses in each area are contained in the Land Use Element.
     Chapman Avenue/Tustin Street
        Emphasize continued commercial and multiple-family residential designations west of
         State Route (SR) 55.
        Promote viable open space recreation uses of Yorba Park, Grijalva Park, and Santiago
         Creek.
        Allow potential future commercial uses on the Yorba Park and OUSD Education Center
         sites in conjunction with on- or off-site parkland improvements.
        Maintain hospital and medical office uses at the Chapman Hospital site and allow for
         compatible integrated retail, housing, and civic uses.
     Katella Avenue Corridor
        Establish an active, vibrant, urban mixed-use gateway to the City featuring high-density
         residential uses.
        Capitalize on development of expanded entertainment uses and housing across the
         Santa Ana River in Anaheim.
        Enhance retail options and convenience throughout west Orange.
        Maintain Katella Avenue’s commercial nature with neighborhood-scale mixed-use
         developments that transition into adjacent residential areas.
     South Main Street Corridor
        Encourage compatible and integrated residential, commercial, and office uses.
        Encourage compatible and integrated residential, commercial, and office uses, either as
         multiple-story projects with ground-floor retail, or as stand-alone projects.
        Encourage pedestrian connections to transit along surrounding arterial corridors, as well
         as adjacent shopping and hospital facilities.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               ED-10

                                                                    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
  Promote development of a medical corridor that capitalizes on existing hospital and
   medical uses.
West Chapman Avenue/Uptown Orange
  Encourage integrated commercial retail, professional and medical office, housing, and
   civic uses.
  Provide convenient transit access, innovative housing options, and pedestrian-oriented
   design.
  Require new development projects to provide community open space areas and retain or
   improve access to the Santa Ana River Trail.
Old Towne and Santa Fe Depot
  Reduce residential densities in many areas of Old Towne.
  Continue to protect and enhance Old Towne’s historic character.
  Introduce neighborhood-scale mixed-use along Glassell Street and Chapman Avenue and
   adjacent to the Burlington Northern/Santa Fe (BNSF) railroad.
  Encourage the adaptive re-use of existing industrial/commercial areas and the creation of
   transit-oriented developments around the historic Santa Fe Depot.
  Maintain and enhance Old Towne’s walkability.
  Provide for continued use and enhancement of the civic center, including City Hall and
   the Orange Public Library & Local History Center.
Industrial Areas
  Decrease the maximum allowed intensity within areas located west of Batavia Street and
   generally south of Grove Avenue to help discourage professional office uses within this
   area in favor of true industrial uses.
  Provide room for expansion of current businesses and infill of vacant properties in
   remaining portions of this area by increasing the maximum allowed development
   intensity.
  Preserve the single-family residential character of the Cully Drive neighborhood.
Lemon Street Corridor
  Establish a corridor of well-insulated, higher density residential uses, gradually
   transitioning, from west to east into a single-family residential area.
Eckhoff Street/Orangewood Avenue
  Recognize the potential of areas north of Orangewood Avenue to continue to provide
   options for lower-scale office uses and business-park oriented light industrial uses, as
   well as warehouse and distribution uses.
  Expand current neighborhood-scale office activities along Orangewood Avenue.
                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         ED-11

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Fiscal Diversity and Balance
     According to projections published by California State University, Fullerton’s Center for
     Demographic Research (OCP 2006), Orange County’s population is projected to grow by
     approximately 15 percent between 2006 and 2030. The number of jobs within the County is
     projected to grow by approximately 22 percent within this same timeframe. To
     accommodate this anticipated regional growth, demand for both office and retail space will
     increase. According to OCP 2006, Orange’s population is expected to increase 16 percent and
     employment is expected to increase by about 8 percent. Most of the new population will be
     distributed between higher density infill mixed-use developments within the western
     portions of the City, or in newer suburban environments in east Orange. Because most of the
     anticipated retail and commercial growth will result from intensification of existing
     commercial nodes, such projected residential development will strengthen the market. The
     City will encourage mixed-use developments, including projects with affordable rental
     housing and businesses that complement the jobs available in Orange.
     Redevelopment Dissolution
     In 1983, the Orange Redevelopment Agency established the Tustin Street Redevelopment
     Project Area. In subsequent years, the Southwest Redevelopment Project Area (1984) and
     the Northwest Redevelopment Project Area (1988) were established. In 2001, the Agency
     Board approved a comprehensive plan amendment which merged the three project areas
     into one, which is now known as the Orange Merged and Amended Redevelopment Project
     Area. Figure ED-1 identifies the location and boundaries of the Merged Project Area.
     Economic development and redevelopment activities in a project area were funded primarily
     with property “tax increment” dollars. When a project area was formed, property taxes
     within that area are frozen at a base year. Tax dollars below this base year are distributed to
     taxing agencies such as county, fire, and school districts as if the redevelopment project area
     did not exist. When property taxes within the project area increase as a result of increased
     property values, the amount over the frozen base year is referred to as “tax increment.” In
     2011, Assembly Bill X1 26 came into effect which dissolved redevelopment agencies as of
     February 1, 2012 and a Successor Agency was created for each former redevelopment agency.
     The responsibility of the Successor Agency to the Orange Redevelopment Agency (Successor
     Agency) is to facilitate redevelopment wind-down activities.
     Economic Development Activities
     Economic development covers a wide spectrum of activities focused toward creation and
     maintenance of a healthy local economy including: business retention; encouraging
     expansion and growth of new business; exploring new opportunities to attract new start-up
     businesses; and, encouraging job retention and promoting new job creation. Enhancing and
     maintaining the City’s economic base through increased sales and property tax dollars to the
     City’s General Fund area also essential economic development efforts to sustain delivery of
     services to residents and businesses.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              ED-12

ED-13 Figure ED-1 Redevelopment Project Are
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                     (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                              ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                     ED-14
                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Assembly Bill 562 and Sales Tax Sharing Program
In 103, the State Legislature and Governor Brown approved Assembly Bill 562 (AB 562) which
went into effect on January 1, 2014. This new legislation provided expanded flexibility for
local agencies and cities to create and retain jobs as well as incentivize business retention
and attraction efforts through sales tax sharing and other financial assistance.
The City’s Sales Tax Sharing Program provides for economic development incentives
whereby the City and the owner of an existing or new business that generates sales tax
revenue to the benefit of the City may enter into a Participation Agreement. These
agreements would occur when businesses desire to:
        Establish, expand and/or consolidate business operations.
        Retain and/or create new jobs.
        Undertake upgrade and/or significant upgrade of property.
        Generate a minimum of $10 million in annual tax sales to the City.
Business Development and Outreach
The Business Enhancement Support Team (BEST Team) works to eliminate development
constraints of environmental, physical, or economic origin through public collaboration and
assisting private partnerships through a streamlined entitlement process. The BEST Team
works to understand private development and investment toward public infrastructure
improvements, and seeks to stimulate economic growth through property upgrades and job
creation. These objectives also emphasize the
need to strengthen the City’s economic base by
identifying specific economic opportunities,
promoting incentive programs, and facilitating
business development.
Additionally, in the area of business development
the City will continue to monitor property
conditions throughout the community over time,
and through ongoing business outreach with
local brokers will evaluate areas and/or territory,
and will promote development of high quality         Orange will continue to encourage attraction and
live-work mixed-use projects within focus areas      retention of small, independent entrepreneurs as
                                                     part of its long-range economic strategy.
designated for mixed-use development.
Fiscal Balance
Cities achieve fiscal balance by effectively budgeting and managing revenues and
expenditures. Policies that encourage diverse revenue sources and that monitor costs will
ensure a strong, sustainable economic base in Orange. Achieving fiscal balance means
capturing sufficient tax revenue to support public services. In Orange, fiscal balance will
require strengthening underrepresented economic sectors that bring revenue to the City. To
                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         ED-15

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
     minimize local economic downturns due to heavy reliance on a limited number of market
     sectors, Orange will continue to promote the diversity of businesses already present in the
     City.
     Revenues
     General Fund revenues are collected from taxes and are used to provide local government
     services such as public safety, planning and building services, park maintenance, library and
     recreation services, and other expenditures not required by law to be restricted to a separate
     fund. The General Fund represents nearly half of the City’s total revenues. In recent years,
     General Fund revenues have steadily risen.
     Tax revenues, which include sales, property, transient occupancy, and other taxes, account
     for a large portion of total General Fund revenues. Other sources of revenue are motor
     vehicle license fees, service fees, licenses, and permits. Among tax revenues, sales taxes are
     the single most important source of revenue for the City. Orange receives an equivalent one
     percent share of the total value of transactions at City-based businesses that are subject to
     sales tax. The largest recent increases in taxable sales in Orange are associated with auto
     dealerships and “big box” retailers.
     Ensuring adequate revenue to finance public facilities, services, and utilities requires a strong
     economic base. Orange’s economic base can be strengthened by encouraging small,
     independent entrepreneurship, providing incentives for industrial, office, and larger
     commercial businesses, and attracting new private investments focused on revitalizing and
     redeveloping areas. The City will continue to work to eliminate constraints and encourage
     the productive use of underutilized and vacant sites, and will promote lot consolidations in
     areas characterized by smaller parcels and multiple property ownerships.
     Expenditures
     The General Fund serves as the primary funding source for the operating portion of the City’s
     budget and provides money for expenditures that support ongoing programming. General
     Fund expenditures include general government, public safety, public works, community
     services, library services, community development, and non-departmental activities.
     City government is labor intensive; consequently, labor costs (salaries and benefits) account
     for a large portion of the outlay. Over three-quarters of total general fund expenditures are
     spent on salaries and benefits. The Police and Fire Departments typically have the largest
     operating budgets among City departments and services.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               ED-16

                                                                           ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Retail Business Retention and Expansion
    Retail businesses in Orange are located primarily along Tustin Street, Katella Avenue,
    Chapman Avenue, and The City Drive. Major retail centers include The Block at Orange in
    west Orange on The City Drive south of Chapman Avenue, The Village at Orange on North
    Tustin Street, and the Stadium Promenade on West Katella Avenue. As a major retail and
    entertainment center, The Block at Orange attracts local residents and regional customers.
    Existing and future growth in the adjacent Anaheim Platinum Triangle and the University of
    California-Irvine Medical Center expansion further support the Uptown area’s regional
    attraction. The Urban Mixed-use designation for The Block at Orange and the surrounding
    area presents opportunities to develop additional retail, office, residential, and
    entertainment uses. The Village at Orange is a regional lifestyle shopping center featuring
    traditional department store anchor tenants and regional retailers. The potential future
    Meats Avenue interchange along SR-55 would increase accessibility to the Village at Orange
    along an important north-south roadway. Stadium Promenade includes entertainment and
    retail businesses, and is located adjacent to Anaheim’s Platinum Triangle and across the
    Santa Ana River from the proposed Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center
    (ARTIC) transit station. Stadium Promenade will serve as a prominent western gateway into
    the City. To capitalize on the increased population within the adjacent area, and to
    successfully incorporate the benefits of increased transit use, this area will accommodate a
    higher concentration of mixed entertainment, retail, and residential uses. Areas further east
    along Katella Avenue, between Batavia Street and Glassell Street, will be retained as a highly-
                                                                           productive         commercial
                                                                           district, and will continue as
                                                                           home          to       several
                                                                           automobile        dealerships.
                                                                           East of Glassell Street,
                                                                           neighborhood-scale mixed-
                                                                           use      development       will
                                                                           provide a transition from
                                                                           commercial retail uses to
                                                                           mixed-use neighborhoods
                                                                           between Glassell Street and
                                                                           California              Street.
                                                                           Commercial        uses     will
                                                                           continue to surround the
    The current Stadium Promenade site provides exciting opportunities for
    Orange to capture its share of the entertainment and tourist market
                                                                           Katella Avenue and Tustin
    generated by Disneyland and Angels Stadium.                            Street intersection.
    The success of the City’s commercial and retail areas lies in their proximity to major
    transportation corridors, and in possessing a wide range of retail businesses that provide
    diverse goods and services and a variety of shopping and entertainment experiences.
    Challenges to the City’s retail market include financing the rehabilitation of older buildings
    and infrastructure, improving the availability of parking, and implementing design guidelines
    that will improve signage, create attractive public spaces within commercial corridors, and
    preserve the historic character of Old Towne. Redevelopment and improved financing of
    both public facilities and services will strengthen the City’s economic base and can improve
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   ED-17

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
     the physical appearance of these corridors. New mixed-use designations will both increase
     the market for commercial areas, and allow for expansion.
Commercial and Industrial Base
     The City’s commercial market offers diverse shopping
     opportunities, goods, and services for a broad range of
     tastes and socioeconomic groups. The proximity of
     commercial areas to major transportation corridors,
     and the planned expansion and renovation of these
     areas outlined in the Land Use Element will provide
     growth and expansion opportunities for commercial
     businesses, particularly retail businesses. Even though
     these commercial uses are vulnerable to fluctuations in
     the local and regional markets, and developable land is
     growing      scarce,     mixed-use      expansions    and
     redevelopment of parcels along major corridors will
     provide new business opportunities as the City
     approaches a more highly developed condition. The
     City will continue to support smaller industries and
     businesses that provide job growth and tax revenue. By
     diversifying both its tax and employment base, the City
     will continue to improve its fiscal viability.
                                                                 Supplementing the City’s strong
     Orange’s industrial uses are concentrated in the commercial and industrial sectors,
     northwest area of the City, generally north and south of Orange’s institutions, including St.
     Katella Avenue, and west of Glassell Street, with Joseph Hospital, provide valuable skilled
                                                                 employment opportunities.
     consistent, strong demand from small businesses. The
     area consists of a mix of warehouses, light industrial
     uses, and flexible office spaces catering to incubator or “home grown” companies. Key
     advantages offered by the City’s industrial areas include proximity to high-end housing in
     Orange and surrounding communities for company executives, a central location, convenient
     freeway access, and the opportunity to capture displaced industrial tenants from the
     Platinum Triangle area. Even with high demand for industrial spaces, growth is limited due to
     lack of available land. To promote industrial growth and increase employment opportunities,
     the City encourages consolidation of small parcels with multiple owners, concentrates
     redevelopment on smaller sites, and has refined or increased the buildable capacity of
     industrial areas to be responsive to demand by adjusting maximum permitted Floor-area
     Ratios (FARs).
Encouraging Economic Development
     Strategies for promoting economic development in Orange include potential reuse and
     redevelopment of underutilized properties and irregularly shaped parcels. One challenge
     existing in Orange today is the lack of appropriate sites for larger retail developments. The
     City must compete with adjacent retail centers in neighboring cities such as Main Place Mall
     in Santa Ana and the Platinum Triangle and Garden Walk projects in Anaheim. The local
     market is also vulnerable to fluctuations in the Southern California economy.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                ED-18

                                                                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
    To facilitate commercial development on underutilized sites, the City encourages site
    consolidation where feasible and desirable to provide parcels appropriately sized and
    configured to support larger retail and office development. The City also will support site
    assessments to determine the status of potential environmental contamination.
    Orange’s large industrial area is located in the northwestern portion of the City, and is
    characterized by a broad mix of business park, office, manufacturing, warehousing and
    commercial uses. Over time, market forces may create a demand for more office space in the
    industrial area, or for more intense business park or warehouse uses than are currently
    present. Considering ways to increase the intensity of uses throughout the City’s industrial
    areas will encourage more productive use of limited land resources. Demand for industrial
    and office use in this area is strong, particularly among those who want to own their
    buildings. Therefore, the City seeks to preserve the primary industrial land use found in this
    area and to encourage intensification and/or redevelopment of underutilized parcels.
    Areas with incompatible uses often require mitigation efforts to address negative impacts. The
    City will buffer industrial and residential uses from each other with commercial uses or other
    higher intensity uses to protect residential areas from exposure to truck traffic, to the
    transport of hazardous materials, and to excessive noise associated with industrial uses. Within
    industrial areas, the City will encourage recruitment and retention of environmentally safe and
    clean manufacturers to ensure that expansion of industrial areas can occur without increasing
    the risk to residents and employees from potential exposure to hazardous materials and
    wastes.
Aesthetic Improvements
    The quaint streets of Old Towne and the postmodern attractions at The Block at Orange and
    The Village at Orange display the City’s appreciation for a variety of aesthetic styles. Funds to
    support renovation and rehabilitation are returned through tax revenue generated by
    regional and local clientele, who enjoy the upgraded look and feel of Orange’s retail centers.
    In addition, mixed-use areas will increase the opportunity for aesthetically pleasing
    commercial and residential development along some of the City’s major corridors while
    promoting both walkability and a sustainable lifestyle.
    Areas already characterized by strong design features are the result of implementation of
    design guidelines the City has adopted in certain locations. The City can complement the
    economic and aesthetic contributions of its thriving retail centers by focusing aesthetic
    improvements in additional areas along Lincoln Avenue, Tustin Street, and Katella Avenue, and
    by removing barriers and capturing economic opportunities present in each area. Creating a
    streetscape program and design guidelines, and using economic development resources and
    funds where possible will contribute toward achieving the City’s aesthetic and economic goals
    in these areas.
    Furthermore, the City emphasizes specific programs to improve aesthetics along commercial
    corridors, such as placing entryway signs on major corridors near the City’s boundary,
    developing landscape guidelines to extend landscape and hardscape design throughout the
    City, and paying attention to design in transitional areas between commercial and residential
    areas. Implementing the Old Towne Design Standards and Infill Residential Design Guidelines
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              ED-19

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
     and updating other design guidelines throughout the City in tandem with economic
     development plans will ensure aesthetic improvements and improve economic viability.
     More information and policies related to urban design and aesthetic improvements within
     the City’s commercial and mixed-use corridors are provided in the Urban Design Element.
Infrastructure
                                                                                 Fiscal growth and business
                                                                                 expansion, both within the
                                                                                 Project Area and throughout
                                                                                 the City, depends on
                                                                                 provision     of     adequate
                                                                                 infrastructure and necessary
                                                                                 public     services.    These
                                                                                 services ensure the safety,
                                                                                 cleanliness,               and
                                                                                 communication             that
                                                                                 businesses rely on in order
                                                                                 to carry out daily operations.
                                                                                 In effect, inadequate public
                                                                                 services and infrastructure
                                                                                 will curtail expansion of
      Orange’s Redevelopment Agency considers development and                    retail,   commercial,     and
      rehabilitation of affordable family housing with emphasis on low and very- industrial businesses; will
      low income families as one of its highest priorities.
                                                                                 reduce job opportunities;
                                                                                 and will create blight over
     the long term. Adequate infrastructure will allow businesses to expand and will provide room
     for new businesses to develop without making burdensome demands on the City’s
     infrastructure.
     To ensure proper services and infrastructure, the City has created and continues to update
     plans for drainage, sewer operations, and water management. The City also monitors the
     status of its infrastructure and of public utilities such as gas, electricity, and
     telecommunications. To address aging of the water, sewer, and storm drain infrastructures;
     to deliver clean water; and to ensure proper waste collection; Orange gauges current and
     future needs and charges fees to fund needed upgrades and replacements. The City also
     implements infrastructure policies in its Economic Development Strategy Plan to address
     inadequacies pertaining to storm drains, signalization, and slow progress in placing utilities
     underground. More information and policies related to the infrastructure needed to support
     economic growth and expanded employment are provided in the Infrastructure Element.
Housing for Employees
     The supply of adequate housing in and around Orange is directly related to the health and
     expansion of the City’s economy. State law (Health and Safety Code Section 33070) declares
     the importance of providing housing and employment opportunities for all people. It also
     states that “unfit housing and lack of employment opportunity depend on each other to
                                             ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                       ED-20

                                                                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
    perpetuate a system of dependency and hopelessness which drains the state of its valuable
    financial and human resources” (Health and Safety Code Section 33070).
    Among the fundamental purposes of redevelopment are expansion of the supply of low- and
    moderate-income housing, and expansion of employment opportunities for jobless and
    underemployed persons. To accomplish this, the Agency is required to set aside at least 20
    percent of its tax increment revenues to increase, improve, and preserve low- and moderate-
    income housing. The City and the Agency aim to rehabilitate and repair the current supply of
    housing, to provide new construction of low- and moderate-income housing, to provide
    special-needs housing, to replace affordable housing that has been eliminated as a result of
    redevelopment, and to integrate affordable housing within new residential development.
    Although the City lacks an abundance of vacant land for residential use and faces
    competition from planned developments in surrounding cities, Orange is a prime location for
    residential developments because of its proximity to major employment centers and
    amenities, its high quality of life, and its high existing demand for a range of housing types.
    To improve quality of life for workers in Orange, the City will continue to provide a wide
    variety of housing options that suit the needs of residents of all income groups and
    household types. To increase the existing housing supply, the City has increased the amount
    of land designated for mixed-use development and identified sites suitable for housing
    development for local and regional employees. More information, including policies and
    programs related to provision of affordable and accessible housing in the City, are provided
    in the Housing Element.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPLEMENTATION
    The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of
    City plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing
    collaboration with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation
    measures for policies in this Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               ED-21

                                                                    LAND USE
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
        The Land Use Element describes the desired future physical and
        economic composition of Orange’s planning area and the planned
        relationship of uses. The primary objectives of the Element are to
        determine the future location, type, and intensity of new
        development and redevelopment projects, and to establish the
        desired mix and relationship between such projects to maximize
        the long-term livability of the community.
        The City also seeks to achieve a number of additional objectives, consistent with Orange’s
        Vision for the Future, described in the General Plan Introduction. These objectives include:
           Providing policy guidance for Orange’s future based on innovative land use planning
            techniques, unifying the developed portion of the City with east Orange, and expressing
            community values.
           Encouraging a variety of semi-rural, suburban, and urban neighborhood living
            environments.
           Protecting and enhancing the City’s historic core, and expanding historic preservation
            efforts to other neighborhoods within the City.
           Encouraging new residential, commercial, industrial, and public uses within established
            focus areas.
           Supporting a multi-modal circulation network that accommodates vehicles, pedestrians,
            cyclists, hikers, and equestrians.
           Managing future development in a manner that ensures adequate and timely public
            services and infrastructure.
           Improving the appearance and variety of the City’s commercial, retail, industrial, and
            employment centers.
           Enabling development of high quality entertainment-oriented mixed-use projects
            strategically located near regional tourist draws.
           Expanding open space areas and promoting completion of a trail system.
           Protecting critical watersheds and other natural and open space resources.
                                           ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  LU-1
(REV. 12/15, GPA 2014-0001)

LAND USE
     The Land Use Element provides a key policy foundation for the entire General Plan. Through
     the use of text and diagrams, the Land Use Element establishes clear and logical patterns of
     land use as well as standards for new development. The goals and policies contained in this
     Element establish a constitutional framework for future land use planning and decision-
     making in the City.
     Another important feature of this Element is the Land Use Policy Map, which indicates the
     location, density, and intensity of development for all land uses citywide. The proposed land
     use designations identify the types and nature of development permitted throughout the
     planning area. The goals and policies contained in this Element are designed to ensure land
     use diversity and balanced development; encourage mixed-use development; promote
     commercial enterprise in Orange; encourage high quality industrial development; maintain
     and enhance the role of Old Towne within the community; encourage an efficient and
     responsible relationship between land use, transit, open space, and areas of environmental
     sensitivity; ensure City interests are achieved through inter-jurisdictional and regional
     planning; and encourage public involvement in land use planning decisions.
Purpose of the Land Use Element
     The Land Use Element is one of seven elements required by the State to be included in
     Orange’s General Plan. The Land Use Element directs and defines development patterns by
     designating allowable uses, requirements, and locations for both existing and future
     development. This Element has the most wide-ranging scope in the General Plan, and affects
     all of the others. Although the interpretation of the Land Use Element is the responsibility of
     the community’s policymakers, this vision of long-term land use will influence short-term
     plans such as infill development, Specific Plans, and public works investments.
Scope and Content of the Land Use Element
     The Land Use Element is divided into three sections:
          (1) Introduction
          (2) Issues, Goals, and Policies
          (3) Land Use Plan
     The Introduction defines the purpose, scope, and content of the Land Use Element, and its
     relationship to other General Plan Elements. The Issues, Goals, and Policies section describes
     the City’s intent to encourage diverse land uses that foster a vibrant and sustainable
     community, and to coordinate planning and public participation activities in determining
     future land uses. The Land Use Plan section communicates how these goals and policies will
     be implemented through land use diagrams and maps depicting assigned land uses,
     locations, and the extent of future use envisioned by the community.
     The Land Use Plan complies with the requirements of the Land Use Element as stated in
     Section 65302 of California’s Government Code. Land uses requiring future planning include
     “housing, business, industry, open space, forest/timber, agriculture, natural resources,
     recreation, scenic beauty, education, public buildings and land, solid and liquid waste
     disposal facilities, and other public and private uses of land.” The Land Use Plan also
     establishes standards for residential density and non-residential building intensity for
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-2

                                                                                          LAND USE
    designated land uses citywide, and it expresses the community’s vision for revitalization of
    eight focus areas located throughout the City.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
    The Land Use Element serves as a guide for future development in the City and determines
    many key issues examined in the remaining Elements. For example, different land uses
    generate various trip demands, which influence the capacity and service levels of Orange’s
    transportation systems. The Circulation & Mobility Element lays out future transportation
    services and routes designed to meet the demands of both existing and future development.
    Future residential development described in the Land Use Element affects the City’s housing
    goals, programs and objectives, which are discussed in the Housing Element. Land use
    decisions and the City’s long-range economic development strategy are also directly inter-
    related. This Element proposes new development strategies for a number of the City’s most
    important commercial corridors, and advocates intensification of certain areas as mixed-use
    corridors and urban office and employment centers. These Land Use Element policies are
    directly related to the long-range policies of the Economic Development Element.
    The Land Use Element also designates areas to be used as open spaces, areas for parks and
    recreation, and areas for conservation and preservation of natural resources. Goals and
    policies regarding the preservation and maintenance of these areas are also addressed in the
    Natural Resources Element.
    Land uses defined in the Land Use Element are also affected by the Urban Design Element.
    The goals and policies of the Urban Design Element address physical characteristics of the
    community, such as building massing, concentration, setbacks, and landscaping features that
    affect land use requirements. The Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element
    expresses the City’s strategy for requiring preservation of structures and areas that carry
    historic significance.
    Growth and development patterns in Orange are to be managed in a way that does not
    overwhelm or reduce the quality of services provided by the City’s infrastructure system. The
    goals and policies of the Growth Management and Infrastructure Elements are related to the
    contents of the Land Use Element because they affect land use designations and
    requirements.
    Safety and noise abatement issues also relate to land uses. To comply with noise level
    requirements, land use designations are determined in tandem with noise contour maps in
    the Noise Element. Provisions are made within the Noise Element to allow higher noise levels
    within the mixed-use environments promoted within the Land Use Element. To mitigate or
    avoid damage and injury from natural and human-caused hazards, hazards maps in the Safety
    Element must also be consistent with the Land Use Element.
ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
    The goals, policies, and implementation programs of the Land Use Element address eight
    citywide issues, as well as issues pertaining to eight focus areas identified within the City.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-3

LAND USE
     Citywide land use issues represent opportunities to improve the way land is currently used
     and the way future land use is planned. These opportunities capitalize on existing community
     assets, such as hospitals, universities and colleges, transportation networks, and natural
     features. Land use issues include: (1) ensuring land use diversity and balanced development;
     (2) encouraging mixed-use development for purposes of promoting convenient and efficient
     relationships between housing, employment, services, and transit; (3) promoting commercial
     enterprise in Orange; (4) encouraging high quality industrial development; (5) maintaining
     and enhancing the role of Old Towne within the community; (6) considering and promoting
     the contextual and environmental compatibility of various land uses; (7) ensuring City
     interests are achieved through inter-jurisdictional and regional planning; and (8) encouraging
     public involvement in land use planning decisions.
Land Use Diversity and Balanced Development
     A well-balanced community provides a broad range of housing and business opportunities as
     well as recreational, institutional, and cultural activities that serve Orange’s diverse
     population and enhance the overall living environment. By encouraging a mix of land uses,
     the City can create an active and diverse environment that complements all lifestyles and
     supports neighborhoods. The City will continue to work toward creating a balanced
     inventory of land uses that meets the housing needs of all income groups and household
     types, creates a stable employment and tax base, maintains logical relationships between
     land uses and community assets, and provides residents with a diverse range of recreational
     opportunities.
     GOAL 1.0:       Meet the present and future needs of all residential and business sectors
                     with a diverse and balanced mix of land uses.
     Policy 1.1:     Maintain a land use structure that balances jobs and housing with available
                     infrastructure and public and human services.
     Policy 1.2:     Balance economic gains from new development while preserving the
                     character and densities of residential neighborhoods.
     Policy 1.3:     Provide a range of housing densities and types to meet the diverse needs and
                     lifestyles of residents.
     Policy 1.4:     Ensure that new development reflects existing design standards, qualities,
                     and features that are in context with nearby development.
     Policy 1.5:     Prioritize recreation and open space uses at Irvine Lake and protect historic
                     visual resources in east Orange.
     Policy 1.6:     Minimize effects of new development on the privacy and character of
                     surrounding neighborhoods.
     Policy 1.7:     Provide a range of open space and park amenities to meet the diverse needs
                     of current and new residents.
Encouraging Mixed-use
     Development opportunities for creative commercial, residential, office, or mixed-use centers
     are emerging within older commercial corridors throughout the City. Three different styles of
     mixed-use are defined in the Land Use Plan and are implemented through five land use
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-4

                                                                                        LAND USE
    designations. The three mixed-use styles are Neighborhood, Old Towne, and Urban. Future
    development options for these mixed-use areas rely on high quality, pedestrian-oriented
    design, incorporation of community open spaces, and full integration of alternative
    transportation modes. Successful completion of high quality mixed-use projects in Orange
    will assist the City in accomplishing multiple objectives concerned with housing, circulation,
    land use, economic vitality, recreation, and the environment.
    GOAL 2.0:        Create successful, high quality mixed-use districts consisting of a mix of
                     residential, commercial, office, civic, and common open space land uses,
                     supported by alternative modes of transportation.
    Policy 2.1:      Encourage development of mixed-use projects to revitalize older commercial
                     areas throughout the City and industrial areas surrounding the historic Santa
                     Fe Depot.
    Policy 2.2:      Encourage transfers of development rights within areas designated Urban
                     Mixed-use on the Land Use Policy Map to promote development of high-rise
                     office and residential structures at compatible locations.
    Policy 2.3:      Encourage transfers of development rights within areas designated
                     Neighborhood Mixed-use and Old Towne Mixed-use on the Land Use Policy
                     Map to promote historic preservation and creation of open spaces accessible
                     to the community.
    Policy 2.4:      Encourage mixed-use projects that contain a variety of compatible uses, and
                     provide necessary supporting public and community facilities.
    Policy 2.5:      Minimize traffic and parking impacts of proposed mixed-use projects.
    Policy 2.6:      Encourage linkage in and around mixed-use areas using a multi-modal
                     circulation network, particularly transit, pedestrian sidewalks, paths and
                     paseos, and bicycle and trail systems.
    Policy 2.7:      Ensure that the architecture, landscape design, and site planning of mixed-
                     use projects are of the highest quality, and that they emphasize a pedestrian
                     orientation and safe, convenient access between uses.
    Policy 2.8:      Ensure that adequate gathering areas or plazas are incorporated within
                     mixed-use projects and areas to allow for social interaction and community
                     activities.
    Policy 2.9:      Encourage mixed-use development to include ground floor retail.
Vibrant Commercial Districts
    Commercial activities continue to play an important role in shaping the City. Business
    activities provide jobs and revenue that support important community services. Much of the
    City’s revenue comes from sales tax generated by commercial establishments. The City will
    continue to revitalize and improve the appearance of aging commercial districts. The City will
    encourage land use patterns and development standards that promote vibrant commercial
    activities, take advantage of existing land use assets, assist existing businesses that want to
    expand, promote the local economy and existing establishments, and reinforce the
    relationship between neighborhoods and adjacent business districts with respect to goods,
    services, and employment.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-5

LAND USE
     GOAL 3.0:        Create commercial uses that provide a solid economic base and employment
                      opportunities and identify Orange as an attractive and diverse shopping
                      destination.
     Policy 3.1:      Promote development of revenue-generating land uses that help defray the
                      costs of high quality public services.
     Policy 3.2:      Actively promote the City as a place to shop and conduct business, and
                      encourage local patronage of Orange businesses.
     Policy 3.3:      Improve vehicular, pedestrian, and visual connections between commercial
                      areas and the rest of the community.
     Policy 3.4:      Discourage commercial and industrial enterprises that have significant
                      adverse soil, air, water, or noise impacts.
Sustainable Industrial and Office Uses
     Providing options for industrial development and office uses within the City is important,
     because these uses contribute to the economic wellbeing and the employment base of the
     community. Industrial development in Orange and throughout the region has changed
     significantly in recent years. Although traditional manufacturing activities continue to be a
     key component of Orange’s industrial areas, many such businesses have been replaced by
     warehousing uses and modern office uses that are more attractive in appearance and more
     compatible with adjacent neighborhoods. In some instances, large buildings and warehouses
     that once housed manufacturing or agriculture-oriented activities are now available for
     adapting to future residential, office, or commercial uses. In addition, Orange has
     experienced increased demand for larger, multi-story professional office complexes at
     locations such as South Main Street, Town and Country Road, La Veta Avenue, and The City
     Drive. Demand has also increased for medical office space surrounding local hospitals. The
     City will emphasize the important role industry continues to play in the community’s future,
     will encourage continued development of professional offices, and will ensure that the
     quality of the environment is not compromised by industrial uses.
     GOAL 4.0:        Encourage high quality, sustainable, industrial and office uses that provide
                      jobs and revenue; support environmental quality; and promote options for
                      adaptive re-use.
     Policy 4.1:      Maximize use of limited land resources for industrial and office uses within
                      areas designated Light Industrial or Industrial on the Land Use Policy Map.
     Policy 4.2:      Encourage development of professional office space located near medical
                      institutions and County facilities.
     Policy 4.3:      Protect residents and the environment from potential adverse soil, air, water,
                      and noise impacts of industrial operations.
     Policy 4.4:      Encourage development of mixed office, industrial, and support commercial
                      uses in areas designated Light Industrial on the Land Use Policy Map.
     Policy 4.5:      Accommodate a wide variety of industrial uses that contribute to a healthy
                      and diverse economic base.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 LU-6

                                                                                          LAND USE
Old Towne Orange
    When people think of Orange, they often think of the historic downtown district and
    adjoining residential neighborhoods. Old Towne Orange is an active, vibrant area that
    supports a variety of commercial, office, civic, and residential uses. In recent years, the City
    has taken steps to enable long-term preservation of many historic properties in the Old
    Towne area. This has created one of California’s most viable and recognized historic districts.
    The historic Santa Fe Depot, associated Metrolink station, and Orange County Transportation
    Authority (OCTA) Transportation Center provide valuable commuting options. Land use
    policies for Old Towne call for targeted growth in the area near the Santa Fe Depot, to be
    achieved through increased density and more walkable and transit-oriented development.
    This area also provides opportunities for adaptive reuse of historic industrial buildings.
    GOAL 5.0:       Maintain and enhance the vibrant, transit-accessible, pedestrian-friendly,
                    and livable character of Old Towne’s neighborhoods and commercial core.
    Policy 5.1:     Promote targeted development of mixed-use, transit-oriented development
                    surrounding the Santa Fe Depot to achieve development intensities
                    compatible with the fabric of Old Towne.
    Policy 5.2:     Promote adaptive re-use of previously industrial and agricultural historic
                    structures for residential, office, or commercial purposes.
    Policy 5.3:     Continue to promote institutional and civic uses located throughout Old
                    Towne.
    Policy 5.4:     Develop additional sensitively designed public parking throughout Old
                    Towne.
    Policy 5.5:     Continue to require consistent, high quality, historically-referenced design
                    within Old Towne.
    Policy 5.6:     Continue to upgrade infrastructure throughout Old Towne.
    Policy 5.7:     Ensure that roadway improvements within Old Towne are designed to
                    promote walkability and a safe pedestrian environment.
    Policy 5.8:     Maintain balance between Old Towne and Chapman University’s growth, so
                    that the University complements Old Towne.
    Policy 5.9:     Promote attractive and safe pedestrian access between the Santa Fe Depot
                    and the Plaza.
Contextual and Environmental Compatibility
    The quality of the physical environment, built or natural, plays a large part in defining
    Orange’s quality of life. Land use conflicts often occur when newer developments are
    insensitive to the use, scale or character of existing development and/or the surrounding
    natural environment. In other cases, older, obsolete nonconforming uses remain
    interspersed among newer development, as when old service stations or repair shops survive
    in the midst of residential development. Such conflicts can lead to degradation of the built
    and natural environments. The following goals and policies are designed to ensure
    contextual and environmental compatibility of development within the City, and to achieve
    compliance with local, regional, state, and federal environmental requirements.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-7

LAND USE
     These policies also represent an overview of the City’s strategy to consider the contextual
     and environmental effects of new development and reuse projects. Additional related
     policies addressing this topic may be found in the Natural Resources, Cultural Resources &
     Historic Preservation, Infrastructure, Urban Design, Public Safety, and Noise Elements.
     GOAL 6.0:       Advance development activity that is mutually beneficial to both the
                     environment and the community.
     Policy 6.1:     Ensure that new development is compatible with the style and design of
                     established structures and the surrounding environment.
     Policy 6.2:     In areas where residential uses abut commercial or industrial land uses, use
                     buffering techniques to improve compatibility. Such techniques include the
                     use of setbacks, screening, soundwalls with pedestrian access, and
                     appearance standards.
     Policy 6.3:     Establish and maintain greenways, and pedestrian and bicycle connections
                     that complement the residential, commercial and open space areas they
                     connect.
     Policy 6.4:     Create and maintain open space resources that provide recreational
                     opportunities, protect hillside vistas and ridgelines, and conserve natural
                     resources.
     Policy 6.5:     Reduce pollutant runoff from new development and urban runoff to the
                     maximum extent practicable.
     Policy 6.6:     Enhance the walkability of both new and current development.
     Policy 6.7:     Integrate natural amenities and connections, including waterways and
                     wildlife corridors, within the design of urban and suburban spaces.
     Policy 6.8:     Maximize landscaping along streetscapes and within development projects
                     to enhance public health and environmental benefits.
     Policy 6.9:     Restrict development in areas where exposure to hazards such as flood,
                     erosion, liquefaction, dam failure, hazardous materials, and toxic gases
                     cannot be mitigated to reduce risk to residents and liability to the City.
     Policy 6.10:    Mitigate adverse air, noise, circulation, and other environmental impacts
                     caused by new development adjacent to existing neighborhoods through use
                     of sound walls, landscaping buffers, speed limits, and other traffic control
                     measures.
     Policy 6.11:    Recognize the value of natural and cultural resources in the undeveloped
                     portions of the planning area.
     Policy 6.12:    Maximize the land use opportunities for the Irvine Lake area by providing a
                     mix of uses, such as lodging, housing, and recreational uses.
Coordinated Planning
     Future planning considers ongoing planning efforts of other City departments, agencies,
     surrounding jurisdictions, and special districts. In addition, ongoing planning efforts
     undertaken by regional agencies such as the County of Orange, the Southern California
     Association of Governments, the Southern California Air Quality Management District, the
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-8

                                                                                         LAND USE
    Orange County Transportation Authority, the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control
    Board, and others will be examined for consistency with the City’s long-range objectives.
    GOAL 7.0:        Promote coordinated planning among City departments and agencies,
                     property owners, residents, special districts, and other jurisdictions in the
                     region.
    Policy 7.1:      Coordinate with the Orange Unified School District and Community College
                     District regarding future plans for their facilities.
    Policy 7.2:      Work with institutions within the City to ensure that implementation of their
                     future plans is compatible with the City’s goals for surrounding areas.
    Policy 7.3:      Coordinate planning efforts with adjacent cities, special purpose agencies,
                     utilities, and community service providers.
    Policy 7.4:      Ensure positive benefits for Orange from regional transportation, land use,
                     air quality, waste management and disposal, and habitat conservation plans.
    Policy 7.5:      Work with and encourage other agencies and service providers to minimize
                     potential visual and environmental impacts of their facilities on Orange.
    Policy 7.6:      Explore joint use agreements with other agencies to share existing and future
                     public facilities among institutions in Orange.
Public Participation
    The City recognizes that the single most important component of any future planning effort
    is public participation. The following goal and policies emphasize the need for continued
    public involvement in all parts of the planning process.
    GOAL 8.0:        Encourage active involvement of residents, businesses, and agencies in the
                     planning and decision making process.
    Policy 8.1:      Continue to provide opportunities for public education and involvement in
                     land use planning decisions through public hearings, community meetings,
                     study sessions, electronic media, and any other appropriate and available
                     means.
    Policy 8.2:      Emphasize public-private cooperation in implementing the General Plan and
                     future planning activities.
    Policy 8.3:      Foster meaningful involvement and interaction among diverse groups within
                     the City regarding land use planning efforts and decision making.
LAND USE PLAN
    The Land Use Plan discusses how the City will grow and change over the next 20 years, and
    describes those aspects of the community that will be enhanced and maintained. Current and
    future land uses are categorized and mapped to identify where residential, commercial,
    industrial, and community facilities are anticipated to be located. The Land Use Plan
    describes the planned distribution and development intensities of all land uses in the City,
    and describes how the City’s land use goals will be achieved both citywide and within eight
    identified focus areas.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-9

LAND USE
Land Use Distribution
     The predominantly residential land use pattern in Orange reflects the City’s history of
     transition from a citrus-growing center clustered near the railroad to a town core surrounded
     by residential neighborhoods and supporting businesses and services. Based on a land use
     inventory completed in 2004,
     residential              development
     represented the predominant land
     use within Orange’s city limits, with
     housing covering 46 percent of the
     City’s land area. Commercial and
     industrial uses represented about 14
     percent of the City’s land area, while
     natural hillsides, parks, and open
     space represented 32 percent.
     Figure LU-1 identifies the division of
     on-the-ground land uses within the
     City in 2004.                                                   Figure LU-1
                                                                     Land Use Distribution (2004)
Land Use Density and Intensity
     Planners describe the extent to which properties can be or are developed using the terms
     density and intensity. Density is used for residential uses and refers to the population and
     development capacity of a given parcel or group of parcels. Density within the General Plan is
     described in terms of dwelling units per net acre of land (du/ac), exclusive of existing or
     proposed streets and rights-of-way. Typical residential densities found within Orange are
     illustrated in Figure LU-2.
     Development intensity, which applies to non-residential uses, refers to the extent of
     development on a parcel of land or lot (that is, the total building square footage, building
     height, the floor-area ratio, and/or the percent of lot coverage). While intensity is often used
     to describe non-residential development levels, in a broader sense, intensity also can
     describe overall levels of mixed residential and non-residential development. Throughout this
     Element, floor-area ratio (FAR) and building floor area square footage are used as measures
     of non-residential development intensity.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-10

                                                                                               LAND USE
              Estate and                  Low Medium Density Residential          Medium Density Residential
      Low Density Residential                      (6-15 units/acre)                    (15-24 units/acre)
           (1-6 units/acre)
                                                                                                       Figure LU-2
                                                                           Typical Residential Densities in Orange
Floor-area ratio (FAR) expresses the intensity of use on a lot (see Figure LU-3). The FAR
represents the ratio between the total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot and the total
land area of that lot. For example, a 20,000-square-foot building on a 40,000-square-foot lot
yields an FAR of 0.50. A 0.50 FAR describes a single-story building that covers half of the lot, a
two-story building covering approximately one-quarter of the lot, or a four-story building
covering one-eighth of the lot.
                                                          For purposes of illustration, the diagrams in
                                                          Figure LU-4 provide examples of FAR for
                                                          commercial retail and office sites drawn
                                                          from throughout the City. The middle
                                                          example illustrates buildings within two
                                                          square blocks of Old Towne Orange along
                                                          Glassell Street north and south of Chapman
                                                          Avenue. The lot area is approximately
                                                          549,800 square feet and the gross floor
                                                          area of the buildings is approximately
                                                          549,900 square feet (most of the buildings
                                                          have two stories). As shown in the diagram,
                                                          when the gross building floor area is
                                                          divided by the lot area, an FAR of
                                                          approximately 1.0 results. The same
                                                          process is illustrated for office properties
                                                          located along Town and Country Road, and
                                                          industrial areas located on Glassell Street,
                                                          north of Taft Avenue.
                                       Figure LU-3
                         Floor Area Ratios Defined
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             LU-11
LAND USE
Land Use Designations
     The Land Use Element establishes 19 land use
     designations. The land use designations have
     been established to reflect: (1) development
     trends affecting the City’s near and long-term
     futures; (2) opportunity areas associated with
     major institutional uses, shopping and
     employment centers, and access to
     transportation facilities; and (3) community
     interests and desires expressed during the
     General      Plan     update      process.    Four
     designations are established for residential
     development that allow for a range of housing
     types and densities. Three mixed-use activity
     center designations encourage creative mixes
     of commercial retail, office, housing, civic, and
     entertainment uses at key locations
     throughout the City. Five commercial and
     office designations and two industrial
     designations provide for a range of revenue-
     and employment-generating businesses. Five
     public and semi-public use categories provide
     locations for important public and private
     facilities and institutions, including parks, open
     space areas, resource lands, civic facilities,
     hospitals, and educational institutions.
     Table LU-1 presents descriptions of each
     General Plan land use designation and the
     corresponding range of density or intensity of
     development permitted for each. The
     maximum allowable development on any
     individual parcel is governed by these
     measures of density or intensity, with the
     anticipated yield influenced by the physical
     characteristics of a parcel, by access and
     infrastructure issues, and by compatibility
     considerations. The land use designations are
     described here in terms of general land uses
     and maximum densities or intensities
     permitted. Corresponding zoning districts
     specify the permitted uses for each category
     as well as the applicable development
     standards. The density or intensity maximums
     outlined in Table LU-1 serve as development                                     Figure LU-4
                                                             Floor Area Ratio Examples in Orange
     caps. Actual development intensities are
     expected to be lower than the caps, based on
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-12

                                                                                                               LAND USE
         market factors and past development trends. In order to estimate future build-out of the City
         and resulting impacts on the circulation system, expected levels of density and intensity have
         also been assumed, and are shown in Table LU-1. The City anticipates most development will
         occur at or below these expected levels, although on any single property, development up to
         the cap is allowed. However, any development proposed in excess of the expected levels
         indicated in Table LU-1 may be required to perform special studies to show the
         development’s ability to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties and the citywide
         circulation system.
         Density ranges are provided in Table LU-1 for each of the residential land use designations
         and the Urban Mixed Use designation, whereas only maximum densities are established for
         the Neighborhood Mixed Use and Old Towne Mixed Use designations. Similarly, FAR ranges
         are provided in Table LU-1 for several commercial, industrial, office, and mixed
         commercial/residential land uses, while others feature a maximum FAR value. In cases where
         a range is listed, the minimum value represents the least intense land use permitted within
         the area, while the maximum value represents the most intense land use permitted. For
         designations where only a maximum value is listed, no minimum is implied.
         For mixed-use designations listed in Table LU-1, both densities (du/ac) and intensities (FAR)
         are established. The permitted dwelling units per acre should be interpreted to be contained
         within the maximum FAR expressed for each category.
                                                       Table LU-1
                                               Land Use Designations
      Land Use                 Density or Intensity                                 Description
     Designation               Range        Expected
Residential Designations
 ESTR      Estate Low       0-2.0 du/ac       1.8 du/ac   Large lot, single-family residential development in a rural or
             Density                                      semi-rural setting. Private, noncommercial equestrian and
           Residential                                    agricultural uses may be allowed if associated with residential
                                                          uses.
 LDR      Low Density      2.1-6.0 du/ac      5.0 du/ac   Conventional      single-family     residential    development
           Residential                                    characterized by individual single-family homes constructed in
                                                          subdivisions, or by custom units built on individual lots.
LMDR      Low Medium       6.1-15.0 du/ac    8.0 du/ac    Includes small lot or zero lot line single-family subdivisions,
             Density                                      duplexes and mobile home parks, as well as lower intensity
           Residential                                    apartment and condominium complexes.
 MDR        Medium        15.1-24.0 du/ac    16.3 du/ac   Apartment and condominium or townhouse units in areas with
             Density                                      ready access to major circulation routes, business districts and
           Residential                                    public open space areas. Typical developments may consist of
                                                          two- or three-story buildings that house multiple dwelling units
                                                          and provide some form of open space.
Mixed-Use Activity Center Designations
                                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                         LU-13

LAND USE
                                                      Table LU-1
                                              Land Use Designations
      Land Use                Density or Intensity                                    Description
     Designation             Range          Expected
NMIX    Neighborhood        Max. 24.0       16.3 du/ac;  Local- and neighborhood-supporting mixed-use activity
        Mixed-use             du/ac;      1.0 FAR        centers and corridors. Commercial retail is encouraged to be
                       1.0 - 1.5 FAR                     the primary use on the ground floor. Professional office and
                                                         housing uses are also encouraged, either integrated with a
                                                         commercial use, or as separate, free-standing uses. Walkability
                                                         and pedestrian access are key considerations. The lower end
                                                         of the FAR range supports retail development, while the
                                                         higher end supports a combination of uses including both
                                                         commercial and office.
OTMIX               Old Towne Mixed-use                  Local- and neighborhood-supporting mixed-use activity
                                                         centers designed to be contextually appropriate within a
Old Towne Mixed Use Max. 15.0 du/ac; 8.0 du/ac;
                                                         historic area. Commercial retail is encouraged to be the
15                         0.5-1.0 FAR    1.0 FAR
                                                         primary use on the ground floor. Professional office and
Old Towne Mixed Use         Max. 24.0       16.3 du/ac;  housing uses are also encouraged, particularly as adaptive
24                            du/ac;          1.5 FAR    reuse opportunities within existing structures. Transit-
                           1.0-1.5 FAR                   orientation, walkability, and pedestrian access are key
                                                         considerations. The lower end of the FAR range supports retail
                                                         development, while the higher end of the range supports a
                                                         combination of uses including commercial and office.
Old Towne Mixed Use 6.0 – 15.0 du/ac; 10.0 du/ac;        Local- and neighborhood-supporting mixed-use activity
Spoke                    Max. 0.6 FAR 0.6 FAR            centers designed to be contextually appropriate within a
                                                         historic area. Commercial retail is encouraged to be the
                                                         primary use on the ground floor. Professional office and
                                                         housing uses are also encouraged, particularly as adaptive
                                                         reuse opportunities within existing structures. Transit-
                                                         orientation, walkability, and pedestrian access are key
                                                         considerations, as well as protection of the existing historic,
                                                         residential-scale, and building character of the spoke streets
                                                         outside of the downtown core. The lower end of the FAR
                                                         range supports retail development, while the higher end of the
                                                         range supports a combination of uses including commercial
                                                         and office.
UMIX    Urban Mixed-       30.0 – 60.0      48.0 du/ac;  Urban, high-intensity, regionally-oriented activity centers that
        use                   du/ac;          1.7 FAR    define the character of surrounding areas and serve as
                          1.5 - 3.0 FAR                  gateways to the City. This designation provides for integrated
                                                         commercial retail, high-rise office, housing, and civic uses.
                                                         Commercial retail is intended to be the primary use on the
                                                         ground floor. Convenient, high-frequency transit access,
                                                         innovative housing options, and pedestrian-oriented design
                                                         are key considerations.
Commercial and Office Designations
GC      General          Max. 1.0 FAR        0.35 FAR    A wide range of retail and service commercial uses and
        Commercial                                       professional offices. Regional shopping centers, mid-rise office
                                                         projects, corridor shopping districts, and neighborhood corner
                                                         stores are permitted uses.
RC      Recreation      Max. 0.35 FAR        0.18 FAR    Outdoor commercial recreational uses which include, but not
        Commercial                                       limited to: golf courses, marinas, boat rental buildings, staging
                                                         areas, fishing facilities, and other commercial sports facilities.
                                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                        LU-14

                                                                                                                   LAND USE
                                                            Table LU-1
                                                     Land Use Designations
         Land Use                    Density or Intensity                                  Description
      Designation                   Range         Expected
NOP         Neighborhood        Max. 0.5 FAR       0.36 FAR    Low-rise office and professional office park development.
            Office                                             Professional office is intended as the primary use. However,
            Professional                                       support retail and service commercial uses are also permitted
                                                               as necessary to serve adjacent professional offices.
UOP         Urban Office          1.5-3.0 FAR       1.5 FAR    Urban, high-intensity, mid- and high-rise office centers.
            Professional                                       Professional office is intended as the primary use. However,
                                                               support retail and service commercial uses are also permitted
                                                               as necessary to serve adjacent professional offices. Hospitals
                                                               and supporting uses are also permitted.
YNCO        Yorba North         Max. 1.0 FAR       0.35 FAR    Allows for mixed uses compatible with a public facility or
            Commercial                                         institutional use, such as a civic, college, or health care
            Overlay                                            campus, including integrated retail, housing, office, and civic
                                                               uses where a specific plan is approved for a public facility or
                                                               institutional activity center. Innovative housing and
                                                               pedestrian-oriented deign are key considerations.
YSCO        Yorba South         Max. 1.0 FAR       0.35 FAR    A wide range of potential retail and service commercial uses, in
            Commercial                                         conjunction with on-site parkland improvements, off-site
            Overlay                                            parkland, and/or park improvements. Commercial use may
                                                               only be activated through a Development Agreement with the
                                                               City that identifies specific parkland obligations.
Industrial Designations
LI          Light Industrial    Max. 1.0 FAR       0.50 FAR    Allows for manufacturing, processing, and distribution of
                                3-story height                 goods. Wholesale activities associated with industrial
                                      limit                    operations, as well as small-scale, support retail, service
                                                               commercial and office uses may also be established in areas
I           Industrial          Max. 0.75 FAR      0.65 FAR
                                                               with ready access to major circulation routes. A 3-story
                                                               building height limit applies within Light Industrial designated
                                                               areas.
Public Facilities and Open Space Designations
PFI         Public Facilities and Institutions                 Provides for several types of public, quasi-public and
                                                               institutional land uses, including schools, colleges and
Civic uses/Schools              Max. 0.50 FAR
                                                               universities, City and County facilities, hospitals, and major
   Cemeteries, Corporate yard, Water                .05 FAR    utility easements and properties. Includes service
   towers, Southern California Electric                        organizations and housing related to an institutional use, such
   facilities                                                  as dormitories, employee housing, assisted living,
                                                               convalescent homes, and skilled nursing facilities.
   Schools, Water Department facilities             .15 FAR
   Civic Center, Libraries, Police and Fire         .25 FAR
   Department facilities
Institutions                    Max. 2.0 FAR
      Colleges and Universities                     .35 FAR
      Hospitals                                     1.0 FAR
OS          Open Space                 NA              NA      Steep hillsides, creeks, or environmentally sensitive areas that
                                                               should not be developed. Although designated as permanent
                                                               open space, most areas will not be developed as public parks
                                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                              LU-15
LAND USE
                                               Table LU-1
                                         Land Use Designations
      Land Use            Density or Intensity                               Description
     Designation          Range        Expected
                                                  with the exception of river and creekside areas that promote
                                                  connectivity of the City’s trails system. Lands in this category
                                                  include both privately held open spaces and public lands.
OS-P    Open Space–         NA            NA      Public lands used for passive and active recreation. Includes all
        Park                                      parklands owned and maintained by the City of Orange, as well
                                                  as parks operated by the County.
OS-R    Open Space–         NA            NA      Areas designated open space to preserve visually significant
        Ridgeline                                 ridgelines identified on the Land Use Policy Map. No
                                                  development or grading is permitted.
RA      Resource Area       NA            NA      Allows for agricultural uses and continued use of stream and
                                                  river channels for aggregate mining. Passive and active
                                                  recreational uses are also permitted. May serve as a holding
                                                  zone for future uses compatible with established and planned
                                                  land uses in surrounding areas.
        Residential Uses
        Four residential categories allow for a variety of housing types representing the diverse
        residential character of Orange. The City will continue to preserve and enhance existing
        single-family residential neighborhoods. Older neighborhoods, characterized by higher
        densities, are located throughout the western part of the City. Lower density housing, typical
        of newer residential development, is located principally on the City’s eastern side.
Estate Low Density Residential
Density Range: 0-2.0 du/ac
        The Estate Low Density Residential designation
        provides for single-family detached, estate-style
        homes on large lots, featuring a custom character
        of development. Estate Low Density Residential
        development is primarily found in Orange Park
        Acres and other similar parts of east Orange.
        Private, noncommercial equestrian and agricultural
        uses may be allowed if they are associated with the
        residential uses.
                                           ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 LU-16

                                                                        LAND USE
Low Density Residential
Density Range: 2.1-6.0 du/ac
        The Low Density Residential designation provides
        for typical single-family residential neighborhoods.
        Low Density Residential uses make up the majority
        of land uses in Orange, and are found throughout
        the City in both older, established areas, such as
        Old Towne, and newer development areas,
        including east Orange.
Low Medium Density Residential
Density Range: 6.1-15.0 du/ac
        The Low Medium Density Residential designation provides for
        both detached and attached single-family homes on smaller lots,
        as well as duplexes and some mobile homes, multi-family
        townhouses, condominiums, and apartments. Low Medium
        Density residential uses are typically found adjacent to
        commercial or mixed-use activity centers, such as near South
        Main Street, Tustin Avenue, or El Modena. Low Medium Density
        residential uses are also found within newer development areas,
        such as Serrano Heights.
Medium Density Residential
Density Range: 15.1-24.0 du/ac
        The      Medium       Density     Residential
        designation provides for multi-family
        townhouses,         condominiums,         and
        apartments featuring some form of
        internal open space in areas with good
        access to major circulation routes, business
        districts, and public open space areas.
        Medium Density residential uses are
        typically found adjacent to commercial
        districts, such as near Lincoln Avenue,
        Katella Avenue, or La Veta Avenue.
        Medium Density residential uses are also
        found near major transportation corridors,
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 LU-17
LAND USE
        such as the Santa Fe Depot or freeway interchanges along Chapman Avenue, Tustin Street,
        or Glassell Street.
        Mixed-Use Activity Centers
        In response to the Vision and recent development trends, the General Plan provides three
        designations for mixed-use activity centers. All of these designations promote creative mixes
        of commercial retail, office, housing, civic, and entertainment uses that vary in composition
        and intensity based upon location, accessibility, and the surrounding development context.
Old Towne Mixed-use
Maximum Density: Old Towne Mixed Use Spoke: 15.0 du/ ac
                    Old Towne Mixed Use 15: 15.0 du/ ac
                    Old Towne Mixed Use 24: 24.0 du/ac
Intensity Range:         Old Towne Mixed Use Spoke: 0.6 FAR
                    Old Towne Mixed Use 15: 0.5-1.0 FAR
                    Old Towne Mixed Use 24: 1.0-1.5 FAR
        The Old Towne mixed-use designations
        provide for integrated commercial retail,
        professional office, housing, and civic uses
        designed to be contextually appropriate
        within a historic area. These areas are
        intended to be local- and neighborhood-
        supporting activity centers and corridors.
        Commercial retail is encouraged to be the
        primary use on the ground floor.
        Professional office and housing uses are
        also encouraged, particularly as adaptive
        reuse     opportunities      within    historic
        structures. Transit-orientation, walkability,
        and pedestrian access are key considerations, as well as protection of the existing historic,
        residential-scale, and building character of the Spoke Streets outside of the downtown core.
        The lower end of the FAR range supports retail development, while the higher end of the
        range supports a combination of uses including commercial and office. Uses within this area
        are additionally subject to provisions of the Old Towne Design Standards and Santa Fe Depot
        Specific Plan, as applicable.
                                           ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  LU-18
                                                                                         LAND USE
Neighborhood Mixed-use
Maximum Density:South Main Street: 24.0 du/ac
Intensity Range: 1.0-1.5 FAR
        This land use designation provides for integrated commercial retail, professional office,
        housing, and civic uses along the South Main Street corridor. This area is intended to be a
        local- and neighborhood-supporting activity
        center and corridor. Commercial retail is
        encouraged to be the primary use on the
        ground floor. Professional office and
        housing uses are also encouraged, either
        integrated with a commercial use, or as
        separate, free-standing uses. Walkability
        and      pedestrian    access    are     key
        considerations. The lower end of the FAR
        range supports retail development, while
        the higher end of the range supports a
        combination of commercial and office uses.
Urban Mixed-use
Density Range: 30.0-60.0 du/ac
Intensity Range: 1.5-3.0 FAR
        This designation provides for integrated commercial
        retail, professional office, housing, and civic uses
        along West Katella Avenue, Town and Country Road,
        and within Uptown Orange. These areas are intended
        to provide for urban, high-intensity, regionally-
        oriented activity centers that define the character of
        surrounding areas. Commercial retail is intended to be
        the primary use on the ground floor. Convenient
        transit access, innovative housing options, and
        pedestrian-oriented design are key considerations.
        Commercial and Office Designations
        The commercial and office categories consist of four designations that provide for a range of
        revenue- and employment-generating businesses.
General Commercial
Maximum Intensity: 1.0 FAR
        The General Commercial designation provides for a wide range
        of retail and service commercial uses and professional offices.
        This designation is found along many of the City’s most highly-
        traveled roadway corridors, including Katella Avenue, Chapman
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-19

LAND USE
        Avenue, and Tustin Street. Regional shopping centers, mid- and high-rise office projects,
        corridor shopping districts, and neighborhood corner stores are all permitted uses.
Recreation Commercial
Maximum Intensity: 0.35 FAR
        Recreation commercial uses provide for the operation
        and development of resort or amusement oriented
        commercial and recreational uses. The designation refers
        to recreational uses of regional interest that will draw
        visitors from throughout the City, Orange County, and
        Southern California. The areas adjacent to the east and
        south sides of Irvine Lake in east Orange are proposed for
        this land use. Permitted uses include, but are not limited
        to, marinas, boat rental buildings, staging areas,
        conference centers, golf courses, clubhouses, hotels,
        resorts, restaurants, and other commercial sports facilities.
Neighborhood Office Professional
Maximum Intensity: 0.5 FAR
        This land use designation provides for low-rise office
        and professional office park development in
        appropriate areas throughout the City, including
        portions of Chapman Avenue east of Old Towne and
        portions of the La Veta Avenue corridor. The principal
        use in this designation is intended to be professional
        offices; however, support retail and service
        commercial uses are permitted as necessary to serve
        adjacent professional office needs.
Urban Office Professional
Intensity Range: 1.5 – 3.0 FAR
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-20

                                                                                               LAND USE
        The Urban Office Professional designation encourages urban,
        high-intensity, mid- and high-rise office centers located at the
        City’s edges, away from established single-family residential areas.
        Urban Office Professional uses are located primarily north of the
        SR-22 Freeway and south of La Veta Avenue, concentrated around
        the hospital node at the southern end of Main Street. Professional
        office is intended as the primary use. However, support retail and
        service commercial uses are also permitted as necessary to serve
        adjacent professional offices. Hospitals and supporting uses are
        also permitted.
Yorba North Commercial Overlay
Maximum Intensity: 1.0 FAR
        The Yorba North Commercial Overlay designation applies to the Chapman Hospital site. This
        designation allows for mixed uses compatible with a public facility or institutional use, such
        as a civic, college, or health care campus, including integrated retail, housing, office, and civic
        uses where a specific plan is approved for a public facility or institutional activity center.
        Innovative housing and pedestrian-oriented design are key considerations.
Yorba South Commercial Overlay
Maximum Intensity: 1.0 FAR
        The Yorba South Commercial Overlay designation applies to the current Yorba Park site near
        Chapman Hospital, SR-55, and Chapman Avenue. This designation provides for a wide range
        of potential retail and service commercial uses, in conjunction with on-site parkland
        improvements, off-site parkland, and/or park improvements. Commercial use may only be
        activated through a Development Agreement with the City that identifies specific parkland
        obligations.
        Industrial Designations
        Two industrial land use designations provide locations for offices, manufacturing,
        warehousing, and distribution uses within the City. The principal difference between the
        designations is the permitted maximum intensity of development allowed within each area.
        Permitted uses within industrial areas will continue to be primarily determined using the
        City’s Zoning Ordinance.
Light Industrial
Maximum Intensity: 1.0 FAR
Height Limit: 3 stories
        The Light Industrial designation is intended for uses that are compatible with nearby
        commercial and residential districts and that do not produce substantial environmental
        nuisances (noise, odor, dust, smoke, glare, etc.). This designation allows for manufacturing,
                                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  LU-21

LAND USE
        processing, and distribution of goods. Light industrial uses are located primarily within areas
        west of Glassell Street and north of Walnut Avenue. Wholesale activities associated with
                                           industrial operations, as well as small-scale support retail,
                                           service commercial, and office uses may also be established
                                           in areas with ready access to major circulation routes. The
                                           maximum intensity permitted within the Light Industrial
                                           designation is 1.0 FAR, which is higher than that permitted
                                           within the Industrial designation. This distinction recognizes
                                           that ancillary office uses will be more prevalent in Light
                                           Industrial areas than within Industrial areas. A three-story
                                           height limit applies within the Light Industrial designation to
                                           maintain compatibility of scale with nearby commercial and
        residential districts.
Industrial
Maximum Intensity: 0.75 FAR
        Industrial uses include manufacturing and
        industrial activities that may lead to some
        environmental nuisances that would be
        incompatible with residential or commercial
        uses. Industrial uses are located primarily in
        areas west of Glassell Street and north of
        Walnut Avenue. This designation allows for
        manufacturing, processing, and distribution of
        goods. Wholesale activities associated with industrial operations, as well as small-scale
        support retail, service commercial, and office uses may also be established in areas with
        ready access to major circulation routes. The maximum intensity permitted within the
        Industrial designation is 0.75 FAR.
        Public Facilities and Open Space
        Five designations for public facilities and open space areas allow for important public and
        private facilities and institutions, including parks, open space areas, resource lands, civic
        facilities, hospitals, and educational institutions.
Public Facilities and Institutions
Maximum Intensity: Civic uses, schools, and public facilities: 0.5 FAR
                     Institutions: 2.0 FAR
        The Public Facilities and Institutions designation provides
        for several types of public, quasi-public, and institutional
        land uses, including schools, colleges and universities, City
        and County government facilities, hospitals, and major
        utility easements and properties. This designation also
        includes service organizations and housing related to an
        institutional use, such as dormitories, employee housing,
        assisted living, convalescent homes, and skilled nursing
                                           ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   LU-22
                                                                                           LAND USE
       facilities. The maximum permitted intensity for civic uses, schools, and public facilities is 0.5
       FAR, whereas the maximum for institutions, such as universities and hospitals, is 2.0 FAR.
Open Space
       The Open Space designation includes a substantial part of
       the eastern portion of Orange’s planning area. Much of
       this area includes steep hillsides or environmentally
       sensitive areas that should be preserved. Although these
       areas may be designated as permanent open space, it is
       not intended that they be developed as public parks.
       Lands within this designation include both privately held
       open space lands and public lands.
Open Space Park
       The Open Space Park designation refers to public lands
       used for passive and active recreation. This includes all
       parklands owned and maintained by the City of Orange,
       as well as parks operated by the County.
Open Space Ridgeline
       The Open Space Ridgeline designation is designed to preserve visually significant ridgelines
       and steep hillsides. The City has adopted a hillside grading policy that prohibits development
       or grading on ridgelines with this designated land use.
Resource Area
       The Resource Area designation provides for the continued use of areas for mining and
       agriculture. Passive and active recreational uses are also permitted in areas with this
       designation. Resource Areas also serve as a holding zone for areas that are currently used for
       mining and agriculture, but may not have these uses in the future.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-23

  LAND USE
  Land Use Policy Map
       The Land Use Policy Map (Figure LU-5) graphically represents the planned distribution and
       intensity of land use citywide. The colors shown on the map correspond to the land use
       designations described above.
  General Plan Development Capacity
       Table LU-2 identifies the development capacity associated with the planned distribution of
       land uses. Over time, as properties transition from one use to another or property owners
       rebuild, land uses and intensities will gradually shift to align with the intent of this Land Use
       Element. Table LU-2 summarizes the land use distribution, and the resultant residential and
       nonresidential levels of development that can be expected from full implementation of land
       use policies established by this General Plan. Given the largely built-out character of Orange
       and the good condition of most buildings, significant redevelopment activities may not occur
       over the life of this General Plan. However, within focus areas described in this Element,
       future land use changes are anticipated.
  General Plan and Zoning Consistency
       The Land Use Element is primarily implemented by the City’s Zoning Code, which specifies
       districts and performance standards for various types of land uses described in the General
       Plan. Table LU-3 indicates the corresponding zone district that applies to each General Plan
       land use designation. The zone districts specify the permitted uses for each category as well
       as applicable development standards. Zone districts specified in Table LU-3 for Mixed-use
       General Plan designations are new districts, and will be developed as part of the Zoning Code
       update implementing the General Plan.
  Specific Plans and Neighborhood Plans in Orange
       A specific plan is a detailed plan for the development of a particular area. Specific plans are
       intended to provide finite specification of the types of uses to be permitted, development
       standards (setbacks, heights, landscape, architecture, etc.), and circulation and
       infrastructure improvements that are only broadly defined by the General Plan. Specific plans
       are often used to ensure that multiple property owners and developers adhere to a single
       common development plan. Specific plans are also used as a means of achieving superior
       design by providing flexibility in development standards beyond those contained in the
       Zoning Ordinance.
       The City has used Specific Plans and Neighborhood Plans as tools to achieve the coordinated
       development of individual parcels. Specific Plans and Neighborhood Plans currently in effect
       include:
          Archstone Gateway
          Chapman University
          East Orange Plan (1975)
          Immanuel Lutheran Church
          Orange Park Acres
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 LU-24

LU-25 Figure LU-5 Land Use Policy Ma
LAND USE
         (This Page Intentionally Left Blank)
                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                           LU-26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                       Table LU-2
                                                                                                                                        General Plan Development Capacity
                                                                                        Acres                                                                 Dwelling Units         Non-Residential Square Feet (1,000s)                   Population
       Land Use Designation                           Planning Area                      Total                Sphere of Influence                      Planning Area         Total        Planning Area              Total         Planning Area         Total
                                                 City         Unincorporated                                     Unincorporated                   City       Unincorporated           City      Unincorporated                City       Unincorporated
Estate Low Density Residential                    650                 355                 1,011                           --                      1,181            639        1,819    --              --               --   3,678             1,989      5,667
Low-Density Residential                          5,599                814                 6,413                           --                    27,994            4,069      32,063    --              --               --  87,203            12,674     99,877
Low-Medium Density Residential                   1,298                 54                 1,356                           --                     10,414            435       10,849    --              --               --  32,439             1,357     33,796
Medium Density Residential                        609                   2                  607                            --                     9,863              29        9,892    --              --               --  24,658               73      24,731
Old Towne Mixed Use
          Old Towne Mixed Use Spoke                30                   --                   31                           --                       123               --        123    403              --              403    308                 --       308
                Old Towne Mixed Use 15             49                   1                   50                            --                       274               5         280    640             13               652    685                17        702
               Old Towne Mixed Use 24              11                   --                   11                           --                       130               --        130    224              --              224    326                 --       326
Neighborhood Mixed Use                             26                   --                  26                            --                      300                --        300    343              --              343    749                 --       749
Urban Mixed Use                                   426                   --                 426                            --                     10,223              --      10,223 15,772             --            15,772  25,558               --     25,558
General Commercial                                686                   1                  687                            --                        --               --         --  10,465             11           10,476      --                --        --
Recreational Commercial                           218                   --                 218                            --                        --               --         --   1,659             --             1,659     --                --        --
Neighborhood Office Professional                   58                   --                  58                            --                        --               --         --    897              --              897      --                --        --
Urban Office Professional                          28                   --                  28                            --                        --               --         --   1,823             --             1,823     --                --        --
Light Industrial                                  936                   --                 936                            --                        --               --         --  20,381             --           20,381      --                --        --
Industrial                                        184                   --                 184                            --                        --               --         --   5,220             --            5,220      --                --        --
Public Facilities and Institutions
                Public and Civic Facilities       568                  9                   577                            --                        --               --         --   3,056            59              3,115     --                --        --
                             Institutions         332                   --                 325                            --                        --               --         --   9,035             --            9,035      --                --        --
Open Space                                      6,646                   --               6,646                            --                        --               --         --     --              --               --      --                --        --
Open Space-Park                                   573                   1                  574                            --                        --               --         --     --              --               --      --                --        --
Open Space-Ridgeline                               98                   --                  98                            --                        --               --         --     --              --               --      --                --        --
Resource Area                                      93                  27                  120                            --                        --               --         --     --              --               --      --                --        --
Streets and Rights of Way                        3,268                312                 3,579                           --                        --               --         --     --              --               --      --                --        --
Total                                           22,387               1,575               23,962                        15,800                   60,503            5,177      65,680 69,919            82            70,001  175,605            16,110    191,715
Note:      Population estimates are based on average of 3.16 persons per single-family dwelling unit and 2.5 persons per multiple-family unit.
                                                                                                                                                ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                          LU-27
LAND USE
         (This Page Intentionally Left Blank)
                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                           LU-28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                      Table LU-3
                                                                                                                                            Land Use / Zoning Consistency
                                                                                                                                                                                                    OTMU-15(S)   OTMU-15   OTMU-24
Zoning                                R1-5   R1-6   R1-7   R1-8   R1-10   R1-12   R1-15   R1-20   R1-40   R1-R   R2-6   R2-7   R2-8   R3   R4   MH   OP    CP     C-TR   C1    C2     C3*    CR*                                     NMU   UMU   M1   M2   A1   RO   SH   PI   SG   PC     FP-1   FP-2   A      E      P
Residential Designations
Estate Low Density Residential                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Low-Density Residential                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Low-Medium Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Residential
Medium Density Residential                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Mixed Use Activity Center Designations
Old Towne Mixed Use Spoke                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Old Towne Mixed Use 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Old Towne Mixed Use 24                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Neighborhood Mixed Use                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Urban Mixed Use                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Commercial Designations
General Commercial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Recreation Commercial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Neighborhood Office
                                                                                                                                                                
Professional
Urban Office Professional                                                                                                                            
Industrial Designations
Light Industrial                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Industrial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Public Facilities and Open Space Designations
Public Facilities and Institutions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Open Space                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Open Space – Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Open Space – Ridgeline                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Resource Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Overlay Districts
Yorba North Commercial**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Yorba South Commercial***                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
*The C3 and CR zones were previously associated with the 1989 General Plan’s Commercial Recreation land use designation. The portion of the City with this land use designation has been re-designated Urban Mixed-use. This table will be updated upon adoption of future Zone Changes that address these designations.
** Overlay applies only to area generally north of Chapman Avenue, east and west of Yorba Street, south of Santiago Creek, and abutting the rear property line of parcels fronting Wheeler Street.
*** Overlay applies only to area south of Chapman Avenue, west of Yorba Street, north of Palmyra Avenue, and east of Santiago Creek.
                                                                                                                                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                       LU-29

LAND USE
         (This Page Intentionally Left Blank)
                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                           LU-30
LU-31 Figure LU-6 Land Use Focus Area
LAND USE
         (This Page Intentionally Left Blank)
                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                        LU-32
                                                                                           LAND USE
       Pinnacle at Uptown Orange
       St. John’s Lutheran Church
       Santa Fe Depot Area
       Serrano Heights
       Upper Peters Canyon
    Each of these plans and any future specific plans adopted by the City must be consistent with
    the policies expressed in this Element. The City will continue to utilize specific plans to
    achieve development objectives consistent with the General Plan.
Land Use Focus Areas
    Figure LU-6 identifies the following eight land use focus areas, which represent locations in
    the City where future land use change may occur.
    (1)      Chapman Avenue/Tustin Street
    (2)      Katella Avenue Corridor
    (3)      South Main Street Corridor
    (4)      West Chapman Avenue/Uptown Orange
    (5)      Old Towne and Santa Fe Depot
    (6)      Industrial Areas
    (7)      Lemon Street Corridor
    (8)      Eckhoff Street/Orangewood Avenue
    Within portions of the City that do not lie within one of the identified focus areas, no
    significant land use changes are anticipated. For properties within the focus areas where
    uses established prior to adoption of this General Plan become non-conforming, the City
    recognizes these pre-existing conditions as legal. It is the City’s desire to allow these uses and
    the facilities in which they are located to continue until a change to the property is initiated
    by the property owner.
    Each focus area has unique future development objectives, responding to priorities
    established in the Vision and input from the community. Providing additional community
    open space and facilitating use of transit and other alternative transportation modes are
    encouraged as a component of future development within many focus areas. Others focus
    areas maintain and enhance job growth, economic development, and affordable housing
    options within the City. For each area, the sections that follow provide a brief discussion of
    the recent planning context, a summary of each area’s market potential, and a description of
    the land use plan and future development objectives.
    Chapman Avenue/Tustin Street
    This focus area consists of residential, commercial, institutional, open space, and park uses
    surrounding the intersection of Chapman Avenue and Tustin Street. The focus area includes
    Chapman Hospital, Yorba Park, and Santiago Creek. SR-55 passes through this focus area in a
    north-south direction, with an interchange at Chapman Avenue. Key considerations within
    this area include the continued viability of commercial and institutional uses at the
    intersection of Chapman Avenue and Tustin Street, potential for more productive use of
    properties on both sides of Tustin Avenue from Chapman Avenue to La Veta Avenue,
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             LU-33

LAND USE
     maintaining public access to Santiago Creek throughout the focus area, and the future use of
     the Yorba Park site east of the SR-55. Although the Open Space–Park designation has not
     been changed on the Yorba Park site, the Yorba South Commercial Overlay has been applied
     to the park and the adjacent Orange Unified School District (OUSD) Education Center. The
     Yorba South Commercial Overlay designation provides for the future potential of the Yorba
     Park site to be used for commercial purposes that take advantage of its proximity to the SR-
     55 interchange. Any future commercial use of the Yorba Park site would require the City and
     potential developer to identify commensurate parkland and/or facilities per the terms of a
     Development Agreement.
     This area is well-served by the SR-55 freeway, but is not a regional destination. Market
     studies completed for the General Plan update have concluded that this area is likely to
     develop as an office and professional service center. The Chapman Hospital site includes
     continued hospital and medical office use. This focus area is located completely within the
     City’s Redevelopment Project Area, which can allow for ongoing revitalization and/or
     intensification of existing commercial uses. The Yorba North Commercial Overlay has been
     applied to the Chapman Hospital site. This Overlay designation provides for mixed uses
     compatible with a public facility or institutional use subject to approval of a specific plan. The
     integration of housing, small-scale commercial uses and pedestrian-orientated features in
     this area desirable given its relationship to existing neighborhood-serving commercial uses,
     the Santiago Creek Trail corridor, and Grijalva Park.
     The land use plan for this focus area is based upon the following future development
     objectives, which are consistent with citywide Land Use Element policies and the Vision:
                                                        Emphasize continued commercial and
                                                         multiple-family residential designations west
                                                         of SR-55.
                                                        Promote viable open space recreation uses
                                                         of Grijalva Park, and Santiago Creek.
                                                        Allow potential future commercial uses on
                                                         the Yorba Park and OUSD Education Center
                                                         sites in conjunction with on- or off-site
                                                         parkland improvements.
                                                        Maintain hospital and medical office uses
                                                         near Chapman Hospital.
     The plan maintains the Public Facilities and Institutions designation on the Chapman Hospital
     site east of SR-55, allowing continued hospital and medical office uses. Most currently
     commercial areas along Tustin Street are designated General Commercial to provide for retail
     and service uses that support surrounding residential areas. Areas along Tustin Street
     approaching Santiago Creek are designated Low Medium and Medium Density Residential,
     allowing a combination of duplexes, mobile home parks, and apartments and condominiums.
     East of SR-55, an Open Space-Park designation is applied to Yorba Park and to Grijalva Park,
     located northeast of the Chapman Hospital site. An Open Space designation surrounds much
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-34

                                                                                   LAND USE
of Santiago Creek throughout the focus area. An additional Open Space area is located
between Grijalva Community Park and Chapman Hospital.
Katella Avenue Corridor
                                The Katella Avenue Corridor consists of properties located
                                north and south of Katella Avenue between the Santa Ana
                                River on the west and California Street on the east. The
                                focus area also includes portions of Main Street between
                                the Collins Channel and Katella Avenue, and portions of
                                Struck Avenue between Katella Avenue and the Collins
                                Channel. West Katella serves as a gateway into the City from
                                Anaheim and interfaces with the highly active area
                                surrounding The Pond and Angel Stadium, the Santa Ana
                                River, and the Platinum Triangle. While the West Katella
                                corridor functions as a solid commercial district for the City,
                                the westernmost portion of Katella Avenue has untapped
                                potential due to its strategic location and under-utilized
                                properties.
This western portion of this focus area is located within the City’s Redevelopment Project
Area. The Katella Avenue Corridor includes a good variety of both retail and small office uses.
                                ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-35

LAND USE
     Its location at the midpoint of the City's industrial area provides service and support
     functions for these uses. The current Stadium Promenade site could maximize development
     potential to include mixed housing and retail uses that complement the current uses on the
     site.
     Market studies completed for the General Plan update concluded that the western-most
     portion of this focus area could support mixed-use development, including housing at high
     densities. By employing this land use strategy, the City could encourage design of a signature
     development project on West Katella Avenue, serving as a gateway from the Platinum
     Triangle in Anaheim into the City of Orange.
     The land use plan for this focus area is based upon the following future development
     objectives, which are consistent with citywide Land Use Element policies and the Vision
     statement:
        Establish an active, vibrant urban mixed-use residential gateway to the City featuring
         high-density residential uses.
        Capitalize on development of expanded entertainment uses and housing across the
         Santa Ana River in Anaheim.
        Enhance retail options and convenience throughout west Orange.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             LU-36

                                                                                  LAND USE
The land use plan features an Urban Mixed-use designation
within the portion of the area between the Santa Ana River
and Batavia Street, General Commercial and Industrial
between Batavia Street and Glassell Street, and General
Commercial and Medium Density Residential uses between
Glassell Street and California Street. The Urban Mixed-use
area is intended to be a regionally-oriented activity center,
characterized by mid- to high-rise structures with uses that
could include housing (30.0 to 60.0 du/ac), commercial retail uses, restaurants, offices, and
civic uses. The General Commercial designation recognizes the contributions of the Katella
                                Avenue corridor to the City’s overall retail sales base, and
                                encourages some expansion and intensification of these uses,
                                up to a maximum FAR of 1.0. Additionally, public input
                                regarding this area emphasizes the need to incorporate youth
                                and teen activities within the uses; to improve the
                                appearance of Katella Avenue in the context of new
                                development, conveying the identity of a grand boulevard;
                                and to gradually phase out strip commercial uses along
certain segments of the corridor. The Neighborhood Mixed-use designation allows local- and
neighborhood-supporting mixed-use activity centers and corridors, which could include
housing (at up to 15.0 du/ac). This designation maintains the commercial nature of the
corridor with housing uses that help to transition into adjacent Low Density Residential
designations.
South Main Street Corridor
The South Main Street Corridor includes the
Children’s Hospital of Orange County
(CHOC) and St. Joseph Hospital medical
centers on La Veta Avenue, as well as
various commercial and office uses on Main
Street between La Veta Avenue and
Chapman         Avenue.       Multiple-family
residential apartments located west of Main
Street and south of Chapman Avenue form a buffer between the Main Street corridor and
single-family neighborhoods to the west. The South Main Street corridor also includes areas
                     south of SR-22 along Town and Country Road, characterized by mid-rise
                     office, senior housing, and commercial retail uses.
                     Most of this focus area is located within the City’s Redevelopment
                     Project Area. South Main Street serves as a key approach to the major
                     medical hub created by CHOC and St. Joseph Hospital medical centers.
                     These medical facilities have generated a spin-off demand for medical
                     office space and other complementary uses that existing land use
                     policies and parcel sizes do not easily accommodate. In recent years,
                     new medical office buildings have been constructed on redeveloped
                     sites, but many commercial properties remain that are incompatible
                     with desired medical uses. The corridor also abuts established single-
                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-37

LAND USE
     and multi-family neighborhoods, making expansion and intensification a challenge. Market
     studies completed for the General Plan update concluded that this area has good potential to
     provide for relatively high density housing and mixed-use development that supports current
     and future medical facilities in the area, while the Town and Country shopping center and
     Main Place regional mall in Santa Ana continue to provide nearby retail amenities.
     The land use plan for this focus area is based upon the following future development
     objective, which is consistent with citywide Land Use Element policies and the Community
     Vision:
        Encourage compatible and integrated residential, commercial, and office uses.
        Promote development of a medical corridor that capitalizes on existing hospital and
         medical uses.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-38

                                                                                   LAND USE
                                                 The plan encourages mid- to high-rise office,
                                                 medical, housing, and retail uses south of La
                                                 Veta Avenue. It applies the Urban Mixed-use
                                                 and Urban Office Professional designations to
                                                 properties along La Veta Avenue, Town and
                                                 Country Road, and Parker Street. Urban
                                                 Mixed-use areas south of SR-22 are intended
                                                 to provide for integrated commercial retail,
                                                 professional office, housing, and civic uses.
                                                 Commercial retail uses are intended to be the
primary use on the ground floor within these areas. Urban Office Professional areas north of
SR-22 are intended to provide for urban, high-intensity, mid- and high-rise office centers.
Professional office is intended as the primary use. Both designations allow for a maximum
allowable intensity of 3.0 FAR within this area. A limited number of high-rise office and
residential projects may also be permitted within this focus area through the use of
transferable development rights.
The plan also features Neighborhood Mixed-use designations for portions of Main Street
south of Almond Avenue. This designation encourages compatible and integrated residential,
commercial, office, and medical uses, either as multiple-story projects with ground-floor
retail, or as stand-alone projects with pedestrian connections to the arterial corridors.
Neighborhood-scale mixed-use at this location is intended to support the ongoing
transformation of south Main Street into a medical corridor in a manner sensitive to
surrounding single-family residential areas. On south Main Street, Neighborhood Mixed-use
areas are permitted at a maximum density of 24.0 du/ac, and a maximum FAR of 1.5. In the
Town and Country Road area south of SR-22, high intensity retail, office and housing
development is encouraged within the Urban Mixed-use designation, which allows a
maximum density of 60.0 du/ac, and a maximum FAR of 3.0. The General Commercial
designation present at the intersection of Main Street and Chapman Avenue allows for a
maximum development intensity of 1.0 FAR, to enable more productive use of retail
properties near the intersection.
West Chapman Avenue/Uptown Orange
The West Chapman/Uptown Orange focus area consists of
mostly commercial and industrial properties located west
of SR-57, as well as commercial areas located along Anita
Drive, just east of the Santa Ana River. In recent years, the
City has experienced a high level of interest in sites
available for redevelopment in Uptown Orange (generally
bounded by SR-57 and State College Boulevard). Large
multi-family     developments have recently been
constructed and property owners and developers remain
interested in increased office, retail, and housing
opportunities. Factors influencing redevelopment interest
in this area include expansion of the University of
California Irvine (UCI) Medical Center, freeway
accessibility, improvements at The Block at Orange,
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          LU-39
LAND USE
     County government facilities located in the area, and the City of Anaheim’s Platinum Triangle
     Plan.
     Uptown Orange is the most urban of the eight focus areas. It adjoins Anaheim, Garden
     Grove, and Santa Ana, where substantial higher-density development is already underway.
     Uptown is well-served by freeways and contains a mix of major destination uses, including
     shopping, entertainment, offices, hotels, and a hospital. As a regional mixed-use node,
     Uptown should accommodate additional development intensity, including high-density
     multifamily residential development.
     Market studies completed for the General Plan update concluded that Uptown Orange has
     the potential to complement similar residential/mixed-use development in surrounding cities.
     Existing and proposed retail/entertainment facilities at The Block provide the atmosphere to
     create a live, work, and play destination once higher-density residential units are introduced.
     This mixed-use development strategy and increased residential densities will require
     improved transit access. Additionally, the presence of the Santa Ana River and associated
     regional bike trail along the eastern edge of the focus area provides great opportunity to
     improve the community’s access to and relationship with the river, and to integrate access to
     and views of the river corridor in the design of mixed-use projects.
     The land use plan for this focus area is based upon the following future development
     objectives, which are consistent with citywide Land Use Element policies and the Vision
     Statement:
         Encourage integrated commercial retail, professional office, housing, and civic uses.
         Provide convenient transit access, innovative housing options, and pedestrian-oriented
          design.
         Require new development projects to provide community open space areas and retain or
          improve access to the Santa Ana River Trail.
     The plan features an Urban Mixed-use designation for most of the focus area, which provides
     for integrated commercial retail, professional office, housing and civic uses. Convenient
     transit access, innovative housing options, and pedestrian-oriented design will be
     encouraged. High intensity retail, office and housing development is encouraged within the
     Urban Mixed-use designation, which allows a maximum density of 60.0 du/ac, and a
     maximum FAR of 3.0. A limited number of high-rise office and residential projects that
     exceed the maximum density or intensity may also be permitted within this focus area
     through the use of transferable development rights. New development projects in this area
     will be required to demonstrate provision of community open space areas, and, for projects
     adjacent to the Santa Ana River, to provide access to the River Trail when possible.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-40

                                                                                  LAND USE
Old Towne and Santa Fe Depot
The Old Towne and Santa Fe Depot focus area is
generally bounded by Walnut Avenue to the north,
La Veta Avenue to the south, Cambridge Street to
the east, and Batavia Street to the west. Uses
within Old Towne consist of a variety of
commercial retail, service, restaurant, and office
uses lining the Chapman Avenue and Glassell Street
corridors; Hart, Plaza, and Depot Parks; industrial
and warehouse buildings lining the Burlington
Northern/Santa Fe (BNSF) Railway west of Glassell Street; several churches; Orange City Hall;
the Orange Public Library & History Center; the Senior Center; much of the Chapman
University campus; and numerous single-family and multiple-family residential units at
varying densities.
Over the past several years, the City has taken steps to enable long-term preservation of
historic properties in Old Towne, and in the process, has created one of California’s most
intact and recognized historic districts. Today, strong interest exists among segments of the
community to reduce overall residential densities in the Old Towne residential quadrants,
and to make the areas surrounding the Santa Fe Depot more pedestrian friendly and transit-
oriented.
                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          LU-41

LAND USE
                                                 The Santa Fe Depot and associated Metrolink
                                                 station and OCTA Transportation Center provide
                                                 commuting options to people living and working in
                                                 Orange. Opportunities for land use changes in this
                                                 area arise because of its proximity to The Plaza and
                                                 Chapman University, and due to the presence of
                                                 Depot Park, under-utilized industrial properties,
                                                 and surface parking lots. Land use changes could
                                                 better integrate this area with its surroundings and
                                                 could lead to more transit-oriented housing and
     creative re-use of historic industrial and commercial buildings.
     Old Towne is the heart of the City, and the General Plan seeks to protect the small-scale
     fabric of the area, as well as the existing predominantly single-family neighborhoods that
     surround the Plaza. Residents in this “small town” district enjoy proximity to key quality-of-
     life amenities, such as restaurants, shopping, commuter rail services, and other public
     facilities. The area provides amenities that are compatible with and supportive of new mixed-
     use development, which may include small-scale office development, additional storefront
     retail, and new housing. Market studies completed for the General Plan update concluded
     that mixed-use designations in this area are more likely to build out as residential use than as
     non-residential use. Residential uses will in turn drive support for additional non-residential
     development.
     The land use plan for this focus area is based upon the following future development
     objectives, which are consistent with citywide Land Use Element policies and the Vision
     statement:
         Reduce residential densities in many Old Towne neighborhoods.
         Continue to protect and enhance Old Towne’s historic character.
         Introduce neighborhood-scale mixed-use along Chapman Avenue and Glassell Street, and
          adjacent to the BNSF railroad.
         Encourage the adaptive re-use of existing industrial areas and the creation of transit-
          oriented developments around the historic Santa Fe Depot.
         Maintain and enhance Old Towne’s walkability.
         Provide for continued use and enhancement of the civic center.
     The plan features lower residential densities within the northeast, southwest and southeast
     quadrants of Old Towne, and introduces mixed-use within the historically industrial areas
     adjacent to the BNSF railroad. Low Density (maximum 6.0 du/ac) residential designations are
     applied to most current residential areas located east of Glassell Street. West of Glassell
     Street, a combination of Low, Low Medium, and Medium Density Residential designations
     are found, consistent with current development patterns. The intent of these designations is
     to ensure that infill development within Old Towne over time is consistent with the style,
     density, character, and intensity of the historic residential neighborhood character.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-42

                                                                                     LAND USE
Two Old Towne Mixed-use designations with a maximum density of 15.0 du/ac surround the
Plaza and line much of Chapman Avenue, Glassell Street, and the BNSF railroad corridor. One
of these is designed with a lower floor area ratio to maintain the historic residential character
associated with the Spoke Streets. A higher-density Old Towne Mixed Use designation that
allows up to 24.0 du/ac generally occurs along Olive Street, north and south of Chapman
Avenue, and around Pixley Street. The higher-density designation supports future plans for
transit-oriented development near the Metrolink station outlined within the Santa Fe Depot
Specific Plan. The Old Towne Mixed Use designations encourage and support development
up to the property lines in the downtown core and Santa Fe Depot Specific Plan area in order
to maintain the historic streetscape and building pattern that characterizes these portions of
the Old Towne area. Ground floor retail uses are encouraged for most infill development
projects, which could be supported by residential or office uses on subsequent stories. Stand
alone commercial, residential, or office projects may also be appropriate, provided they do
not interrupt the historic streetscape. The Old Towne Mixed-use designations also encourage
the adaptive re-use of the existing industrial areas, and support improved walkability within
the area.
Chapman University and the Orange Civic Center are contained within the Public Facilities
and Institutions designation. The civic center includes City Hall, the Orange Public Library &
History Center, the Chamber of Commerce, Fire Department Station 1, St. John’s Lutheran
School, Emanuel Lutheran School, the Women’s Club, and the Ainsworth House.
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-43

LAND USE
Industrial Areas
     This focus area generally consists of properties located north of Orangewood Avenue/Walnut
     Avenue and west of the BNSF Railway. Portions of the area, including the Katella Avenue
     Corridor and the Orangewood/Eckhoff area, are also addressed in more detail in other focus
     areas. Orange’s industrial area is characterized by a broad mix of business park, office,
     manufacturing, warehousing and commercial uses. A limited number of single-family homes
                                                 are located in the industrial area, mostly
                                                 concentrated along Cully Drive.
                                                 The entirety of this focus area is located within the
                                                 City’s Redevelopment Project Area. Over time,
                                                 market forces may create demand for more office
                                                 space or for more intense business park or
                                                 warehouse uses than currently exist. Considering
                                                 ways to increase the intensity of uses throughout
                                                 the City’s industrial areas will encourage more
                                                 productive use of limited land resources. Care
                                                 must also be exercised to ensure adequate
                                                 buffering between higher intensity industrial uses
                                                 and surrounding residential areas to the north and
                                                 east. Market studies completed for the General
                                                 Plan update concluded that demand for industrial
                                                 and office use in this area is strong, particularly
                                                 among those who want to own their buildings.
                                                 Therefore, the City seeks to preserve the primary
                                                 industrial land use found in this area and to
                                                 encourage intensification and/or redevelopment
                                                 of underutilized parcels.
     The land use plan for this focus area is based on the following future development
     objectives, which are consistent with citywide Land Use Element policies and the Vision
     statement:
        Decrease the maximum allowed intensity within areas located west of Batavia Street and
         generally south of Grove Avenue to discourage professional office uses within this area in
         favor of true industrial uses.
        Provide room for expansion of current businesses and infill of vacant properties in
         remaining portions of this area by increasing the maximum allowed development
         intensity.
        Preserve the single-family residential character of the Cully Drive neighborhood.
     The plan features Industrial land use designations west of Batavia Street and generally south
     of Grove Avenue. At these locations, the maximum allowed intensity is 0.75 FAR. The
     remaining portions of the industrial area are designated Light Industrial. In these areas, the
     maximum allowed intensity is 1.0 FAR with a three-story height limit to ensure a sensitive
     interface with nearby residential areas. These changes provide capacity for current
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-44

                                                                                    LAND USE
businesses to expand, and enable more intensive uses to provide infill of currently vacant
properties.
Properties on the east side of the Taft Avenue/Orange-Olive Road intersection are
designated Medium Density Residential (permitting up to 24.0 du/ac). Additionally, to protect
the integrity and character of the Cully Drive neighborhood, currently residential lots located
on Cully Drive, east of Batavia Street, are designated for Low Density Residential use,
permitting up to 6.0 du/ac.
Lemon Street Corridor
The Lemon Street corridor is bounded by
Lemon Street on the east, the BNSF Railway on
the west, Hoover Avenue on the north, and
Collins Avenue on the south. The corridor
includes predominately industrial and office
uses and vacant lots. This corridor represents
an opportunity to redefine and improve the
industrial interface with single- and multi-family
residential uses to the east.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-45
LAND USE
     Market studies completed for the General Plan update indicate that developers have shown
     interest in providing residential uses within the Lemon Street corridor. This focus area is
     located in the City’s Redevelopment Project Area, and it is likely that the Redevelopment
     Agency will need to provide financial and lot assembly assistance in order to successfully
     transition this area to desirable residential development.
     The land use plan for this focus area is based upon the following future development
     objective, which is consistent with citywide Land Use Element policies and the Vision
     statement:
         Establish a corridor of well-insulated, higher density residential uses, gradually
          transitioning, from west to east, into a single-family residential area.
     The plan features a Medium Density Residential designation to the north of the focus area,
     allowing a maximum density of 24.0 du/ac and industrial in the southern two-thirds of the
     area. Future development in this area should also incorporate accessible open spaces for
     residents and workers and take advantage of opportunities for future trails parallel to the
     railroad tracks.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-46

                                                                                      LAND USE
Eckhoff Street/Orangewood Avenue
This focus area encompasses the area
generally east of the Santa Ana River,
north of Orangewood Avenue, west of
Bitterbush Channel, and south of Collins
Channel. The focus area largely consists of
professional offices, commercial uses,
warehouses, and distribution centers. It
has historically been planned and zoned
for industrial use; however, over the years,
properties have been allowed to develop
as offices, and areas adjacent to the
offices have been allowed to develop as
industrial parks.
This focus area is located within the City’s
Redevelopment Project Area. As in the
City’s industrial area as a whole, demand
for industrial and office use in the Eckhoff
Street/Orangewood Avenue area has been
strong, particularly among those who
want to own their buildings. The City
seeks to encourage intensification and/or
redevelopment of underutilized parcels.
The land use plan for this focus area is
based on the following objectives for future development, which are consistent with
citywide Land Use Element policies and the Community Vision:
    Recognize the potential of areas north of Orangewood Avenue to continue to provide
     options for lower-scale office uses and business-park oriented light industrial uses, as
     well as warehouse and distribution uses.
    Expand current neighborhood-scale office activities along Orangewood Avenue.
The plan supports an expansion of current neighborhood office uses along Orangewood
Avenue and north of the Eckhoff Street intersection. All areas designated Light Industrial
have a maximum allowable building intensity of 1.0 FAR and a 3-story height limit. Properties
designated for Neighborhood Office Professional use have a maximum allowable building
intensity of 0.5 FAR.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          LU-47

LAND USE
Land Use Diversity and Balanced Development
     A well-balanced community provides a broad range of housing and business opportunities as
     well as recreational, institutional, and cultural activities that enhance the overall living
     environment. By encouraging a mix of land uses, the City can create an active and diverse
     environment that complements all lifestyles and supports neighborhoods. A balanced
     inventory of land uses is needed to meet the housing needs of all income groups and
     lifestyles, to create a stable employment and tax base, to maintain logical relationships
     between land uses and community assets, and to provide residents with a range of
     recreational opportunities. Maintaining a variety of complementary land uses will continue to
     be a high priority for the City.
     A key challenge that the City will face when reviewing future development is that newer
     areas of Orange (mostly located in the eastern portion of the City) and long-established areas
     of the City (mostly located in the western portion) have very different development and
     community service needs. Priorities in the City’s western area tend to be more established,
     focusing on reinvention of older commercial and industrial areas and on new opportunities
     to provide open space as part of infill development. This contrasts with priorities for east
     Orange, which is characterized by more recent suburban residential development. Here,
     providing adequate levels of roadway, utility infrastructure, and community services that are
     in step with new development and do not degrade service levels in other parts of the City is a
     key priority.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             LU-48

                                                                                          LAND USE
Mixed-use Development
    As this Element has discussed, mixed-use refers
    to the mixing of compatible uses such as
    residential, commercial, and office, which
    increases the diversity of land uses within a given
    area. Mixed-use developments create vital urban
    areas that accommodate residents, employment,
    retail, and amenities within walking distance.
    Mixed-use will also activate neighborhoods
    throughout the day, unlike single-use office
    districts, for instance, that are often deserted at
    night. Mixed-use buildings are often vertically
    mixed, with commercial space on the first floor
    and residential or office space above. Horizontal mixed-use is also desirable at some
    locations, allowing commercial to be adjacent to an office or residential use.
                                           The Land Use Policy Map identifies multiple types of
                                           mixed-use within the City. All of the mixed-use
                                           designations encourage a creative blend of commercial
                                           retail, office, housing, civic, and entertainment uses that
                                           may vary in composition and intensity based upon
                                           location, accessibility, and the surrounding development
                                           context. Figure LU-7 identifies potential configurations
                                           of mixed-use, in both plan and elevation, which may be
                                           found in Orange pursuant to the policies outlined in this
                                           Element. As shown in the figure, the style and intensity
                                           of mixed-use in Orange varies by location. For example,
                                           in areas designated for Urban Mixed-use, vertical mixed-
                                           use is encouraged, and mid-to-high rise buildings
                                           reaching upwards of 10 or more stories may be allowed.
                                           By contrast, in Neighborhood and Old Towne Mixed-use
                                           areas, either horizontal or vertical mixed-use is
    encouraged. Buildings tend not to exceed three stories, and they are designed to blend in
    with their surroundings. The City encourages this diversity of mixed-use development as a
    way of establishing vibrant activity centers, providing diverse housing opportunities, and
    encouraging walkable districts with convenient access to goods and services.
    Transfer of Development Rights for Residential Development
    or Open Space
    The City seeks to promote flexibility in future development of urban mixed-use
    environments, to encourage and support historic preservation within Old Towne, and to
    encourage expansion of open space opportunities in neighborhood scale mixed-use areas.
    Transfers of development rights are encouraged for these four future development
    conditions, which are summarized in Table LU-4 and discussed below.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-49
LAND USE
                                                       Table LU-4
                                      Transfer of Development Rights Conditions
                                             Site Characteristics              Maximum
                                                                              Transferable          Other
               Purpose            Receiver Site Land     Donor Site Land      Unused FAR       Requirements
                                  Use Designation(s)    Use Designation(s)  (Receiver Site)
        Provide for increased       Urban Mixed-use       Urban Mixed-use       0.25 FAR        Development
     levels of residential use at                                                                Agreement
          appropriate sites.
      Encourage development         Urban Mixed-use       Urban Mixed-use        1.0 FAR        Development
      of well-designed high rise                                                                 Agreement
     development consisting of
        buildings 10 stories or                                                             20 percent of receiver
         higher at identified                                                                    site must be
               locations.                                                                       developed as
                                                                                            permanent improved
                                                                                                 open space
     Expand and preserve open        Neighborhood          Neighborhood          Variable       Development
       space in Neighborhood           Mixed-use             Mixed-use       (determined by      Agreement
      mixed-use environments                                                  Development
                                                        Old Towne Mixed-use    Agreement)
       Encourage and support      Old Towne Mixed-use   Old Towne Mixed-use      Variable       Development
     historic preservation in Old                                            (determined by      Agreement
          Towne mixed-use            Neighborhood                             Development
            environments.              Mixed-use                               Agreement)
      For properties within the Urban Mixed-use designation, (see Figure LU-8) allowable land uses
      include residential (at 30.0 to 60.0 du/ac) or commercial retail or office, or any combination
      of those uses that does not exceed a maximum FAR of 3.0. For properties with proposed
      commercial retail and/or office development that do not exceed the maximum FAR, any
      unused FAR on that donor site, up to a maximum 0.25 FAR of an identified receiver site, may
      be transferred to other Urban Mixed-use designated properties for the purpose of
      developing additional residential units on the property that receives the unused FAR. This
      approach to development is known as a transfer of development rights (TDR) and must be
      completed under a development agreement in accordance with City ordinances. This TDR
      technique is allowed in addition to density bonus provisions of State law (section 65915 of
      the California Government Code). Transfers of development rights from a donor site under
      this strategy may be limited to one receiver site, or may involve multiple receiver sites.
                                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                    LU-50
LU-51 Figure LU-7 Mixed-use Type
LAND USE
         (This Page Intentionally Left Blank)
                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                        LU-52
                                                                                          LAND USE
                                                                                 Figure LU-8
                                  Urban Mixed-use Sites Eligible for High Rise Development
To determine the number of residential units that can be added to the receiver property,
unused FAR is converted to building floor area square footage; for example, 0.25 FAR for a
receiver property of 10 acres in size is 108,900 square feet. The resulting square feet of
building floor area is then divided by 1,000 square feet (the average size of a residential unit)
to determine the number of additional residential units that can be added to the receiver
property above and beyond the allowed 30.0-60.0 du/ac already allowed on that property. In
this example, dividing 108,900 by 1,000 equals a maximum of 109 dwelling units that can be
added to the receiver property, above and beyond the 300-600 dwelling units already
allowed.
For some properties within the Urban Mixed-use designation, the City desires well-designed
high-rise development consisting of buildings 10 stories or higher. For any unused FAR, up to
a maximum of 1.0 FAR of the receiving property may be transferred from other Urban Mixed-
use designated properties, if proposed development on the receiving property results in the
construction of a well designed high-rise building, and at least 20 percent of the property is
developed as permanent improved, publicly accessible open space.
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          LU-53
LAND USE
     For properties in the Neighborhood Mixed-use designation, transfers of unused FAR are
     permitted and encouraged for the purpose of creating open space. Similarly, in the Old
     Towne Mixed-use designation, transfers of unused FAR are permitted to support historic
     preservation within the Old Towne neighborhood.
Industrial and Office Uses
     Providing options for industrial development and office uses within the City contributes to
     the economic and employment base of the community. A variety of industrial and warehouse
     facilities are located in the area north and south of the western end of Katella Avenue. Uses
     range from large beverage and grocery distributors, to masonry and foam manufacturers,
     down to small one-person printing operations. Office spaces that support industrial practices
     can also be found in this area.
     Industrial development in Orange and throughout the region has undergone some
     transitions in recent years. Even though traditional manufacturing activities dominate these
     areas, in some cases warehousing uses and a few modern office parks are starting to replace
     manufacturing. In addition, Orange has experienced increased demand for larger, multi-story
     professional office complexes at locations such as South Main Street, Town and Country
     Road, La Veta Avenue, and The City Drive. Demand has also grown for medical office space
     surrounding local hospitals.
     The Land Use Policy Map indicates a change in proposed land use designations directly west
     of the core of Old Towne, from Industrial to Old Towne Mixed-use. By changing the land use
     designation, the City is encouraging the adaptive reuse of several industrial sites to support
     walkability and transit presence in the area. The City continues to support industrial and
     office uses in areas currently characterized by these uses, and encourages a mixture of
     office, commercial, and residential uses in the area near the Old Towne core.
Contextual and Environmental Compatibility
     The quality of the built and natural environments plays a large part in defining Orange’s
     quality of life. Land use conflicts often occur when newer development is allowed to occur
     that is insensitive to the use, scale, or character of current development and the surrounding
     environment. In other cases, older, obsolete and nonconforming uses remain, interspersed
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-54

                                                                                        LAND USE
    among newer developments, as when old service stations or repair shops are located in the
    midst of residential development. Such conflicts can lead to degradation of the built
    environment. The City has ensured that all proposed land use designations in this Element
    are designed to complement and enhance adjacent and surrounding land uses and the
    natural environment.
Coordinated Planning
    Future planning considers ongoing planning efforts of all City departments, agencies,
    surrounding jurisdictions and special districts. In addition, ongoing planning efforts
    undertaken by regional agencies such as the County of Orange, the Southern California
    Association of Governments, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, the Santa Ana
    Regional Water Quality Control Board, and others need to be examined for consistency with
    the City’s long-range objectives.
    The following plans and programs, which are administered by federal, state, county, and
    special purpose agencies, will help achieve the goals of the Land Use Element. The City will
    continue to coordinate with the agencies responsible for administering these plans to ensure
    that City interests are considered and met.
    National Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System
    The City of Orange is under the jurisdiction of the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control
    Board (RWQCB), which implements the National Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System
    (NPDES) permit for the northern and central portions of Orange County. The NPDES permit,
    a requirement under the Clean Water Act, addresses pollution from urban runoff that
    threatens water quality of receiving waters (such as streams and lakes). Under the NPDES
    permit, Orange must implement measures to reduce urban runoff during all phases of
    development: planning, construction, and existing use. Requirements include incorporating
    Best Management Practices to reduce runoff from construction and current uses, reporting
    any violations to the RWQCB, and education regarding the negative water quality impacts of
    urban runoff.
    California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines
    The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the state legislature in
    response to a public mandate for more thorough environmental analysis of projects that
    might affect the environment. Provisions of the law and environmental review procedures
    are described in the CEQA Statutes, State CEQA Guidelines, and the City’s guidelines
    implementing CEQA. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the decision making stage
    of development, City officials and the general public will be able to assess the environmental
    impacts associated with private and public development projects.
    Southern California Association of Governments Growth
    Management Plan
    The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) Growth Management Plan
    recommends methods to redirect regional growth to minimize traffic congestion and better
    protect environmental quality. The goals of the Growth Management Plan include balancing
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            LU-55

LAND USE
     jobs and housing. While SCAG has no authority to mandate implementation of the Growth
     Management Plan, principal goals have implications for the land use composition of Orange.
LAND USE IMPLEMENTATION
     The goals, policies and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of
     City plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing
     collaboration with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation
     measures for this Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-56
                                                         CIRCULATION
                                                            & MOBILITY
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
        Orange’s circulation system has been influenced by a variety of historical factors, including
        the presence of the Santa Fe Railroad, the vision of Alfred B. Chapman and William T. Glassell,
        the agricultural history of the area, and alternative transportation modes including a historic
        streetcar system.
        In 1887, the Santa Fe Railroad came to Orange and built a station four blocks west of the
        Plaza. The coming of the railroad set off a real estate boom that brought hundreds of settlers
        to the area. The railroad also influenced the City’s early economic success by providing a
        means to transport goods, especially citrus, to the entire country. Today, the railroad tracks
        continue to serve freight trains and provide a critical link to the region via the Metrolink
        heavy rail transit system.
        In the 1870s, Alfred B. Chapman and William T. Glassell subdivided their land into residential
        and small farm lots centered on a roundabout known today as Plaza Park. Plaza Park was
        dedicated in 1886 and established the City’s two main streets – Chapman Avenue and Glassell
        Street – as well as the compact street grid of Old Towne Orange. The street grid and railroad
        system were supported historically by a streetcar system that connected the small towns and
        settlements that make up the City today.
        Over time, the small farms on the outer edges of Orange’s core district began to disappear.
        Two factors influenced this change: the demand for housing after World War II and the
        appearance of “Quick Decline” disease that destroyed the local citrus industry. As each farm
        was developed independently, the grid system expanded outward and commercial corridors
        were established. Orange’s roadways began to take on a more suburban pattern of
        collectors, connectors, and arterials. As development reached the eastern portion of the City,
        the grid gave way to curvilinear street patterns.
        The historic roadways and railways that form the basis for the current circulation network
        have been complemented over the years by the development of a streetcar system, a transit
        service, an emerging and continually expanding bicycle trail and route network, and routes
        for equestrian use in the eastern portion of the City. The City will continue to be served by
        these multiple modes of transportation and other emerging mobility technologies.
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  CM-1
REV. GPA 2014-0001 (12/8/15)
Rev. GPA 2010-0001 (8/10/10)

                                                                       CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
    Orange’s Vision for the Future, described in the General Plan Introduction, recognizes that
    the circulation system is a key component of the quality of life in the City. Accordingly, the
    vision includes the following objectives:
        Residential areas will be connected to commercial, recreational, and open space areas, as
         well as educational and cultural facilities via a balanced, multi-modal circulation network
         that accommodates vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists, hikers, and equestrians. This network
         will create additional opportunities for walking and biking, enhancing safety and well-
         being for neighborhoods and businesses.
        The City will work to define neighborhoods through the use of open space areas and a
         trail system that provides a source of aesthetic beauty and recreational opportunities.
         These open space areas support a healthy and active community.
        We will develop a connected multi-modal network for traveling from one end of town to
         the other that provides the option for residents from different neighborhoods to access
         parks, open spaces, and scenic areas by vehicle, transit, foot, bicycle or, where
         appropriate, horse.
Purpose of the Circulation & Mobility Element
    California’s General Plan Guidelines mandate that the Circulation & Mobility Element fulfill
    the following objectives:
        Show a direct relationship to the Land Use Element to ensure that any changes to land
         use as stated by the Land Use Element and growth occur with adequate circulation and
         transportation facilities in mind.
        Address relevant issues including the adequacy of “major thoroughfares, transportation
         routes, terminals, other local public utilities and facilities.” The goal of the Circulation &
         Mobility Element is to identify circulation problems related to these facilities in the early
         stages and resolve them in local goals and policies without costly delays.
    Other relevant issues discussed in the Circulation & Mobility Element include those that
    address streets, highways, public transit routes, railroads, bicycle and pedestrian routes,
    recreational trails, paratransit, parking, transportation system management, and air
    pollution. The hierarchy of streets within the residential areas helps to frame the urban form.
    Connections between neighborhoods can be achieved by a comprehensive network of
    sidewalks and trails. Also, the commercial corridors can be enhanced with adequate street
    capacity, public transit, and pedestrian-friendly environments.
    The state also recommends that the Circulation & Mobility Element address coordination
    efforts among the local, regional, and state transportation plans to better resolve circulation
    issues. Since many transportation concerns are regional, addressing them requires
    intergovernmental and regional transportation management plans and policy
    implementation. These partnerships ensure the most efficient use of funding, infrastructure,
    and other resources. The state also recommends the “preservation of transportation
    corridors for future system improvements.”
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CM-2

                                                                    CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
    The Circulation & Mobility Element prioritizes the issues and opportunities that exist within
    Orange’s transit network. It is directly responsive to proposed changes in land use and
    anticipates the impacts of those changes. This Element also seeks to reassure residents and
    businesses that the City recognizes the link between transportation and land uses, and
    provides a means to mitigate the impacts of growth.
    Another goal of the Circulation & Mobility Element is to increase transportation options and
    provide increased access to the circulation system for all residents of Orange. This goal
    includes improved rail and bus transit connections and frequency, implementation of a
    Bikeway Master Plan, and completion of a trails system. Transforming many of Orange’s
    historically auto-oriented commercial corridors, such as Katella Avenue, Main Street, and
    portions of La Veta Avenue, Chapman Avenue, and Glassell Street into more pedestrian-
    friendly mixed-use environments is an overarching goal. Where possible, the development of
    equestrian trails is also encouraged.
    One of the main functions of the Circulation & Mobility Element is to guide and direct
    enhancement of the current circulation system for existing and future developments. Thus,
    circulation provisions correlate with the Land Use Element to avoid unchecked growth and
    unnecessary congestion.
    Another key objective of the Element is to work toward a future circulation network that
    provides meaningful alternatives for getting around the community by less auto-dependent
    means. The City’s topography, street and sidewalk system, transit and trail framework, and
    land use relationships provide an excellent foundation for pursuit of this objective.
    The Circulation & Mobility Element does not simply determine automobile routes. It also
    guides the movement of people and goods, directly affecting Orange’s physical, social, and
    economic environment. Since circulation permits accessibility to places and social amenities,
    it can either improve or cause deterioration in quality of life. Circulation efficiency also plays a
    major role in progress and development of the City’s economy.
Scope and Content of the Circulation & Mobility Element
    The Circulation & Mobility Element comprises three sections:
    (1) Introduction;
    (2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and
    (3) The Circulation & Mobility Plan.
    The first section introduces the contents of the Circulation & Mobility Element. The second
    section presents issues, goals, and policies for improving circulation. The third section
    includes the Circulation & Mobility Plan, which designates locations and standards for
    roadways and non-motorized circulation facilities, and states the community’s desired level
    of transportation service.
    Implementation measures designed to promote achievement of the goals and policies are
    provided in an Appendix to the General Plan.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CM-3

                                                                      CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
Relationship to other General Plan Elements
    California planning law requires that the Circulation & Mobility Element correlate and
    maintain consistency with the other General Plan elements. The Circulation & Mobility
    Element relates most closely to the Land Use, Natural Resources, Noise, Economic
    Development, Housing, and Urban Design Elements.
    The Circulation & Mobility Element is linked to the Land Use Element because the General
    Plan land use designations identified in the Land Use Element serve as a basis for the
    allocation of vehicle trips and establishment of capacity levels for circulation planning. The
    Land Use Element also provides land use designations that accommodate mixed commercial
    and residential development, which encourage shorter trips and improve the efficiency of
    the transportation network. The Circulation & Mobility Plan is established to define and
    provide for adequate levels of service and facilities to support future land uses. This Element
    recommends roadway and intersection improvements that may require land acquisition.
    Location of public transportation facilities will also influence pedestrian activity and transit-
    oriented development, and the physical size of streets will affect urban land uses and the
    physical appearance of the City.
    The Natural Resources Element identifies regional air quality objectives and provides
    appropriate mitigation efforts that affect the Circulation & Mobility Element. Improving
    access, encouraging alternative modes of travel, and maintaining air quality and conservation
    standards are common objectives of the Natural Resources and the Circulation & Mobility
    Elements.
    The Noise Element addresses future noise levels associated with roadways, rail, and other
    transportation facilities. Future volumes of traffic on the circulation system are directly
    related to future noise levels and mitigation strategies.
    The Economic Development Element identifies desirable economic conditions and land uses
    that enhance and promote business activity, employment growth, and economic stability.
    The goals and policies of the Circulation & Mobility Element will determine road capacity in
    Orange, which will impact the type and location of uses, and parking and access
    considerations associated with future uses. Both elements share a common objective of
    planning for future transportation infrastructure needs. Maintaining roadways, bikeways and
    bus and rail transit facilities is critical to the success of both current and future businesses in
    Orange.
    The Urban Design Element is a framework for shaping the future form and character of
    Orange. The quality of Orange’s physical environment contributes to its identity, attracts
    new residents, and sets the stage for economic activity. The Urban Design Element builds on
    the foundation of Orange’s already strong sense of place to preserve and strengthen the
    streetscape environment of commercial corridors and landmarks within the city. The Urban
    Design Element and Circulation & Mobility Element share a common objective to reinvent
    City streets as more functional and walkable public places.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   CM-4

                                                                   CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
    The goals, policies, and implementation programs of the Circulation & Mobility Element seek
    to achieve a better balance between vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle travel, and to provide
    a wide range of viable transportation options to Orange residents. The following six issues
    are addressed: (1) enhancing the local circulation system; (2) maintaining the regional
    circulation system; (3) maintaining a viable public transportation network; (4) creating a
    comprehensive system of sidewalks, trails, and bikeways; (5) providing adequate parking
    facilities; and (6) improving circulation system aesthetics and safety.
Local Circulation System
    The local roadway system serves the community’s primary needs for mobility and access, and
    consists of a hierarchy of City streets to meet those needs. The City’s original street system
    was established as a grid pattern long before a Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH) was
    adopted. The Old Towne area and many postwar neighborhoods were designed in a classic
    grid configuration, while in newer parts of the City, physical features such as the Santa Ana
    River, Santiago Creek, hilly terrain, freeways and the presence of the City of Villa Park have
    resulted in a system without a definitive pattern. Some major roads do not connect the
    eastern and western portions of the City and consequently do not provide effective through
    circulation. A well-designed roadway system will provide convenient access to activities in
    Orange.
    GOAL 1.0:         Provide a safe, efficient, and comprehensive circulation system that serves
                      local needs, meets forecasted demands, and sustains quality of life in
                      neighborhoods.
    Policy 1.1:       Plan, build, and maintain an integrated, hierarchical, and multi-modal system
                      of roadways, pedestrian walkways, and bicycle paths throughout the City.
    Policy 1.2:       Identify key intersections and streets with historical or projected traffic
                      congestion problems and apply creative traffic management measures to
                      improve overall circulation.
    Policy 1.3:       Consider various methods to increase safety on City arterials and
                      neighborhood streets, including landscaping, provision of bike/transit lanes,
                      and consideration of traffic calming on neighborhood streets in accordance
                      with the City’s Neighborhood Residential Traffic Management Program.
    Policy 1.4:       Prohibit on-street parking where possible to reduce bicycle/automobile
                      conflicts in appropriate target areas as recommended by the Bikeways Master
                      Plan.
    Policy 1.5:       Address possible safety and noise effects of increased rail activity on grade
                      crossings throughout the City.
    Policy 1.6:       Maintain and repair roadways and sidewalks as necessary to improve
                      circulation and safety.
    Policy 1.7:       Consolidate driveways along roadways that provide access to commercial
                      uses to minimize side street interruption and promote smooth traffic flows.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                CM-5

                                                                   CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                    On-street parking is prohibited on commercial access streets to provide
                    adequate curb-to-curb width for travel lanes.
Regional Circulation System
    Mobility in Orange is directly related to the regional transportation network, as the City lies
    at the confluence of several regional freeways: the Santa Ana Freeway (Interstate 5), Orange
    Freeway (State Route [SR] 57), Garden Grove Freeway (SR-22), Costa Mesa Freeway (SR-55),
    Riverside Freeway (SR-91) and Eastern Transportation Corridor (SR-241). In addition to the
    freeways, other connections to the region include the commuter rail system known as
    Metrolink, a freight and goods rail transport system, and a regional bikeways system with
    connections to the Santa Ana River and other locations. Orange is also connected to the
    region via the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) bus system. City
    infrastructure must accommodate regional through traffic originating in other communities
    in addition to providing local residents access to the regional network.
    GOAL 2.0:       Provide an effective regional transportation network.
    Policy 2.1:     Ensure consistency with the County MPAH in order to qualify for funding
                    programs.
    Policy 2.2:     Coordinate with adjacent cities to plan and develop major east/west and
                    north/south arterials and rapid transit to connect the City with the cities of
                    Anaheim, Tustin, Santa Ana, Garden Grove, and Villa Park, as well as
                    developing areas within the City’s sphere of influence.
    Policy 2.3:     Cooperate with and support local and regional agencies’ efforts to improve
                    regional arterials and transit in order to address increasing traffic congestion.
    Policy 2.4:     Coordinate land use planning with anticipated future development of
                    roadways and other transportation facility improvements as well as the
                    expansion of commuter rail and bus service.
    Policy 2.5:     Ensure that transportation facilities and improvements do not degrade the
                    quality of Orange’s commercial and residential areas.
    Policy 2.6:     Encourage the use of regional rail, transit, bicycling, carpools, and vanpools
                    for work trips to relieve traffic congestion.
    Policy 2.7:     Continue to support the use of rail corridors within the City for the movement
                    of freight and goods, and work with rail operators to minimize associated
                    traffic delays.
Public Transportation
    Public transportation is a crucial component of a comprehensive circulation system. In
    addition to reducing air pollution and traffic congestion, a successful public transit system
    provides an alternative mode of travel for those with limited mobility, residents who may not
    have access to a car, and persons who choose not to drive.
    GOAL 3.0:       Connect centers within the City to each other and to the region through
                    efficient and accessible public transportation.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CM-6

                                                                     CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
    Policy 3.1:      Work with OCTA and other agencies to assess City public transportation
                     needs and to ensure delivery of services when and where they are needed.
    Policy 3.2:      Enhance and encourage provision of convenient and attractive transit
                     amenities and streetscapes to encourage use of public transportation (e.g.,
                     benches, trash cans, shelters, and lighting).
    Policy 3.3:      Require incorporation of transit-oriented design features within major
                     commercial and employment areas as well as in medium density residential
                     and mixed-use development areas.
Sidewalks, Trails, and Bikeways
    In addition to offering recreational and public health benefits, non-vehicular modes of
    transportation offer commuting options. Also, the mixed-use environments advocated by
    Land Use Element policies will encourage increased pedestrian activity on City sidewalks for
    both business and pleasure. An effective pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian network must
    be safe and accessible, and must connect key activity centers within the City with each other
    and with the regional trail system. A comprehensive network of on-street bicycle lanes, off-
    street bicycle paths, sidewalks, and trails should be developed and maintained to increase
    the safety and utility of the system, with a particular focus on the City’s sidewalk deficient
    industrial areas
    GOAL 4.0:        Provide efficient and accessible modes of pedestrian, bicycle, and
                     equestrian transportation and improved facilities and amenities.
    Policy 4.1:      Create a comprehensive bicycle network that is integrated with other
                     transportation systems by establishing complementary on-street and off-
                     street facilities as identified in the City of Orange Bikeways Master Plan and
                     OCTA Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan, including Santiago Creek, the Santa
                     Ana River, and the Tustin Branch Trail.
    Policy 4.2:      Install racks and safe storage facilities at parking areas for City facilities, as
                     appropriate, and encourage incorporation of such facilities within privately-
                     developed projects.
    Policy 4.3:      Improve citywide awareness of automobile and bicycle safety.
    Policy 4.4:      Encourage use of the bikeway system by providing adequate signage, trail
                     markings, and other amenities.
    Policy 4.5:      Ensure that pedestrian sidewalks, trails, and bikeways are safe environments
                     through the use of crime prevention-oriented trail design features, lighting
                     where appropriate, pedestrian and bicycle safety improvements at at-grade
                     rail crossings, access for emergency vehicles, and links to the roadway signal
                     system.
    Policy 4.6:      Explore opportunities to convert abandoned rail corridors into segments of
                     the City’s bikeway and pedestrian trail system.
    Policy 4.7:      Provide ADA accessible sidewalks and pedestrian amenities throughout the
                     City.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                CM-7

                                                                  CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
    Policy 4.8:     Expand and maintain an equestrian trail network and provide for appropriate
                    staging areas and infrastructure.
Parking Facilities
    A shortage of parking can cause circulation problems and could lead to a reduction or loss of
    business activity. Old Towne Orange has been identified as an area of particular concern. As
    the City develops, providing adequate parking adjacent to other activity centers is
    increasingly important.
    GOAL 5.0:       Provide adequate parking to meet the needs of activity centers throughout
                    the City.
    Policy 5.1:     Provide adequate parking to protect and support the economic vitality and
                    diversity of Old Towne.
    Policy 5.2:     Plan for and design parking facilities throughout the City that are adequate to
                    meet demand, but also consider land use-parking efficiencies, and the
                    surrounding natural and built environment.
    Policy 5.3:     Encourage adjacent businesses to consolidate parking facilities and access
                    points.
    Policy 5.4:     Encourage well-designed structured parking in commercial areas where such
                    features would be economically feasible, safe, and visually integrated with
                    existing development.
Circulation System Aesthetics
    Streets that have been made or modified to include visual and pedestrian amenities can
    improve the overall look and feel of City streets, as well as enhancing functionality for all
    users. As major commercial corridors are beautified and changed to include a pleasant
    pedestrian environment, this will have positive effects on the feelings of safety and security
    for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists.
    GOAL 6.0:       Provide roadway corridors that are aesthetically pleasing and contribute to
                    a feeling of safety, security, and comfort for motorists, bicyclists, and
                    pedestrians.
    Policy 6.1:     Supply adequate, clear, and correctly placed signage to direct both motorists
                    and non-motorists toward destinations and away from hazards.
    Policy 6.2:     Provide clear indicators in the right-of-way for where pedestrians and
                    bicyclists are encouraged to walk, bike, or cross safely. These may include
                    special paving, line stripes, and crosswalks.
    Policy 6.3:     Provide lighting, landscaping, street trees, and other appropriately scaled
                    streetscape features that accommodate all users on commercial corridors.
                    Where appropriate, lighting should be scaled for autos as well as pedestrians.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CM-8
                                                                  CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
CIRCULATION & MOBILITY PLAN
    The objective of the Circulation & Mobility Plan is to document existing transportation
    facilities in the planning area used for the movement of people and goods. The Element
    addresses the desired future condition of these facilities, and their relationship to future land
    uses identified in the Land Use Element. The Plan describes the circulation system, including
    the arterial network and intersections, the public transit system, bicycle paths, recreation
    facilities, parking, and railroad operations. The City’s circulation network includes an
    extensive system of roadways, bus transit service, commuter rail, and freight rail.
Local Circulation System
    A well-designed local arterial roadway system that connects to a well-developed regional
    circulation system provides safe and convenient access to employment, housing, recreation,
    and commercial areas in Orange. City arterial roadways located on the western side of SR-55
    generally follow north-south and east-west orientations. On the eastern side of the freeway,
    arterials are characterized by curvilinear streets due to undulating geographical
    surroundings. Key north-south arterials include Tustin Street, Glassell Street, Main Street, and
    The City Drive. Key east-west arterials include Chapman Avenue, Katella Avenue, Taft
    Avenue, and parts of La Veta Avenue. These arterial roadways are in turn supported by a
    network of collector and local streets that provide access to homes and businesses
    throughout the City.
    Roadway Classification System
    The City’s roadway network is distinguished by a hierarchical classification system that
    differentiates roads by size, function, and approximate daily capacity based upon Level of
    Service D (LOS D). LOS is a qualitative measure that characterizes traffic congestion on a
    scale of A to F with LOS A representing a free-flow condition and LOS F representing extreme
    congestion. LOS standards can apply to either intersections or links (a section of street
    between two intersections). Generally speaking, LOS represents the ability of a roadway or
    an intersection to accommodate traffic.
    In the City, intersections are used as actual control points. City roadways consist of both
    divided and undivided roadways. Divided roadways generally contain a physical barrier or
    buffer, such as a raised median or a continuous two-way left turn lane, between each
    direction of travel. Divided roadways remove vehicles making a left turn from the travel lanes
    so as not to impede through traffic and constrict roadway capacity. Undivided roadways do
    not contain a buffer between each direction of travel, and therefore left-turning traffic can
    impede through traffic. Undivided roadways may provide turn movement pockets at
    intersections. The six categories of roadways in Orange are summarized in Table CM-1.
    Proposed cross-sections for each type of roadway are shown in Figure CM-1.
    The City’s policy is to use a link capacity standard of LOS D. The following paragraphs
    represent link capacities of each roadway type at LOS D.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             CM-9

                                                                                 CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                                                    Table CM-1
                                           Roadway Classifications
   Classification      Facility Type                                    Characteristics
Smart Street        Smart Street      4-8 lane divided, with possible signal coordination, intersection capacity
                                      improvements and/or grade separations
Principal Arterial  8 Lane Divided    Primarily serves through traffic with limited local access
Major Arterial      6 Lane Divided    Serves mostly through traffic with some local access allowed
Primary Arterial    4 Lane Divided    Serves through and local traffic
Secondary Arterial  4 Lane Undivided  Serves through and local traffic
Collector Street    2 Lane            Serves mostly local traffic
          Smart Streets are typically four- to eight-lane roadways with enhanced capacity and
          smoother traffic flow than standard arterial streets. These streets have enhanced features
          such as traffic signal synchronization, bus bays, intersection improvements, and the addition
          of travel lanes by removing on-street parking and consolidating driveways. The traffic
          carrying capacities of Smart Streets can range from 60,000 to 79,000 vehicles per day,
          depending on the number of lanes, degree of access control, peak period loading, and the
          configurations of major intersections.
          Principal Arterials are typically eight-lane divided roadways with medians or continuous two-
          way left turn lanes. They can accommodate up to 67,500 vehicles on an average weekday at
          LOS D conditions, depending on the degree of access control, peak period traffic loadings,
          and lane configurations at major intersections. Principal arterials prohibit on-street, curbside
          parking, and connect directly to freeways.
          Major Arterials are six-lane divided roadways with medians or continuous two-way left turn
          lanes. They can accommodate up to 50,700 vehicles on an average weekday at LOS D
          conditions, depending on the degree of access control, peak period traffic loadings, and lane
          configurations at major intersections. Major arterials facilitate traffic circulation within
          Orange, and also prohibit on-street, curbside parking.
          Primary Arterials are four-lane divided roadways with medians or continuous two-way left turn
          lanes. They can accommodate up to 33,750 vehicles on an average weekday at LOS D
          conditions, depending on the degree of access control and peak period loadings. Primary
          Arterials provide for easy circulation in the City, and allow for limited on-street, curbside
          parking.
          Secondary Arterials are four-lane undivided roadways without medians. They can
          accommodate up to 21,600 vehicles on an average weekday at LOS D conditions, depending
          on the degree of access control and peak period loadings. Secondary arterials allow for on-
          street, curbside parking.
                                              ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                       CM-10
                    CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                                 Figure CM-1
                    Roadway Cross Sections
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
      CM-11
                                                                                         CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
         Collector Streets are typically two-lane roadways without medians that gather and distribute
         traffic to higher-capacity arterials. They can accommodate up to 10,800 vehicles per average
         weekday at LOS D conditions, depending on the degree of access control and peak period
         traffic loadings. Centerline striping is typically not provided on collector streets, and on-street
         parking is allowed. There are several types of two-lane streets in the City, including divided,
         undivided, residential, and collector streets. Each type serves a slightly different purpose and
         may have different capacity thresholds based on various factors.
         Performance Criteria
         Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve residents and businesses in Orange
         requires establishing performance criteria. Performance criteria have a policy component
         that establishes a desired LOS, and a technical component that specifies how traffic forecast
         data can be used to measure criteria achievement.
         The LOS definition for intersections is based on a volume-to-capacity (V/C) ratio and provides
         a more quantitative description of traffic conditions. Table CM-2 presents LOS based on
         traffic volumes and the design capacity of intersections.
                                                          Table CM-2
                                    Level of Service Definitions for Intersections
  Level of       Volume-to-Capacity
                                                                                 Description
  Service                 Ratio
      A                 0.00-0.60             Free Flow/Insignificant Delays: No approach phase is fully utilized by traffic and
                                              no vehicle waits longer than one red indication.
      B                  0.61-0.70            Stable Operation/Minimal Delays: An occasional approach phase is fully
                                              utilized. Many drivers feel somewhat restricted within platoons of vehicles.
      C                  0.71-0.80            Stable Operation/Acceptable Delays: Major approach phases fully utilized.
                                              Most drivers feel somewhat restricted.
     D                  0.81-0.90             Approaching Unstable/Tolerable Delays: Drivers may have to wait through
                                              more than one red signal indication. Queues may develop but dissipate rapidly,
                                              without excessive delays.
      E                  0.91-1.00            Unstable Operation/Significant Delays: Volumes at or near capacity. Vehicles
                                              may wait through several signal cycles. Long queues form upstream from
                                              intersection.
      F                     N/A               Forced Flow/Excessive Delays: Represents jammed conditions. Intersection
                                              operates below capacity with low volumes. Queues may block upstream
                                              intersections.
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, Special Report No. 209, Washington DC, 2000.
         Although roadway capacity is generally a function of peak hour intersection performance
         and the corresponding peak hour volumes, daily arterial segment capacities (link capacities)
         also provide a measure of the overall LOS of the arterial system. Generally, traffic impact
         mitigation focuses on peak hour intersection performance, since system performance is
         typically a function of intersection performance. The City’s policy is to use a link capacity
         standard of LOS D. Table CM-3 presents arterial daily capacities at LOS D and LOS E.
                                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                             CM-12

                                                                                 CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                                                             Table CM-3
                                    Arterial Daily Capacity Threshold Assumptions
                                                                                  Daily Capacity
                          Street Type                                    LOS D                   LOS E
Smart Street – 6- to 8-lane divided                                       71,100                 79,000
Principal – 8-lane divided                                               67,500                  75,000
Major – 6-lane divided                                                   50,700                  56,300
Primary – 4-lane divided                                                 33,750                  37,500
Secondary – 4- lane undivided                                            21,600                  24,000
Collector – 2-lane undivided                                             10,800                  12,000
Source: City of Orange General Plan Update Traffic Report, 2008.
          Various LOS policy standards have been established to evaluate observed traffic conditions,
          future development plans, and circulation system modifications. At the local level, the City of
          Orange has established LOS D as the lowest acceptable level of service for both roadway
          segments and peak-hour signalized intersection movements. At the regional planning level,
          Orange County’s Congestion Management Plan (CMP) specifies LOS E as the operating
          standard for roadways and intersections on the CMP highway system. The CMP Highway
          System consists of the Orange County smart street network plus the state highway system.
          Thus, the SR-55 northbound and southbound ramps at Katella Avenue are CMP intersections
          within the City’s jurisdiction. The City does not have an adopted LOS standard for
          unsignalized intersections. Performance of unsignalized intersections is evaluated on a case-
          by-case basis.
          The City has also established additional thresholds for project impacts that go beyond
          acceptable operational LOS to address direct project impacts to roadway capacity. For
          purposes of compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), projects that
          increase V/C by .01 or more on affected roadway segments at intersections already
          experiencing or projected to experience LOS E or F conditions, are considered to create
          significant impacts, and mitigation is required. This requirement is designed to reduce the
          occurrence of both roadway congestion and underfunded improvements, and is
          implemented within the City of Orange Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines.
          In order to maximize the efficiency of its circulation system, the City will look at where
          physical improvements to the circulation infrastructure can be made to expand capacity and
          increase traffic flow. To maximize efficiency of the road system, the City will support traffic
          signal coordination and spacing, and will also discourage on-street parking along arterials. In
          addition, the City will explore ways to reduce the demand for vehicular transportation,
          specifically through the provision and maintenance of bike lanes, bikeways, and trails, and
          will also encourage additional regional transit services and support facilities. The City’s
          Transportation Demand Management (TDM) ordinance (Chapter 10.83 of the Municipal
          Code) further specifies a variety of techniques available to employers with 100 or more
          employees to advance the goals of efficiently utilizing the existing and planned
          transportation system and reducing vehicle emissions.
                                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                               CM-13

                                                              CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
City Master Plan of Streets and Highways
Land Use Element policy will allow land use changes and intensification to occur in specific
focus areas within the City. The City’s
Master Plan of Streets and Highways
displayed in Figure CM-2 has been
developed in close coordination with
land use policy to ensure that traffic
generated by new development will not
compromise the City’s goal to ensure
that     intersections     and   roadway
segments operate efficiently. The map
identifies components of the City’s
roadway circulation system. The map
also indicates where augmented roads
are needed, and pinpoints locations for
enhanced intersections, including the
future Meats Avenue interchange at SR-
55. Although most of Orange is already built out, most remaining developable land is located
in the eastern part of the City. New development in east Orange will require construction of
new roads to provide circulation and traffic flow to residents and businesses. Land Use
Element policies enabling reuse and redevelopment within established portions of the City,
particularly within the focus areas, may also necessitate roadway widening and intersection
enhancements. The City will continue to collect funds for necessary circulation system capital
improvements through a program that sets up a fee structure for all new development and
redevelopment projects. This program will require developers to pay their fair share for
transportation system improvements required by new projects. The City will use the annual
seven-year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) process to prioritize, fund, and complete
improvements required to achieve build-out of the proposed roadway system identified in
Figure CM-2.
Roadway Widening
Roadway widening in specific locations will be necessary to obtain new travel lanes.
Additional travel lanes may be acquired either by obtaining additional rights-of-way as
necessary or by constructing new lanes within existing rights-of-way. Parking restrictions
may be applied to allow additional lanes to be provided within existing rights-of-way.
Old Towne Street Network
The Old Towne street network is a clear example of Orange’s grid street pattern. Parallel
roadways have been established in both the north-south and east-west direction to
distribute traffic evenly. The Plaza area at Glassell Street and Chapman Avenue is a unique
feature that creates discontinuous traffic flows along these two primary roadways. However,
no plans have been made to modify the National Register-listed Historic Plaza to increase its
traffic carrying capacity.
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                        CM-14

      Figure CM-2 City Master Plan of Streets and Highways
                                           GPA 2014-0001 (12/8/15)
                                           GPA 2010-0001 (8/10/10)
CM-15
(This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                     CM-16
                                                                   CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
    In light of these conditions, parallel roadways such as Almond Avenue, Palmyra Avenue,
    Lemon Street, Olive Street, Shaffer Street, Grand Street, Palm Avenue, and Maple Street will
    continue to serve as local collectors around The Plaza.
    Metropolitan Drive Extension
    Extending Metropolitan Drive behind the University of California, Irvine (UCI) Medical Center
    will help facilitate the movement of north-south traffic near The Block at Orange shopping
    area, improve access to Interstate 5 (I-5), and relieve congestion on The City Drive.
    Metropolitan Drive will be extended from The City Drive/State College Boulevard to the
    Metropolitan Drive/Rampart Street connection.
    Critical Intersection Program
    Intersections serve as traffic control points for the circulation system, regulating the flow of
    vehicles along City streets and sometimes limiting the capacity of the system. In the long
    term, system capacity and efficiency can both be increased if intersections are designed to
    handle future anticipated traffic volumes. Typically, the design of the roadways forming an
    intersection dictates the intersection configuration. Department of Public Works standards
    indicate that a left-turn pocket may or may not be provided, depending on traffic volumes
    through the intersection. However, one pocket may not be adequate to handle vehicles
    during peak hours. Traffic may back up into a through travel lane, resulting in congestion at
    the intersection and at other locations along the roadway.
    One way of providing additional intersection capacity at critical locations is through the use
    of special intersection configurations known as “critical intersections.” Critical intersections
    deviate from typical City design standards by increasing the number of lanes at an
    intersection beyond what typically would be required. By increasing capacity at the
    intersection, the circulation link increases overall system capacity.
    The Master Plan of Streets and Highways (Figure CM-2) identifies the locations of critical
    intersections within Orange. A list of these intersections and diagrams depicting their
    geometries are on file in the Public Works Department.
Regional Roadway System
    The City’s local circulation network is connected to an efficient regional circulation system.
    Figure CM-2 shows the freeways that traverse the Orange planning area. The Santa Ana
    Freeway (I-5) provides interstate and regional access to the City. In addition, SR-57, SR-55,
    and SR-22 all provide connections to the City from northern Orange County and neighboring
    Los Angeles County, San Diego County, Riverside County, and San Bernardino County. SR-91
    and SR-241 provide additional, more limited freeway access. SR-241 is a toll facility controlled
    by the Transportation Corridor Agency (TCA).
    I-5 is a northwest-southeast freeway that passes through the southwest corner of the City,
    and provides direct access to Los Angeles County to the north and San Diego County to the
    south. I-5 has two interchanges within Orange—one located at its junction with SR-57 and
    SR-22 (commonly known as the Orange Crush) and the other at State College Boulevard/The
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CM-17

                                                              CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
City Drive. The junction at the Orange Crush currently has the most severe congestion, which
directly affects the roadway system in the City. With projected future growth in Orange and
in the region, traffic flow at this junction is expected to worsen. The City will continue to
work with and support the efforts of local and regional agencies to mitigate the increased
traffic congestion in this area.
SR-91 is an east-west freeway that provides access to key arterial facilities in Orange,
including interchanges at Tustin Street and Glassell Street. SR-91 also provides regional
access through interchanges with SR-55 and SR-57 and SR-241.
SR-22 is an east-west freeway that crosses through the southern portion of the City. Five SR-
22 interchanges are located in the City, at Tustin Street, Glassell Street, Main Street/La Veta
Avenue, Bristol Street, and The City Drive.
SR-55 is a north-south freeway that passes through the center of Orange, and provides
access to the coastal communities of Orange County. SR-55 has four interchanges in Orange,
located at Lincoln Avenue, Katella Avenue, Chapman Avenue, and SR-22. An additional future
interchange at Meats Avenue is contemplated within this General Plan.
SR-57 is a north-south freeway that originates at the junction of I-5 and SR-22 and extends to
San Dimas in Los Angeles County. It provides access for the eastern parts of Los Angeles
County, and central and northern parts of Orange County. SR-57 has three interchanges in
Orange, at Chapman Avenue, Orangewood Avenue, and the junctions of I-5 and SR-22.
The Eastern Transportation Corridor (SR-241) is a north-south toll facility located in the
eastern portion of the planning area. This facility provides direct access to east Orange. SR-
241 has three toll lanes in each direction and provides regional access through an interchange
at Santiago Canyon Road.
Consistency with County Master Plan of Arterial Highways
Maintaining consistency with the County’s Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH) is
required in order to ensure that the City’s circulation system develops in a manner that
promotes regional mobility. At a practical level, consistency is also required in order for the
City to receive transportation funding under Measure M. Orange’s Master Plan of Streets and
Highways (Figure CM-2) is generally consistent with the MPAH.
While the City’s Master Plan of Streets and Highways has been consistent with the County
MPAH to maintain funding eligibility, both the City of Orange and OCTA have the goal of a
realistic and implementable MPAH. In keeping with this spirit, in 2010 as a follow up to
adoption of this General Plan, the City worked with OCTA on amendments to the MPAH and
Master Plan of Streets and Highways that downgraded the long-standing classification of
Chapman Avenue and Glassell Street from 4-lane Primary Arterials to 2-lane Collector Streets,
and removed the Critical Intersection classification of the Plaza. A remaining desire of the
City is to work with OCTA to downgrade La Veta Avenue between Glassell Street and
Cambridge Street from a Secondary Arterial to a Collector Street to reflect physical
constraints related to historic buildings and features in the Old Towne National Register
Historic District.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          CM-18

                                                                    CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
    To initiate the MPAH amendment process, a local agency must submit a written request to
    OCTA describing the amendment requested and provide documentation to support the basis
    for the request. A copy of the request must be submitted concurrently to the City Managers
    of adjoining cities. For the facilities under consideration, this would require a letter to be
    forwarded to the City of Santa Ana.
    Once the initial request is forwarded to OCTA, a conference between the City of Orange,
    OCTA, and potential affected jurisdictions is held to determine whether mutual agreement
    exists for the MPAH amendment. If mutual agreement exists, then Orange is expected to
    proceed with adopting this revision to the Circulation & Mobility Element. Upon adoption,
    the City of Orange would submit the Circulation & Mobility Element to OCTA and request
    OCTA Board approval of the Orange County MPAH amendment.
Public Transportation
    Effective regional transportation strategies are required to successfully implement City and
    County plans for accommodating future growth. Such strategies must link the City of Orange
    with other regional employment and commercial centers, as well as airports and other
    transportation hubs, and should fully integrate alternatives to the automobile. Alternative
    modes of transportation, including public transportation, bicycling, and walking, are
    important components of a comprehensive circulation system. These modes of
    transportation also help reduce air pollution and road congestion.
    Public transportation plays a key role in future land use development and mobility. As the
    roadway system reaches capacity, alternative modes of transportation provide additional
    capacity as well as an enhanced degree of mobility for residents, workers, and visitors.
    Existing services are expected to continue while enhancements, many of them currently in
    the planning stages, will increase the viability of alternative modes of travel. The integration
    into the circulation system of alternative modes of transportation, such as bus, rail, bicycle,
    and pedestrian, is essential to maximizing mobility opportunities for residents, workers, and
    visitors.
    Bus Service
    OCTA provides public bus service for the City of Orange. In addition, the Riverside Transit
    Agency (RTA) provides long-distance service between The Village at Orange and the
    Downtown Terminal in Riverside. Table CM-4 identifies local bus routes that connect various
    activity centers in Orange to each other and to the region.
    Table CM-5 shows the different community, station link, and inter- or intra-County routes that
    serve Orange. Community routes are express bus routes that provide faster connections to
    activity centers within and outside Orange County. Station link shuttles provide services
    between the Orange Transportation Center (OTC) and Orange. Both community and station
    link routes operate only at peak commuter times.
    In addition to the fixed-route service, OCTA also offers several types of specialized
    community transportation services, such as standard service (curb-to-curb service), door-to-
    door service, subscription service, and same-day taxi service. Some of these services cater to
    senior citizens and people with disabilities residing in the City.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CM-19
                                                                        CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
       OCTA has forecast bus ridership to increase by approximately 75 percent by 2030. Some of
       this ridership increase will be the result of enhanced services, including express bus routes
       and introduction of bus rapid transit service. Much of the increase will be driven by increased
       arterial and freeway congestion levels in conjunction with improved local bus service. OCTA
       is planning to introduce bus rapid transit (BRT) services by 2011 on the Bristol Street-State
       College Boulevard, Harbor Boulevard, and Westminster Avenue corridors. This service would
       include planned BRT stops in Orange on State College Boulevard south of Orangewood
       Avenue and on The City Drive south of Chapman Avenue. With the projected success of this
       service, which is comparable to the Los Angeles Metro Rapid service, it is likely that BRT will
       be implemented on other key corridors. Corridors that have been considered for potential
       future application include Katella Avenue.
       Convenient, accessible, frequent, and easy-to-use public transit is a cornerstone element of
       the proposed land use plan. Planned mixed-use residential and commercial areas and
       intensified commercial and professional office corridors must be coupled with increases in
       transit service. Orange’s land use plan features mixed-use districts that strategically
       concentrate population density near alternative transit facilities, such as the OTC in Old
       Towne, transit hubs at The Block at Orange and South Main Street, and the future Anaheim
       Regional Transportation Intermodal Center station in Anaheim near the City’s western
       boundary at Katella Avenue.
                                               Table CM-4
                                             Local Bus Routes
 Route #    Route Type       Route Service       Service Corridors    Key Orange Activity Centers Served
24         Local         Fullerton–Orange      Malvern Ave. /       The Village at Orange
                                               Chapman Ave. /       Lincoln Park and Ride
                                               Tustin St..
42         Local         Orange–Seal Beach     Lincoln Ave. /       The Village at Orange
                                               Los Alamitos Blvd. / Lincoln Park and Ride
                                               Seal Beach Blvd.
46         Local         Los Alamitos–Orange   Ball Rd. /           The Village at Orange
                                               Taft Ave.            Lincoln Park and Ride
47         Local         Brea–Newport Beach    Brea Blvd. /         Theo Lacy Jail
                                               Anaheim Blvd. /      Orangewood Children's Home
                                               Fairview St.         UCI Medical Center
                                                                    The Block at Orange
50         Local         Long Beach–Orange     Katella Ave.         The Village at Orange
                                                                    Lincoln Park and Ride
53         Local         Brea–Irvine           Main St.             Batavia Industrial Parks
                                                                    Children's Hospital – CHOC
                                                                    St. Joseph's Hospital
                                                                    OCTA Offices
54         Local         Garden Grove–Orange   Chapman Ave.         Orange Civic Center
                                                                    Orange Transportation Center
                                                                    The Plaza
                                                                    UCI Medical Center
                                                                    The Block at Orange
                                                                    Rancho Santiago Community College
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  CM-20

                                                                                  CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                                                        Table CM-4
                                                      Local Bus Routes
 Route #      Route Type           Route Service          Service Corridors     Key Orange Activity Centers Served
56           Local             Garden Grove–Orange      Garden Grove Blvd.    Orange Transportation Center
                                                                              OCTA Offices
                                                                              Children's Hospital–CHOC
                                                                              St. Joseph's Hospital
57           Local             Brea–Newport Beach       State College Blvd. / The Block at Orange
                                                        Bristol St.           UCI Medical Center
                                                                              Theo Lacy Jail
                                                                              Orangewood Children's Home
59           Local             Brea–Irvine              Kraemer Blvd. /       Orange Transportation Center
                                                        Glassell St. /        Chapman University
                                                        Grand Ave. /          Orange Plaza
                                                        Von Karman Ave.
71           Local             Yorba Linda–Balboa       Tustin St. /          The Village at Orange
                                                        Red Hill Ave. /       Lincoln Park and Ride
                                                        Newport Blvd.
Source: Orange County Transportation Authority, 2006
                                                         Table CM-5
                         Community, Station Link, Intra- and Inter-County Bus Routes
              Route
Route #                          Route Service            Service Corridors     Key Orange Activity Centers Served
               Type
131        Community      Yorba Linda–Orange             Lakeview Ave./       The Village at Orange
                                                         Riverdale Ave. /     Lincoln Park and Ride
                                                         Tustin St.
147        Community      Brea–Santa Ana                 Raiit St. /          UCI Medical Center
                                                         Greenville St. /     The Block at Orange
                                                         Fairview St.         OCTA Offices
                                                                              St. Joseph's Hospital
                                                                              Children's Hospital – CHOC
167        Community      Anaheim–Irvine                 Santiago Blvd. /     The Village at Orange
                                                         Hewes St. /          Lincoln Park and Ride
                                                         Bryan Ave.
                          Orange        Transportation
453        Station Link                                  Chapman Ave. /       Orange Transportation Center
                          Center
                          –St. Joseph's Hospital         Main St. /           Children's Hospital–CHOC
                                                         La Veta Ave.         St. Joseph's Hospital
                                                                              OCTA Offices
                          Orange        Transportation
454        Station Link                                  Chapman Ave. /       Orange Transportation Center
                          Center
                          –The Block at Orange           Metropolitan Dr.     UCI Medical Center
                                                                              The Block at Orange
                                                                              Bergen Brunswig
                                                                              Nexus
                                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                           CM-21

                                                                                      CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                                                           Table CM-5
                         Community, Station Link, Intra- and Inter-County Bus Routes
              Route
Route #                          Route Service               Service Corridors       Key Orange Activity Centers Served
               Type
213        Intra County Brea–Irvine Express                SR-55                   Lincoln Park and Ride
                                                                                   The Village at Orange
757        Inter County Diamond Bar                        SR-57                   UCI Medical Center
                          –Santa Ana Express                                       The Block at Orange
RTA 149    Inter County Riverside–Orange                   SR-91                   The Village at Orange
                          (Operated by RTA)                                        Downtown Riverside
Source: Orange County Transportation Authority and Riverside Transit Agency, 2006.
         The City recognizes that ridership of both the bus and rail transit systems will increase, and
         has designed a land use plan that both enables and accommodates increased transit use. A
         large part of the City’s role in accommodating additional transit use includes providing
         convenient and attractive transit amenities and streetscape features that improve user
         comfort and perception of safety, thus encouraging transit use. Transit-oriented
         Development (TOD) design features will be encouraged in major commercial and
         employment areas within the City, such as the Town and Country Road corridor, South Main
         Street, Katella Avenue, Uptown Orange, and Old Towne. Such TOD features may consist of
         streetscape measures such as bus turn-outs, benches, trash receptacles, shelters from wind
         and rain, and lighting. TOD features may also be more fundamental to the permitted uses
         and design within projects, such as incorporating child care centers, convenience stores, or
         personal services within the retail component of mixed-use projects, or near professional
         office concentrations. These and other measures help to make the transit system more
         accessible to a wide range of people.
         The City will continue to work with OCTA to pursue expanded community circulators, such as
         the current Station Link service, that will connect people to rail transit, employment centers,
         residential areas, and commercial corridors. Additional options, such as jitney services that
         function as group taxis, will also be explored.
         The City will also continue to support OCTA initiatives and services that promote the mobility
         of Orange’s senior, disabled, and youth populations. To accommodate the needs of these
         groups, the City will continue to work with OCTA to offer para-transit services, and will seek
         ways to improve mobility for Orange youth through transit.
         The City of Orange will continue to cooperate with OCTA and other regional providers to
         establish new bus routes and stops, and to provide transit amenities. New subdivision plans
         will be reviewed by OCTA to assess impacts on bus services, and to examine the need to
         provide bus stops or bays. Orange will also work with OCTA to maintain and, if needed,
         expand successful transfer stations in Old Towne, the Village at Orange, and The Block at
         Orange.
         Rail Transit
         Many current passenger and commuter fixed-rail transit options in the City will be expanded
         in the future, offering significant alternatives to automobile transit for many individuals who
                                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                              CM-22

                                                              CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
commute to or from the City for housing or employment. Rail transit now has a proven track
record in Orange, and Metrolink seeks to expand rail services in support of land use
transformations near current and future rail stations.
Metrolink
Metrolink operates seven commuter rail lines in Southern California, two of which pass
through Orange. The Orange County Line offers direct connections to Union Station in Los
Angeles to the north and to Oceanside to the south. The Inland Empire–Orange County Line
provides direct connections to Riverside/San Bernardino to the east and San Juan Capistrano
to the south. Roughly 30 Metrolink trains pass through the City on a daily basis. The
Metrolink station in Orange is located three blocks from The Plaza at the OTC, close to a
variety of stores and civic uses in Old Towne. Amtrak and Metrolink operate a cooperative
program called “Rail-2-Rail”, which allows all Metrolink monthly pass holders to use Amtrak
within the limits specified on the pass.
Another much-anticipated rail service improvement is intra-county rail service along the
County’s core transit corridor. This service, which will be provided by Metrolink on behalf of
OCTA, is an attempt to provide intra-county trips with a high degree of reliability. This 30-
minute service is planned to operate between the Irvine Transportation Center (and possibly
Laguna Niguel) and the Fullerton Transportation Center throughout the day to supplement
Metrolink’s peak period commuter service.
The City recognizes that plans to increase daily service on the current Metrolink lines,
improvements to the OTC, and future expansion of Metrolink services to new destinations
would be beneficial to Orange by providing multi-modal transportation options for people
living and working in the community, thus reducing auto dependence for business and leisure
purposes.
Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center
The Platinum Triangle, which borders Angel
Stadium in the City of Anaheim, proposes a
variety of high-density multiple-family high-rise
housing, office space, and commercial uses.
The Anaheim Regional Transportation
Intermodal Center (ARTIC) is located adjacent
to the proposed development, between Angel
Stadium and the Honda Center. ARTIC will be a
major regional transportation center similar in
scale to Union Station in Los Angeles and
Ontario International Airport in Ontario. The
intermodal center will be a stopping point for
Amtrak, Metrolink, buses, and future high-
speed rail systems that connect to Ontario Airport, Las Vegas, and the Bay Area.
The City of Orange will coordinate with the City of Anaheim, OCTA, and others to ensure that
the City is able to take full advantage of the regional mobility benefits offered by ARTIC.
Potential benefits offered to the City by ARTIC include:
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         CM-23

                                                                 CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
        BRT service along Katella Avenue;
        a dynamic mixed-use commercial and residential center at the westernmost end of
         Katella Avenue; and
        bicycle and pedestrian connections to the Santa Ana River.
    California High Speed Rail Corridor
    The California High-Speed Rail Authority was established as a state agency in 1996 to direct
    the planning, design, construction, and operation of a future high-speed train system
    extending from Sacramento, San Francisco, and Oakland in the north to Los Angeles and San
    Diego in the south. This high-speed train is proposed to stop at ARTIC. OCTA estimates that
    by 2025, the California High Speed Rail Corridor will serve between 150,000 and 230,000
    passengers each week.
    Magnetic Levitation Train
    A magnetic levitation train is being planned that would connect Anaheim to Ontario,
    Victorville, Barstow, Primm, and Las Vegas. The California-Nevada Super Speed Train (SST)
    will use Magnetic Levitation Systems (Maglev), a type of transportation technology that uses
    electric power and non-contact electromagnetic levitation to sustain speeds in excess of 300
    mph.
    The trip from ARTIC to Las Vegas on the California-Nevada SST will take about 90 minutes,
    with an estimated 40.4 million annual riders. A key future benefit offered by the Maglev train
    is a high-speed connection to Ontario International Airport, which is planned to grow
    substantially and to expand international service in coming decades. The City will support
    efforts of the California High-Speed Rail Authority, OCTA, and Southern California Association
    of Governments to construct these important rail corridors, and will cooperate with all
    parties involved in any future studies conducted to examine the noise and other impacts
    associated with the corridors within Orange.
Sidewalks, Trails and Bikeways
    Walking and biking contribute to a healthy community, and play increasingly significant roles
    as alternatives to the automobile. The City recognizes this by providing and maintaining
    sidewalks, trails, and bikeways to support pedestrians and cyclists.
    Pedestrian Facilities
    In addition to providing basic transportation routes, sidewalks and pathways offer the
    opportunity to create appealing public spaces that reflect community pride and invite people
    to walk. Proposed mixed-use areas and reinvigorated commercial areas throughout the City
    will provide new and reinvented spaces for people to walk and shop. Walkability and access
    are essential components of a circulation system that easily and specifically accommodates
    pedestrians. Features that contribute to walkability include wide sidewalks, safe street
    crossings, design elements that encourage cautious driving, and a pleasant and safe walking
    environment. Sidewalks, walkways, well-designed pedestrian crossings, pathways, and
    pedestrian short-cuts allow people to get from one destination point to another with ease.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             CM-24

                                                                CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
Dedicated pedestrian paths can provide access between residential and activity areas,
especially if streets do not connect. Access strategies for school children, seniors, and people
with disabilities should also be incorporated into street and sidewalk plans. The City supports
proactive integration of pedestrian improvements and amenities within the circulation
system to improve walkability.
The City will create and implement a pedestrian-oriented streetscape master plan addressing
key commercial corridors, including Tustin Street, Chapman Avenue, Main Street, Lincoln
Avenue, and Katella Avenue. The master plan will address all functional aspects of the
pedestrian environment. It will identify pedestrian links that need improvement and
strengthening, determine new pedestrian links to underserved areas, ensure adequate
sidewalk widths to accommodate lighting and street trees, develop sidewalks in the
industrial area that create links between bus stops, encourage safe routes to schools and
recreation facilities, and minimize barriers to pedestrian and bicycle access.
Recreational Trails and Bikeways
A comprehensive network of recreational trails and bikeways greatly benefits Orange
residents and visitors by providing popular modes of transportation for recreation. In
addition to recreation activities, the City also supports walking and bicycling as viable
commute alternatives to the automobile. The City’s plan for recreational trails and bikeways
is shown in Figure CM-3.
The plan includes trails maintained by the County and private homeowners associations, and
is consistent with the OCTA Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan. It is also consistent with the
County’s major riding and hiking trails and off-road paved bikeways. As described in the
Vision for the Future, the plan will enable the City to connect parks to activity centers and
residential areas using a combination of recreational trails and bikeways that truly allows
people to travel from place to place within the City without needing an automobile.
Recreational Trails
As shown in Figure CM-3, over 70 miles of existing recreational trails are located within the
City, connecting a large number of neighborhoods and community parks. In addition, 104
miles of proposed future trails are planned throughout Orange on land currently utilized for a
variety of purposes, including flood control, railroad rights-of-way, and roadways.
The City will use the annual seven-year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) process to
prioritize, fund, and build proposed trail segments identified in Figure CM-3. These trails have
been and will continue to be constructed and administered through cooperative efforts of
the City, County, developers, and private homeowner associations.
Desired cross-sections for recreational trails are identified in Figure CM-4. The City may
require construction of portions of proposed trails identified in Figure CM-3 as a condition of
development approval for projects located adjacent to the proposed trail alignments.
Funding for recreational trails and associated restoration projects comes from a variety of
federal, state, and regional sources. Priority for funding of trail improvements will be given to
projects that complete loops within the system, provide missing links for regional and local
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          CM-25

                                                                CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
trail systems, or serve as destination links to schools, parks, retail businesses, or regional
trails.
Priorities for the recreational trail system include:
    trail connections to the Santiago Oaks Regional Park extension west of Cannon Street,
     consisting of a connection between Calle Grande and Cannon Street, and the Jamestown
     trail from the Orange Park Acres equestrian arena to Cannon Street;
    trail connection from Serrano Avenue near Fred Barrera Park to Santiago Oaks Regional
     Park;
    Mabury Ranch Trail connection from the proposed Cerro Villa Park to the Santiago Oaks
     Regional Park;
    Serrano Avenue connection near Cannon Street; and
    Additional trail connection into Santiago Oaks Regional Park from Orange Park Acres.
To increase the number of people using non-vehicular means of transportation, the City will
encourage putting in place a safe network of crosswalks, grade separations, and walkways to
ensure the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, and equestrians. Where appropriate, traffic
calming devices and methods such as median landscaping and provision of bike or transit
lanes should be used to slow traffic, improve roadway capacity, and address potential safety
issues. The City will continue to work towards improving the overall condition, appearance,
and safety of both medians and sidewalks in Orange.
Bikeways
Orange’s relatively mild climate
permits bicycle riding year-round, and
the growing popularity of bicycling has
drawn enthusiasts onto the streets
and bike trails throughout the City. The
plan for recreational trails and
bikeways (Figure CM-3) shows the
planned system of bikeways within the
City. The Orange Bikeway Master Plan
has established three classes of bicycle
routes that adhere to California
Department          of    Transportation
(Caltrans) standards:
    Class I Off-road bike paths are located on vacated rail lines, water corridors, or areas
     otherwise separated from streets.
    Class II On-road bike lanes are located along arterial roadways that are delineated by
     painted stripes and other features.
    Class III On-road bike routes share use with motor vehicle traffic. They provide a route
     that is signed but not striped.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           CM-26

      Figure CM-3 Plan for Recreational Trails and Bikeways
CM-27
(This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                  CM-28
                                                             CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                                                                             Figure CM-4
                                                                         Trail Standards
Cross-sections for each type of route are shown in Figure CM-5.
As shown in Figure CM-3, several future bike routes are planned within Orange, including the
following high-priority projects:
    Completing Class I bike routes along Santiago Creek and the Tustin Branch Trail
    Establishing Class II bike lanes, including:
                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            CM-29

                    CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
                                Figure CM-5
                         Bikeway Standards
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
      CM-30
                                                               CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
             o   An east/west corridor on Walnut Avenue from the western City limits to
                 Santiago Boulevard
             o   North/south corridors on Main Street from Taft Street to Palm Street, on
                 Batavia Street from Chapman Avenue to La Veta Avenue, and on Parker
                 Street from La Veta Avenue to the City limits
    Establishing Class III routes along Almond Street, Feldner Street, and Bedford Street
The City has recently completed a paved bike trail along Santiago Creek from Tustin Street to
the western City limit that continues on to Main Place Mall and the Discovery Science Center
as well as two additional segments to the bike trail, which will extend the Santiago Creek
Trail from Tustin Street to Grijalva Park, and also connect Grijalva Park at Santiago Creek to
Collins Avenue along the City-owned portion of the Tustin Branch Trail right-of-way between
Walnut and Collins Avenues. The Santiago Creek trail is planned to extend through and
beyond the City, connecting the regional Santa Ana River Trail to Santiago Oaks Regional
Park and wilderness areas east of Orange. The City will continue to work towards designing a
comprehensive bike trail system that is highly accessible and safe for those who wish to use
it.
The City has proposed Class II and III routes along many north-south and east-west arterials,
all of which connect to pedestrian trails and Class I routes. The City responds to the need to
provide safe and efficient bike travel by making every effort to provide bikeways separate
from the roadway. When bicyclists must share the road with automobiles, the City will work
to improve overall safety.
Currently, only one bicycle parking facility is located in Orange, at the OTC (Metrolink
station). The City will work to provide greater bike amenities including delineated bike lanes
and clear signage along bike trails. The City will also install bicycle racks and safe storage
facilities at parking areas for City facilities, as appropriate, and will require privately
developed projects to incorporate on-site bicycle facilities in accordance with the City’s
Zoning Code (Title 17 of the Orange Municipal Code).
Parking Facilities
Although parking is often considered a separate issue from vehicle circulation, it is important
to address on-street parking because it has a direct effect on roadway capacity. In order to
facilitate improved traffic flow along Orange’s major arterials, the City generally plans to
                                                      permit on-street parking only on streets
                                                      classified as Primary or Secondary
                                                      Arterials or Collector Streets.
                                                      Off-street parking deficiencies can
                                                      reduce business activity, and can cause
                                                      vehicles to re-circulate on public streets,
                                                      which increases traffic volumes and
                                                      congestion by reducing capacity for
                                                      through traffic. The City’s Zoning Code
                                                      includes parking requirements to ensure
                                                      that an adequate number of spaces are
                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           CM-31

                                                                  CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
  provided on-site for most uses. The Code also establishes minimum stall dimensions
  consistent with current standards for other jurisdictions. These regulations apply to all new
  developments, and may be applied to current uses that are modified or expanded.
  Particular concern has been expressed within the community regarding current and
  expected future parking shortages in Old Towne. Figure CM-6 identifies the location of
  existing public parking lots in Old Towne. Most Old Towne parking lots have a maximum time
  limit of three hours, with or without a permit. However, some parking lots, such as the OTC
  parking located off Chapman Avenue, have no time limit.
  Orange will continue to provide sufficient parking to meet community demands. In Old
  Towne, the City will study the benefits of creating a parking district and the feasibility of
  developing underutilized parking lots surrounding The Plaza as public parking facilities. The
  City may encourage the use of shared parking, consolidated parking facilities, and
  underground parking or parking structures to provide additional off-street parking to meet
  future demands in areas throughout the City with higher concentrations of commercial uses.
Circulation System Aesthetics
  The City has determined that it is necessary and desirable to improve certain roadways and
  their rights-of-way to enhance the experience for all users of these corridors. Major
  commercial corridors have been designated within the Urban Design Element to be improved
  with pedestrian-scale enhancements. Enhancements could include street trees, sidewalk
  improvements, lighting, bus shelters, and crosswalks. These improvements not only offer a
  more aesthetically-pleasing experience for all users in these corridors, they also may offer
  increased safety and security.
  Streetscape improvements offer safety and security to both motorists and non-motorists
  through increased visual cues, better visibility, and increased activity. Many streetscape
  enhancements provide not only a comfortable environment for the pedestrian and bicyclist,
  but also offer drivers visual cues that a non-motorist could be expected in an area.
  Improvements such as striping, bus shelters, and pedestrian-scaled signage guide the non-
  motorist towards areas that are most appropriate for their use. These same cues help the
  motorist to see where the presence of pedestrians and bicyclists is most likely to occur. For
  example, a well-marked crosswalk guides the pedestrian towards the location in the right-of-
  way most appropriate for crossing, while also alerting the motorist to slow down and look
  out for pedestrian traffic.
  Visibility offered by pedestrian-scaled lighting benefits non-motorists and motorists alike.
  Pedestrians and bicyclists are better able to see their way, which increases their feelings of
  security. Improvements that create a sense of security for pedestrians encourage increased
  use and activity. This increased activity, in turn, leads to a greater feeling of safety. The City
  has acknowledged the importance of improving the experience of users on many of its major
  commercial corridors.
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           CM-32
                                                                         CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
*Note: Possession of City issued parking permit enables holder to exceed specified time limit
GPA 2010-0001 (8/10/10)
                                                                                              Figure CM-6
                                            Public Parking Lots in Old Towne Orange
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                CM-33
                                                                CIRCULATION AND MOBILITY
CIRCULATION & MOBILITY IMPLEMENTATION
 The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of
 City plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing
 collaboration with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation
 measures for this Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          CM-34
                                                                         NATURAL
                                                                 RESOURCES
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
                                                  Orange benefits from and relies upon its natural
                                                  resources, which include a variety of landforms that
                                                  provide the setting for the City, as well as the open
                                                  spaces and parks that define many of the
                                                  community’s neighborhoods. These amenities
                                                  provide visual relief from the intensity of urban
                                                  areas. Open spaces offer areas for passive and
                                                  active recreation, and for horticulture. They provide
                                                  habitat for plant and animal life. Used as parks, they
                                                  house facilities for recreational and civic activities
        that are accessed by residents and visitors of all ages. Striking a balance between the built
        environment and Orange’s natural resources is vital to the long-term sustainability of the
        community. Such sustainability requires that growth occur in a responsible manner that
        allows natural resources to be preserved and enhanced for future generations.
        Orange’s Vision for the Future is described in the General Plan Introduction. The Vision
        recognizes that the City’s quality of life will be judged by how well we connect with our
        surroundings. Therefore, this Element focuses on how Orange can maintain and create
        special places that bring us together, and how the City can reinforce connections between
        open spaces and the community, so that all of our residents and visitors can share and enjoy
        the outdoors and other activities. The Vision includes the following objectives related to
        Orange’s natural resources:
           Define neighborhoods through the use of open space areas and a trail system that
            provides a source of aesthetic beauty and recreational opportunities. These open space
            areas support a healthy and active community.
           Continue to protect our critical watersheds, such as Santiago Creek, and other significant
            natural and open space resources.
           Strive to build a comprehensive system of parks, open space, equestrian areas, scenic
            resources, and undeveloped natural areas, as well as a full array of recreational,
            educational, and cultural offerings such as sports, entertainment areas, and play facilities.
           Develop a connected multi-modal network for traveling from one end of town to the
            other that provides the option for residents from different neighborhoods to access
            parks, open spaces, and scenic areas by vehicle, transit, foot, bicycle or, where
            appropriate, by horse.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 NR-1
REV. 12/8/15 (GPA 2014-0001)

NATURAL RESOURCES
     The natural resources, open space, and parks and recreational facilities described throughout
     this Element are key physical components that are essential to the quality of life in Orange.
     These facilities provide a variety of benefits. For example, open space provides recreational
     areas and wilderness areas. Urban parks provide relief and offer a soothing contrast to
     office, commercial, and residential areas. They provide for both active and passive
     recreational activities, and are key contributors to neighborhood identity and interaction.
     Trails and bicycle paths offer non-motorized alternatives for getting around the City. In
     addition, modern day recreational and visual connections to the Santa Ana River and
     Santiago Creek are reminders of our Native American and agricultural heritage.
     Orange’s General Plan combines two state-required General Plan elements – Open Space and
     Conservation – into a single Natural Resources Element. In addition to meeting other open
     space and conservation requirements, the Natural Resources Element also provides guidance
     regarding strategies for reducing urban runoff, maintaining water quality, preserving air
     quality and combating climate change within the City.
Purpose of the Natural Resources Element
     The Natural Resources Element satisfies State requirements for the Open Space and
     Conservation Elements as stated in the Government Code Section 65302(d) and Section
     65301(e). The goals and policies regarding nature conservation must adhere to the
     underlying intent of the Natural Communities Conservation Plan (NCCP). The Natural
     Resources Element also includes an optional Parks and Recreation Element, under provisions
     of General Plan law, which includes designation of parks and recreation facilities to meet the
     requirements of the state’s Quimby Act imposed on cities and counties. The Quimby Act
     allows the City to collect exactions, in the form of impact fees, conservation easements, or
     park improvement fees from developers by demonstrating a close relationship between the
     park demands of a project and the need for additional parkland or recreational facilities.
     The purpose of the Natural Resources Element is to establish programs and policies for: (1)
     preservation and use of open space; (2) renewable and non-renewable nature conservation;
     and, (3) parks and recreation. The scope of the Natural Resources Element spans areas of
     land and water used for open-space uses such as:
        preservation of renewable and non-renewable natural resources;
        managed production of resources, such as energy and groundwater supply;
        outdoor recreation; and
        trail-oriented recreational use.
Scope and Content of the Natural Resources Element
     The Natural Resources Element contains goals and policies that reflect the community’s
     intent to preserve and efficiently operate programs associated with open spaces, natural
     resources, and recreational spaces. The Element is divided into three sections:
     (1) Introduction
     (2) Issues, Goals, and Policies
     (3) Natural Resource Plans
     The Issues, Goals, and Policies section identifies community open space, resource
     management, and recreational needs. This section also identifies goals and policies related to
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-2

                                                                            NATURAL RESOURCES
    various natural resource issues. Goals are broad statements that reflect the City’s desires and
    guide the City regarding these issues. The policies provide directions for preserving open
    space, improving parks and recreation, and conserving natural resources. Implementation
    measures designed to promote achievement of goals and policies are provided in an
    Appendix to the General Plan.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
    Successful achievement of the goals and policies within the Natural Resources Element
    depends, in part, upon their consistency with those of the other Elements in the General
    Plan. The Natural Resources Element most closely relates to the Land Use, Circulation &
    Mobility, Housing, Public Safety, and Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Elements.
    The Land Use Element identifies desired future uses for all lands within the City. Such uses
    include parks, recreational facilities, and public and privately owned open spaces to meet the
    needs of existing and future generations. The goals and policies of the Land Use Element
    assign location, intensity of use, and unit densities to properties that influence the contents
    of the Natural Resources Element. In addition, the Land Use Element provides for Transfer of
    Development Rights strategies that may increase the availability of future open space
    resources described in the Natural Resources Element.
    The goals and policies of the Circulation & Mobility Element identify, and ensure access to,
    open spaces and recreational areas requiring access. The Circulation & Mobility Element
    assigns the location of streets and trail systems for pedestrians, bicyclists, and equestrians in
    open spaces. The Public Safety Element provides goals and policies addressing public health
    and safety within the City, including open space lands such as parks, trails, lakes, and wildland
    areas. Public health issues include natural and man-made hazards in open space. The Cultural
    Resources & Historic Preservation Element is a companion element to the Natural Resources
    Element, and provides policies and programs related to conservation of historic and cultural
    resources within Orange’s planning area.
ISSUES, GOALS AND POLICIES
    The goals, policies, and implementation programs of the Natural Resources Element address
    seven issues: (1) preserving and expanding open space resources; (2) protecting air, water,
    energy, and land resources; (3) reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to effects
    of climate change; (4) preserving significant ecological, biological, and mineral resources; (5)
    providing and expanding recreational facilities and programs; (6) creating a comprehensive
    trails network; and (7) preserving visual and aesthetic resources.
Open Space Resources
    Open space areas are important biological, aesthetic, and recreational resources. They
    become increasingly valuable as the City develops and the landscape becomes more
    urbanized. Open spaces create buffers to development and provide both wildlife habitat and
    recreational opportunities.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-3

NATURAL RESOURCES
     GOAL 1.0:      Provide recreational use, scenic enjoyment, and the protection of natural
                    resources and features in open space areas.
     Policy 1.1:    Conserve open space through various public-private funding mechanisms and
                    management strategies including, but not limited to, conservation
                    easements.
     Policy 1.2:    Actively seek out new public open space opportunities through land
                    recycling.
     Policy 1.3:    Promote development of additional open spaces and access points adjacent
                    to waterways and planned trails.
Air, Water, and Energy Resources
     Orange lies within the heart of north-central Orange County, where the best qualities of
     Southern California living continue to attract new residents every year. Clean water and air,
     carefully managed land resources, and an efficient circulation network are critical elements
     of a healthy, sustainable City and watersheds. Orange will maintain and protect these
     resources through a range of measures to protect public health and quality of life.
     GOAL 2.0:      Protect air, water, and energy resources from pollution and overuse.
     Policy 2.1:    Cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)
                    and other regional agencies to implement and enforce regional air quality
                    management plans.
     Policy 2.2:    Support alternative transportation modes, alternative technologies, and
                    bicycle- and pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods to reduce emissions related
                    to vehicular travel.
     Policy 2.3:    Reduce the amount of water used for landscaping through the use of native
                    and drought-tolerant plants, proper soil preparation, and efficient irrigation
                    systems as parks and other City facilities are built or renovated.
     Policy 2.4:    Encourage the production, distribution, and use of recycled and reclaimed
                    water for landscaping projects, while maintaining urban runoff water quality
                    objectives.
     Policy 2.5:    Continue to work toward local and regional waste-reduction and diversion/
                    recycling goals and promote public education programs.
     Policy 2.6:    Encourage sustainable building and site designs for new construction and
                    renovation projects.
     Policy 2.7:    Coordinate with energy suppliers to ensure adequate energy supplies to
                    meet community needs, and to promote energy conservation and public
                    education programs for that purpose.
     Policy 2.8:    Encourage development that incorporates pedestrian- and transit-oriented
                    design and landscape elements.
     Policy 2.9:    Promote City operations as a model for energy efficiency and green building.
     Policy 2.10:   Work toward replacing existing City vehicles with ultra low or zero emission
                    vehicles. At a minimum, new City vehicles shall be low emission vehicles as
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             NR-4
                                                                            NATURAL RESOURCES
                    defined by the California Air Resources Board, except if certain vehicle types
                    are not available in the marketplace. Public safety vehicles are exempted
                    from this requirement.
    Policy 2.11:    Protect the ecological integrity and overall health of Orange’s watersheds.
    Policy 2.12:    Cooperate with water supply agencies to protect the quantity and quality of
                    local groundwater supplies.
    Policy 2.13:    Control surface runoff water discharges into the stormwater conveyance
                    system to comply with the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
                    System (NPDES) Municipal Permit and other regional permits issued by the
                    Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board.
    Policy 2.14:    Reduce pollutant runoff from new development by requiring use of the most
                    low development impact practices and effective Best Management Practices
                    (BMPs) currently available.
    Policy 2.15:    Minimize the amount of impervious surfaces and associated urban runoff
                    pollutants in new development and significant redevelopment throughout
                    the community.
    Policy 2.16:    Protect in-stream habitat and natural stream and channel features.
    Policy 2.17:    Educate City residents and businesses on the effects of urban runoff, and
                    water and energy conservation strategies.
Climate Change
    The scientific community believes that increasing levels of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the
    earth’s atmosphere are contributing to rising global average temperatures. The most
    abundant GHG is carbon dioxide (CO2), which is a byproduct of fossil fuel combustion. CO2 is
    removed from the atmosphere through sequestration by vegetation and dissolution into the
    ocean. Carbon sequestration is the absorption or removal from the air of carbon dioxide by
    plants or natural processes. These sequestration processes happen naturally, but human-
    generated emissions may be outpacing these removal processes, resulting in excessive GHG
    concentrations accumulating in the atmosphere, and leading to a subsequent trend of
    unnatural global warming.
    GOAL 3.0:       Prepare for and adapt to the effects of climate change and promote
                    practices that decrease the City’s contribution to climate change.
    Policy 3.1:     Evaluate the potential effects of climate change on the City’s human and
                    natural systems and prepare strategies that allow the City to appropriately
                    respond and adapt.
    Policy 3.2:     Develop and adopt a comprehensive strategy to reduce greenhouse gasses
                    (GHGs) within Orange by at least 15 percent from current levels by 2020.
Ecological, Biological and Mineral Resources
    Wildlife habitat is crucial for the survival of native animal and plant species, and for
    maintaining the biodiversity of the City and larger Orange County region. Significant wildlife
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             NR-5

NATURAL RESOURCES
     habitat can be found in the City’s undeveloped hillside areas, East Orange, and parks and
     open spaces (particularly near Santiago Creek, Santiago Oaks Regional Park, Irvine Regional
     Park, and Peters Canyon Regional Park). Human-created landscaping is also an important
     environmental element, particularly in urban areas. Landscaping elements such as street
     trees contribute to an improved aesthetic and biological environment while providing a
     natural means of cleansing the air and minimizing urban heat. Sand and gravel resources in
     the planning area provide valuable sources of aggregate material for new construction.
     These resources benefit the region as a whole. In accordance with guidelines established by
     the State Mining and Geology Board, City policy recognizes the need to protect these
     resources from premature urbanization.
     The following goals and policies reflect the City’s desire to maintain and support prudent
     management of these important environmental resources.
     GOAL 4.0:       Conserve and protect wildlife habitat, plant and animal species of concern,
                     and general biodiversity.
     Policy 4.1:     Preserve and protect native and habitat-supporting plant resources
                     throughout the City.
     Policy 4.2:     Work with agencies, including the Orange County Flood Control District, to
                     identify opportunities to enhance the natural qualities of Santiago Creek to
                     protect habitat and reintroduce native plants and animals.
     Policy 4.3:     Reduce the impact of urban development on important ecological and
                     biological resources.
     Policy 4.4:     Repair or improve ecological and biological conditions in the urban and
                     natural environments when reviewing proposals for site development and
                     redevelopment, as well as public improvements.
     Policy 4.5:     Protect the Santiago Creek and Santa Ana River corridors from premature
                     urbanization to ensure the continued availability of important sand and
                     gravel, flood control, water recharge, biological, and open space resources.
Recreational Facilities and Programs
     The City’s active and passive recreational resources consist of designated parks, trails, and
     open space areas. Continued provision of recreational opportunities through preservation of
     open space, park maintenance and development, and the creation of new facilities will
     ensure improved quality of life for residents.
     GOAL 5.0:       Provide recreational facilities and programs that adequately serve the needs
                     of residents.
     Policy 5.1:     Maintain existing City parks at levels that provide maximum recreational
                     benefit to City residents.
     Policy 5.2:     Provide a range of high quality recreational facilities and programming to
                     serve a broad cross section of residents, including youth, seniors, young
                     adults, mature adults, and people with disabilities.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                NR-6

                                                                              NATURAL RESOURCES
    Policy 5.3:      Establish joint recreational use of open space land and facilities owned by
                     school districts and/or the City.
    Policy 5.4:      Develop new public parks and open space resources by establishing
                     incentives to use creative techniques available to property owners and
                     developers that support public-private open space partnerships.
    Policy 5.5:      Explore and pursue new approaches to new park development and to
                     providing a balanced mix of amenities and facilities.
    Policy 5.6:      Identify areas within the City that are currently underserved by existing open
                     space, and develop programs to purchase land and build park amenities at a
                     minimum level of 3 acres per 1,000 persons and the goal of 5 acres per 1,000
                     persons. Support provision of a total of 10 acres of parkland per 1,000
                     persons, inclusive of County regional parks within the planning area.
    Policy 5.7:      Consider the use of Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) as a means to
                     acquire and develop more publicly accessible open space.
Comprehensive Trails Network
    Trails within the City serve important recreational and transportation needs, but are currently
    disconnected and in some areas incomplete. The Santiago Creek corridor has been
    recognized as a potential spine for a City-wide network of multi-use trails that connect parks,
    open spaces, recreational facilities, and other City amenities. Other opportunities to improve
    trail networks may include the conversion of active and inactive railroad rights-of-way to
    trails, and joint use of utility easements and flood control rights-of-way for trail purposes.
    While providing for pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian circulation, a trails network would
    also create a valuable greenway system throughout the City and would support the physical
    health and active lifestyle of Orange residents.
    GOAL 6.0:        Provide for alternative modes of transportation and access to recreational
                     resources through a multi-use trail system that links the City’s parks and
                     regional open space amenities.
    Policy 6.1:      Complete multi-use trail links throughout the City that serve recreational and
                     circulation purposes as funding is available.
    Policy 6.2:      Ensure consistent, safe, and efficient maintenance of trails, and minimal
                     impacts to the environment.
    Policy 6.3:      Work with the Rails-to-Trails Conservancy, surrounding residents, utility
                     providers, flood control and water agencies, and community organizations to
                     pursue the joint use of local rights-of-way and easements for multi-use trails.
    Policy 6.4:      Link existing equestrian trails and provide outlets to open space areas,
                     particularly in the northeast region of the City, to reach regional parks such as
                     Santiago Oaks, Irvine, Peters Canyon, and the Cleveland National Forest.
    Policy 6.5:      Ensure that the trail system has a safe interface with existing development.
    Policy 6.6:      Encourage an integrated relationship between trails and developed areas
                     through the site planning and design of private development and trail
                     projects.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-7

NATURAL RESOURCES
Visual and Aesthetic Resources
     Portions of Orange are characterized by scenic vistas that include hillsides, ridgelines, or
     open space areas that provide a unifying visual backdrop to the urban environment. These
     “viewsheds” contribute to the City’s identity and quality of life. The City will preserve open
     space areas and view corridors where possible and will encourage landscaping in urban areas
     to improve boulevards, neighborhoods, and commercial and industrial districts.
     GOAL 7.0:       Protect significant view corridors, open space, and ridgelines within the
                     urban environment.
     Policy 7.1:     Preserve the scenic nature of significant ridgelines visible throughout the
                     community.
     Policy 7.2:     Designate Santiago Canyon Road east of Jamboree Road as a City Scenic
                     Highway to preserve the scenic nature of the open space adjacent to the
                     road.
     Policy 7.3:     Encourage the development of landscaped medians and parkway
                     landscaping along arterial streets in public and private projects, and
                     encourage the state to provide freeway landscaping.
     Policy 7.4:     Coordinate with Southern California Edison and other utilities to place utility
                     lines underground wherever possible.
     Policy 7.5      Encourage the retention and enhancement of scenic corridors and visual
                     focal points within the community.
NATURAL RESOURCE PLANS
     The Natural Resources Element establishes the City’s approach to protecting and enhancing
     its natural, open space, and recreation resources. The City has established goals and policies
     to preserve these resources. The following Natural Resource Plans provide an outline for
     future actions to conserve and improve the natural resources in Orange’s planning area.
     Implementation programs, which describe and detail the City’s specific actions, are included
     in an Appendix to the General Plan.
     The Natural Resources Element covers a wide
     range of diverse issues, from the protection of
     water resources to the establishment of
     recreational trails. In order to focus policy and
     implementation programs on each specific issue,
     the Natural Resource Plan is divided into two
     “mini-plans”—a Natural Resource Conservation
     and Protection Plan, and a Park and Recreation
     Plan.
NATURAL RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND PROTECTION PLAN
     Before Orange was an incorporated city, people were attracted to the area by its wealth of
     natural resources—the temperate climate, clean air, abundance of water, variety of plants
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              NR-8

                                                                             NATURAL RESOURCES
    and animals, and vast acres of open space, from the alluvial plains below the Santa Ana
    Mountains to the rolling hills and shaded canyons. People found Orange to be a desirable
    place to farm, raise a family, and pursue a high quality lifestyle.
    Population growth in the 20th century transformed Orange from a quiet farming community
    into a sizable urban city. The sand and gravel resources of the Santa Ana River and Santiago
    Creek were used to support urban development, first on the flatlands, and then into the hills
    of east Orange.
    Growth has been accompanied by a gradual reduction in the quality and quantity of the
    natural resources which first attracted people to the area. Growth in Orange, as well as
    throughout the region, has contributed to a decline in air and surface water quality,
    reduction in local groundwater supplies, and elimination of some open space areas suitable
    for agricultural production and wildlife habitat.
    Despite the reduction and loss of some resources, Orange residents have not lost sight of the
    benefits natural resources provide the community. Clean air and water are vital to ensure the
    protection of public health and to support wildlife. Plant and wildlife resources enrich the
    urban setting by providing changes in scenery and environment. They contribute to the
    biodiversity and ecology of the region. Also, preservation of some open space areas
    (floodplains, steep hillsides) is necessary to protect public safety. Finally, aggregate
    resources (sand and gravel) provide the community with a source of income and a source of
    readily available building materials to support new construction and growth in appropriate
    areas of the community.
Open Space Resources
    Open space lands may be set aside for many purposes, including the provision or
    preservation of: (1) parks for recreation or wildlife habitat preservation; (2) water resources
    for groundwater recharge and support of plant and animal habitat; (3) environmental hazard
    zones for the protection of public safety; and, (4) prominent geologic features and scenic
    resources for the visual enhancement of the urban environment.
    As shown in Figure NR-1, Orange’s planning area includes approximately 7,400 acres of open
    space, which is about one-third of the planning area’s total land area. Open spaces include
    lands used as City or County parks, ridgelines, and areas designated as Open Space on the
    Land Use Policy Map. The greatest concentration of open space within the planning area is in
    the Cleveland National Forest, a portion of which is located within the City’s Sphere of
    Influence. This open space includes several hundred acres in the Peralta Hills area and several
    hundred acres in the hills south and east of Orange Park Acres, consisting of Santiago Oaks
    Regional Park, Irvine Regional Park, and Peters Canyon Regional Park. An additional 15,800
    acres of open space lies within the City’s Sphere of Influence, east of the planning area.
    The open space areas also include a portion of the 37,000-acre reserve area established by
    the Central and Coastal Orange County Natural Communities Conservation Plan/Habitat
    Conservation Plan (NCCP/HCP). This area encompasses portions of Santiago Hills II and east
    Orange. Additionally, the Irvine Ranch Land Reserve affects the pattern of developable and
    undevelopable land in the eastern portion of the planning area. The reserve stretches from
    Weir Canyon near State Route (SR) 91 at the north end of Irvine Ranch, connects with the
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              NR-9

NATURAL RESOURCES
     Cleveland National Forest along the northeast border of the ranch, continues south to
     include large regional open space systems in the northern and southern hillsides of the City
     of Irvine, and extends to the Laguna Coast Wilderness Park and Crystal Cove State Park near
     Laguna Beach.
     Conserving current open spaces and creating new open spaces are important concerns. As
     development pressure increases in the hillside areas east of the City, one key to preserving
     the quality of life for Orange residents lies in providing open spaces that preserve scenic
     vistas, provide habitat for wildlife, and maintain the ecological balance of the area.
     Additionally, because most of Orange’s open spaces are located adjacent to the many
     reservoirs and creeks located within the City, opportunity exists to improve water quality in
     the region by enhancing and adding open spaces around these reservoirs and creeks.
     To increase the amount of open space within the City, Orange will work with large
     landowners to secure open space dedications where feasible. The City will also work with
     land trusts and non-profit agencies to secure grant funds for acquisition and conservation of
     open space areas. Where appropriate, this process may include the use of conservation
     easements, which are voluntary agreements that allow landowners to limit the type or
     amount of development on their property while retaining private ownership of the land. The
     easement is signed by the landowner, who is the easement donor, and by a government
     agency or non-profit organization, which is the party receiving the easement. The landowner
     continues to privately own and manage the land, and may receive tax advantages for having
     donated the conservation easement. The government or non-profit accepts the easement
     with the understanding that it must enforce the terms of the easement in perpetuity. After
     the easement is signed, it is recorded with the County Clerk and applies to all future owners
     of the land.
Air, Water, and Energy Resources
     The quality of air, water, energy, and land resources must be preserved, not only for public
     health, environmental, and economic reasons, but also to improve and maintain the quality
     of life for Orange residents. All of these resources generate regional issues. Therefore,
     resolving issues related to air, water, energy and land resources requires the coordinated
     efforts of many jurisdictions. Collectively, smaller local actions can have wide-reaching
     impacts.
     Air Resources
     Orange has seen steady growth in both population and development over the past decades,
     which has urbanized a once rural town. The population growth in Orange and surrounding
     jurisdictions has led to declining air quality in the regional air basin. Orange is located within
     the South Coast Air Basin, managed by the South Coast Air Quality Management District
     (SCAQMD), which is the regional agency responsible for regulating pollutant emissions in the
     air basin.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-10

NR-11 Figure NR-1 Open Space Resource
NATURAL RESOURCES
                  (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                  NR-12
                                                                        NATURAL RESOURCES
In order to protect and improve air quality at a regional level, the City will continue to
cooperate with SCAQMD to implement the Air Quality Management Plan. At a local level, the
City will carry out the following programs to help improve regional air quality:
   Assess project impacts on air quality as part of the environmental review process.
    Whenever appropriate, environmental review and mitigation measures will be
    coordinated with SCAQMD.
   Support efforts to provide public transit, and routes that are user-friendly for bicyclists
    and pedestrians throughout the City.
   Support the development of pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods. As described in the Land
    Use Element, more intensely used commercial and mixed-use areas will be concentrated
    in identified opportunity areas located throughout the western portion of the City.
    Centralizing these uses may encourage mass transit to better serve core employment
    areas. Also, increased business opportunities within the City may reduce the number of
    area residents commuting greater distances to work (e.g. to downtown Los Angeles or
    Irvine).
   Require major employers to institute Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plans.
    Such plans establish incentives to encourage employees to carpool, take public
    transportation, bicycle, walk, or use some means other than private automobiles to get
    to and from work.
Water Resources
Water is a resource that must be preserved, not only for public health, environmental, and
economic reasons, but also to improve and maintain quality of life. Water quality is most
definitely a regional issue. Pollutants entering the hydrologic system are dispersed outward,
with the potential to affect all who use the water within the system.
Water sources are considered most vulnerable to contamination from industrial activities
and/or environments such as chemical processing, petroleum pipelines and storage, gas
stations, and sewer collection systems. The local issue of household chemicals entering
water sources is also a challenge to water safety. Pollution of urban runoff and stormwater,
and threats to the City’s water supply arise from improper use of household hazardous
materials, such as solvents, fuels, paints, swimming pool chemicals, miscellaneous flammable
and corrosive substances, and from improper disposal of household hazardous wastes,
including used motor oil. Reliable water supplies are essential to public health, safety, and
welfare, and the City tests all water supply sources to assure safety and compliance with all
drinking water standards.
Ground Water Quality and Supplies
Protection of water supply and ground and surface water quality is imperative for the health
and quality of life of Orange residents, businesses, and visitors. Between 60-80 percent of
the water supply to the City is drawn from municipal wells drilled into the Santa Ana River
Aquifer from the Lower Santa Ana River groundwater basin managed by the Orange County
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          NR-13

NATURAL RESOURCES
     Water District (OCWD). The City is a member of this District, which manages the Orange
     County Groundwater Basin and monitors and maintains ground water quality in the region.
     Other water sources include surface water runoff into Irvine Lake purchased from the
     Serrano Water District. The Lower Santa Ana River basin, which extends from San Bernardino
     County southwest to the Pacific Ocean, underlies the entire western portion of the planning
     area. The Santa Ana Mountains and foothills form the basin’s eastern boundary. The ground
     water supply is supplemented by imported water purchased through the Metropolitan Water
     District of Orange County (MWDOC).
     Figure NR-2 identifies major surface water bodies, waterways, and watershed areas in the
     planning area. A watershed is the geographic area draining into a river system, ocean, or
     other body of water through a single outlet and includes receiving waters. Watersheds are
     usually bordered and separated from other watersheds by mountain ridges or other naturally
     elevated areas. Three watersheds are located within Orange’s corporate boundaries: the
     Santa Ana River Watershed (Lower Santa Ana River drainage basin), the San Diego Creek
     Watershed, and the Westminster Watershed (Los Alamitos/East Garden Grove/Bolsa Chica
     drainage basin). Most of Orange falls within the Santa Ana River Watershed. The
     southeastern portion of the planning area falls within the San Diego Creek Watershed, and
     consists primarily of residential communities with scattered neighborhood-serving
     commercial areas. A small southwestern portion of the planning area falls within the
     Westminster Watershed. These watersheds are based on the hydrologic areas delineated by
     the Orange County Flood Control District.
     Irvine Lake, Villa Park Reservoir, and Peters Canyon Reservoir are artificial lakes constructed
     to provide water storage and flood control capabilities. All three lakes lie within areas
     designated for open space uses on the Land Use Policy Map. Villa Park Reservoir and Peters
     Canyon Reservoir lie within areas designated for public park uses. Therefore, land use policy
     ensures the preservation of these water resources for both resource conservation and
     recreation uses.
     Irvine Lake is planned for continued use as a water reservoir, and such use includes related
     recreational uses such as fishing, sailing, and boating. Resort and commercial recreation uses
     on adjacent lands enhance the lake’s recreation function. In determining the mix of
     recreation uses for the lake, the Irvine Ranch Water District and the Serrano Irrigation District
     recognize the primary use of the lake as an agricultural and domestic water supply reservoir.
     Desilting activities may continue as a part of the lake’s management program to assure
     sufficient capacity for water storage.
     The Santa Ana River, which forms the City’s western boundary, is the major drainage course
     for the Santa Ana River basin. The river performs valuable flood control and groundwater
     recharge functions along its entire route. In recognition of the important role the river plays
     in providing groundwater recharge areas and adequate flood protection for Orange County,
     land use policy calls for open space uses along the river.
     Santiago Creek flows from the Santa Ana Mountains through Orange and empties into the
     Santa Ana River in the City of Santa Ana. In addition to controlling floodwaters and
     recharging the groundwater basin, Santiago Creek has become a defining feature of the
     community, characterized by trails and recreational open space throughout portions of its
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-14

NR-15 Figure NR-2 Drainage Areas and Water Recharge Facilitie
NATURAL RESOURCES
                  (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                NR-16
                                                                      NATURAL RESOURCES
length within Orange. Community members identify with the creek, and the City seeks to
incorporate natural characteristics of Santiago Creek in the design of adjacent future
projects. The upper portions of Santiago Creek are characterized by large, abandoned mining
pits. In particular, the pits near Bond Street serve valuable groundwater recharge purposes.
Land use policy recognizes these uses by designating the creek and several surrounding
properties as Open Space or Open Space-Park.
Handy Creek is a minor drainage course flowing from Peters Canyon Reservoir to Santiago
Creek. Water flows from Peters Canyon Reservoir are channeled through Handy Creek to the
recharge basin system at Santiago Creek near Bond Street, where it replaces water pumped
from wells and helps maintain levels of groundwater supply for the area.
To promote water conservation, the City will encourage all developments to utilize water
conservation measures in accordance with the City’s Municipal Code, and will encourage
sustainability in project site planning and building design. The City will use native and
drought-tolerant plants for landscaping, and will use recycled and reclaimed water for
irrigating landscape projects whenever feasible. Reclaimed water is the reuse of treated
wastewater, and is usually used for non-drinking purposes. Using recycled or reclaimed water
instead of expensive and increasingly scarce potable water helps to ensure the long-term
availability of drinking water to Orange residents.
Urban Runoff
Urban stormwater runoff occurs when rainfall that in a nonurban environment would have
been absorbed by groundcover or soil is instead collected by storm drains. In urbanized areas
such as Orange, vegetation and top soil have been largely replaced by impervious surfaces
such as buildings, roads, sidewalks, and parking lots. When it rains, trash, litter, silt,
automotive chemicals, fertilizers, animal wastes and other contaminants are washed into the
storm drain system. Since storm drains are designed to carry only stormwater, these drains
typically are not equipped with filters or cleaning systems. Consequently, they can carry
contaminants found in urban runoff directly into local flood control channels, lakes and the
ocean. Many of the contaminants found in this runoff affect water quality and can, at
elevated concentration levels, be toxic to aquatic and marine life.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Local stormwater pollution control measures are implemented in accordance with the 1972
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act) and the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES). The Clean Water Act prohibits any person from discharging
pollutants through a “point source” into a “water of the United States” unless they have a
NPDES permit. The NPDES Program, mandated by Congress under the Clean Water Act, is a
comprehensive program for addressing the nonagricultural sources of stormwater
discharges that adversely affect the quality of the nation’s waters. The Program uses the
NPDES permitting mechanism to require the implementation of control and monitoring
measures designed to prevent harmful pollutants from being washed into local water bodies
by stormwater runoff. The NPDES program requires the owner or operator of any facility,
including publicly owned facilities, or any person responsible for any activity that discharges
waste into the surface waters of the U.S., to obtain an NPDES permit. The Clean Water Act
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         NR-17

NATURAL RESOURCES
     amendments of 1987 established a framework for regulating stormwater discharges from
     municipal, industrial, and construction activities under the NPDES program.
     The Clean Water Act provides that states are authorized to operate their own NPDES
     programs, provided that such programs meet minimum federal requirements. In California,
     the NPDES Program is administered by the State Water Resources Control Board and its nine
     Regional Water Quality Control Boards. The NPDES Municipal Storm Water Permit for
     northern and central Orange County, including the City of Orange, is issued by the Santa Ana
     Regional Water Quality Control Board (Region 8). The City of Orange, along with other
     northern and central Orange County cities, currently operates under Santa Ana Regional
     Board Order No. R8-2009-0030 (NPDES Permit No. CAS 618030) as amended by Order R8-
     2010-0062. The Permit, issued in May 2009 and amended in October 2010, requires the City of
     Orange to minimize short- and long-term impacts on receiving water quality from
     stormwater and non-stormwater discharges associated with new development and
     significant redevelopment to implement low impact development practices (LID) and other
     onsite retention practices to the maximum extent practicable. As part of the NPDES permit
     program, Orange adopted a Local Implementation Plan in 2003, which was revised and
     readopted in September 2011 to conform to the May 2008 permit.
     The City will require all new development and modifications to existing development to use
     LID and Best Management Practices (BMPs) to reduce stormwater runoff and increase on-
     site retention. BMPs are effective methods that prevent and control the amount of
     pollutants entering the storm drain system, where pollutants eventually enter the surface
     water system. These practices closely follow federal stormwater requirements and
     regulations. In addition, the Orange County Model Water Quality Management Plan, adopted
     in August 2011 provides BMPs for source, structural and treatment control. Source control
     BMPs include such techniques as site planning and landscaping, and use of pervious
     pavements. Structural BMPs include providing protection from rain, secondary containment,
     and other construction BMPs. Treatment control BMPs include natural treatment options
     such as constructed wetlands and vegetated swales. The City will continue to support
     implementation of NPDES requirements on new development and significant redevelopment
     projects.
     Energy Resources
     The City will continue to promote energy conservation, both by encouraging conservation
     measures on the part of homeowners, the business community, and institutions, as well as
     by encouraging green building techniques for new construction and renovation projects.
     Green Building
     Green building concepts can be incorporated into site and building design to reduce energy
     use within the City as a whole, to improve aesthetics and comfort, and to provide a more
     cost-effective means of living. According to the U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in
     Energy and Environmental Design (LEED), seven concepts of green building can help
     conserve energy and preserve the environment:
        Location and transportation
        Sustainable sites
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              NR-18

                                                                                     NATURAL RESOURCES
    Water efficiency
    Energy and atmosphere
    Materials and resources
    Indoor environmental quality
    Innovation and design process
Sustainable sites require development designs that work with existing topography, building
on previously developed sites, integrating natural surroundings, using existing infrastructure,
building on brownfields (sites previously used for industry) through site remediation, and
selecting sites near public transportation and diverse land uses. These measures will
ultimately help preserve natural habitats, reduce negative effects on water and air quality,
and minimize automobile use.
Incorporating water efficiency at the time of construction will maximize water conservation
through a building’s lifetime. Using non-potable water or gray water to irrigate landscaping
or using xeriscape (landscaping requiring minimal water usage) to conserve water, installing
water-efficient fixtures, and incorporating innovative wastewater technologies and plans will
reduce water demand and limit extraction and pollution of groundwater supply.
Green building incorporates site orientation, window placements, skylights, solar panels, and high insulation to
improve indoor comfort and to conserve valuable natural resources.
Providing natural ventilation and effective insulation in buildings can reduce energy demand
and utility bills. Natural ventilation will allow residents to cool living spaces without relying on
air conditioners, and increased building insulation will sustain moderate variations to indoor
temperature. Orienting buildings to invite natural light or using solar panels will reduce
electricity demand. These measures will not only reduce demand for natural resources and
minimize effects on climate change, but they will also increase comfort for residents and
should encourage street-fronting design using more windows and detailing.
Judicious selection of materials and maximizing landscaping in parking lots, rights-of-way,
and overall building sites can further provide natural indoor cooling and reduce heat island
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 NR-19

NATURAL RESOURCES
         effects and glare in our urban environment. Choosing natural materials will improve indoor
         environmental quality by limiting toxic emissions associated with components such as
         adhesives and formaldehyde often found in building materials. Constant monitoring and
         innovation in sustainable building design will enhance the aesthetics of the built environment
         while improving the comfort and health of residents.
         The City already practices building material waste reduction through its protection of historic
         building resources. These efforts, combined with construction waste management and
         efforts to incorporate recycled content and natural materials into new construction, will
         reduce the amount of waste destined for landfills and conserve non-renewable resources.
         Climate Change
         Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that persists for an extended
         period, due to natural processes, human-caused changes in the composition of the
         atmosphere, or land use changes that lead to atmospheric changes. According to the United
         Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)1, the scientific authority on the
         subject of climate change, certain findings are widely accepted by the scientific community:
             Greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as carbon dioxide (CO2), when introduced into the
              atmosphere, have a warming effect on the earth;
             Human activities have increased the levels of GHGs in the atmosphere since pre-industrial
              times; and
             The global climate has warmed by an average of 1.0-1.7 degrees Fahrenheit from 1906-
              2005.
         Greenhouse gases are gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. GHGs include CO2, methane,
         nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases. The human activities during which these gases are
         emitted include burning, manufacturing, and transportation-related combustion of fossil
         fuels. Livestock and solid waste emissions also contribute to the buildup of GHGs.
         The effects of climate
         change include increased
         global average temperature,
         subsequent              altered
         precipitation        patterns,
         thermal expansion of the
         ocean, and loss of polar and
         global sea ice extent. In
         Orange, these changes
         would translate to water
         and energy supply issues,
         increased risk of wildfire and
         floods, and possible human
         health complications.
1
  IPCC 2007; Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the IPCC. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK.
                                             ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                     NR-20

                                                                       NATURAL RESOURCES
Responding to climate change requires a two-pronged approach. On one hand, the City must
adapt to change and prepare for the already-foreseeable effects of global warming that have
already occurred and, on the other hand, the City must coordinate with agencies, residents,
and businesses to modify behavior to decrease the citywide contribution to GHG emissions
and associated effects on the climate.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
The California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32) was created by the state
legislature to address the threat global warming poses to the state’s “economic well-being,
public health, natural resources, and the environment”. The Act directs the California Air
Resources Board (ARB) to “adopt a statewide GHG emissions limit equivalent to the
statewide GHG emissions levels in 1990 to be achieved by 2020.” California Executive Order
03-05 (EO-S-3-05. June 2007) requires statewide GHG emissions to be reduced to a level 80
percent below 1990 levels by 2050. These laws require maintenance of a statewide inventory
of emission levels as well as taking action to decrease emission levels. Actions needed to
decrease emission levels statewide were documented in a Scoping Plan approved in 2008,
and subsequently amended in 2011 and 2014.
Senate Bill 375 (2008) requires metropolitan planning organizations (such as the Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG)) to include sustainable communities strategies
in regional transportation plans for the purpose of reducing GHG emissions from
automobiles and light tricks through integrated transportation, housing, and use and
environmental planning. In compliance with SB 375, the Orange County Council of
Governments (in coordination with the Orange County Transportation Authority) prepared a
sub-regional Sustainable Communities Strategy for Orange County (OCSCS), which was
incorporated into the Regional Transportation Plan adopted by the SCAG. However, all
jurisdictions in California have a responsibility to contribute to this effort with changes in
operations, technology, and policies that enable residents and businesses to follow suit. This
General Plan provides a comprehensive framework for Orange’s approach to climate change
and GHG emission reduction. The types of policies that deal with climate change and GHG
emission are far ranging. The City has located policies and programs throughout the General
Plan that have multiple outcomes. They help the City to achieve a high quality of life for its
current and future residents and businesses, reduce the City’s contributions to climate
change, and help residents and businesses adapt to changing circumstances.
State and local governments will play a critical role in addressing this important issue. The
OCSCS identifies policies and measures that will minimize GHG emissions at a regional level.
However, the City believes that in order to achieve the emission reductions mandated in AB
32 and EO-S-3-05, each sector must do its fair share to reduce total emissions, and local action
is needed to manage and measure activity within each sector as it relates to land use
planning. For this reason the City is establishing a GHG emissions reduction goal of at least 15
percent of current levels by 2020.
To achieve this goal, the General Plan advocates primarily compact “infill” future
development, focusing on introducing urban-scale mixed-use projects at locations near
transportation corridors and transit, and creating additional retail and employment
opportunities within the City that increase the range of goods and services available to
residents and improve the community’s jobs-housing balance. Future “greenfield”
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          NR-21

NATURAL RESOURCES
     development is limited to previously-approved entitlements in east Orange. The General Plan
     includes a broad spectrum of policies related to climate change. These policies have been
     integrated throughout the relevant General Plan elements, as detailed in Table NR-1.
     Adaptation Strategies
     Climate change has been recognized as a threat that could alter social, economic, and
     ecological conditions in the City. Concentrations of GHGs have dramatically increased in the
     atmosphere due to the use of fossil fuel-based energy sources. Additionally, the earth’s
     capacity to capture and store GHGs has been reduced due to extensive deforestation and the
     conversion of grasslands and other carbon rich natural communities, as well as saturation of
     the ocean with dissolved CO2. Rigorous scientific analysis conducted by the IPCC, the
     National Research Council of the National Academies, and other agencies indicates that
     increased concentrations of GHGs have already begun to result in significant warming, and
     will lead to changes in precipitation patterns, sea level rise, and more frequent extreme
     weather events. Other effects could include constrained water and energy availability, more
     frequent flooding, health impacts related to increases in vector borne diseases, air pollution,
     and habitat loss.
     Wildfire Hazards
     Research conducted at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
     indicates that climate change will increase the frequency and size of wildfires in California.
     Hotter, drier climates, aided by prolonged drought, will promote increased accumulation of fire-
     prone vegetation. When fires occur, stronger winds will continue to fan the flames, spreading
     fires faster and farther than previously experienced. This will expand the size of the urban-
     wildland interface, because more residential communities will be within reach of wildfire
     activity. An expanded urban-wildland interface will require increased resources, planning, and
     funding to maintain and defend.
     Adaptability is important in considering how the City can protect its citizens from the negative
     effects of climate change. In terms of fire protection, The City will continue to adapt by regularly
     updating fire protection requirements, especially in transition areas between developed and
     undeveloped land, and by enforcing the strongest construction and design standards.
     Additionally, the City will work to preserve open space where significant hazards exist.
     Flooding
     The California Climate Change Center, a research arm of the California Energy Commission, has
     found that climate change will result in new flooding concerns throughout California. Climate
     change will result in increased severity of winter storms, particularly in El Niño years. Such
     weather events will result in higher levels of seasonal flooding than those currently experienced.
     This will strain dam capacity and increase floodplain areas. Policies regarding flood protection
     under Goal PS-2 (in the Public Safety Element) will help the City deal with existing and increased
     potential for flooding. The City will continue to work with the Orange County Hazard Mitigation
     Task Force in its planning and implementation of the Hazard Mitigation Plan, and will update its
     Emergency Operations Plan to identify and fund flood control improvements regularly. Public
     facilities must be flood-proofed, and buildings in floodplains must adhere to construction
     standards.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                NR-22

                                                                                          Table NR-1
                                                                                Climate Change Related Policies
                           Issues             Topic                                                                     Policies1
                      Community form   Compact development   Land Use Element
                                                             1.1: Jobs and housing balance
                                                             2.1: Mixed-use projects in older commercial and industrial areas
                                                             2.4: Mixed-use projects with compatible uses and supporting public and community facilities
                                                             2.2: Transfers of development rights for high-rise office and residential structures
                                                             2.9: Mixed-use development to include ground floor retail
                                                             Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element
                                                             1.4 and 1.5: Alternatives to building demolition
                                                             Urban Design Element
                                                             1.4: Pedestrian-oriented places and connections
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                             1.6: Street-oriented development, parking and commercial activities
                                                             2.1: Commercial corridors as pedestrian-friendly streets that balance mobility and accommodate compact development
                                                             2.4: Building design and orientation to promote active street life
                                                             Economic Development Element
      NR-23
                                                             4.3: Lot consolidation for integrated development with improved pedestrian and vehicular circulation
                                                             5.4: Redevelop and rehabilitate underutilized and vacant lands and public rights-of-way
                                       Commercial use        Land Use Element
                                       locations             3.2: City business promotion and local patronage
                                                             3.4: Clean commerce and industry
                                                             Urban Design Element
                                                             2.1: Pedestrian-friendly commercial corridors that balance mobility and accommodate compact development
                                                             2.2: Pedestrian and transit access through commercial and mixed-use corridors
                                                             2.5: Design standards for urban parks and open spaces within mixed-use corridors
                                                                                                                                                                                   NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                             4.6: Pedestrian linkages between commercial districts and neighborhoods
                                                             6.1: Development standards for high quality building and site design integrated with infrastructure and circulation
                                                             6.2: Infill development to benefit surrounding corridors/neighborhoods and provide additional park space
                                                             Economic Development Element
                                                             4.2: Reduce land, infrastructure and environmental deficiencies within commercial corridors
                                                                                                                                                                                 NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                                        Table NR-1
                                                                              Climate Change Related Policies
                      Issues            Topic                                                                         Policies1
                               Industrial use locations   Land Use Element
                                                          4.1: Maximize industrial land resources for industrial and office uses
                                                          4.3: Protect residents and the environment from impacts of industrial operations
                                                          4.4: Mixed office, industrial, and support commercial uses in light industrial areas
                                                          4.5: Environmentally friendly business atmosphere
                               Live-work uses             Land Use Element
                                                          5.1: Targeted development of mixed-use, transit-oriented development surrounding the Santa Fe Depot
                                                          5.2: Adaptive re-use of industrial and agricultural historic structures
                               Access to employment       Land Use Element
                               centers                    2.2: Transfers of development rights for high-rise office and residential structures
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                          Circulation & Mobility Element
                                                          3.3: Transit-oriented design within commercial, employment, medium density residential, and mixed-use areas
                                                          Growth Management Element
                                                          1.8: Housing within close proximity to jobs and services
      NR-24
                                                          2.3: Match residents with local jobs to reduce long commutes and improve community fiscal and public health
                                                          Economic Development Element
                                                          2.1: Public-private partnerships to support business and employment growth
                                                          2.5: Retention of existing retail businesses
                                                          3.4: Higher density residential and mixed-use projects to provide community-based workforce and market
                                                          7.1: Sites appropriate for housing development for all income groups that support commercial development
                                                          7.2: Mixed-use developments providing housing close to employment hubs
                               Open space                 Land Use Element
                               management                 1.5: Recreation, open space and visual resources in east Orange
                                                          1.7: Range of open space and park amenities to meet diverse needs
                                                          2.3: Transfers of development rights to promote creation of accessible open spaces
                                                          6.4: Open space to provide recreational opportunities, protect vistas and ridgelines, and conserve natural resources
                                                          Natural Resources Element
                                                          1.1: Public-private funding mechanisms and management strategies to conserve open space
                                                          1.2: Land recycling opportunities for new public open space
                                                          1.3: Additional open spaces and access points adjacent to waterways and planned trails
                                                          5.3: Joint recreational use of open space land and facilities
                                                                                               Table NR-1
                                                                                     Climate Change Related Policies
                            Issues               Topic                                                                        Policies1
                                                                 5.4: New public parks and open space resources through incentives and creative techniques
                                                                 5.6: Identify areas currently underserved by open space, and develop programs to purchase land and build park amenities
                                                                 5.7: Transfer of development rights to acquire and develop more publicly accessible open space
                                                                 Public Safety Element
                                                                 2.2: Protecting critical public and private facilities located within floodplain and inundation areas
                                                                 2.4: Reduce impervious surface area within new development
                                                                 Urban Design Element
                                                                 4.5: Incentives to create neighborhood parks and green spaces, particularly within commercial and mixed-use corridors
                                        Wildfire safety          Public Safety Element
                                                                 3.1: Identification and evaluation of new potential fire hazards and fire hazard areas
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                 3.2: Non-traditional methods of controlling vegetation in undeveloped areas
                                                                 3.3: Planting and maintenance of fire-resistant slope cover, stringent site design and maintenance standards, and use of native,
                                                                 non-invasive plant materials
                                        Economic adaptation to Infrastructure Element
      NR-25
                                        climate change         5.4: Disaster mitigation strategies incorporated into City infrastructure master plans
                      City Operations   City of Orange as model Natural Resources Element
                                                                2.9: City operations as model for energy efficiency and green building
                                        Low emission City        Natural Resources Element
                                        vehicles                 2.10: Replace existing City vehicles with ultra low or zero emission vehicles and purchase new low emission vehicles
                                        Other                    Land Use Element
                                                                 7.4: Benefits from regional transportation, land use, air quality, waste management and disposal, and habitat conservation
                                                                 plans
                                                                 7.5: Other agencies and service providers to minimize impacts of their facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                    NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                 7.6: Joint use agreements with other agencies to share existing and future public facilities among institutions
                                                                 Growth Management Element
                                                                 2.1: Address regional issues and opportunities related to growth, transportation, and infrastructure
                      Ecosystems        Wildlife migration       Land Use Element
                                                                 6.8: Integrate natural amenities and connections within design of urban and suburban spaces
                                                                                                                                                                                               NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                                                  Table NR-1
                                                                                        Climate Change Related Policies
                            Issues                 Topic                                                                       Policies1
                                          Habitat management         Land Use Element
                                                                     6.12: Recognize value of natural and cultural resources in undeveloped areas
                                                                     Natural Resources Element
                                                                     2.16: Protect in-stream habitat and natural stream and channel features
                                                                     4.1: Preserve and protect native and habitat-supporting plant resources
                                                                     4.2: Enhance the natural qualities of Santiago Creek to protect habitat and reintroduce native plants and animals
                                                                     4.3: Reduce impacts of urban development on important ecological and biological resources
                                                                     4.4: Repair or improve ecological and biological conditions in site development, redevelopment, and public improvements
                                                                     4.5: Protect the Santiago Creek and the Santa Ana River corridors from premature urbanization
                                          Tree protection and        Land Use Element
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          planting                   6.9: Maximize landscaping along streetscapes and within development projects
                      Energy Efficiency   Energy efficient           Infrastructure Element
                                          technology                 3.4: Use energy-efficient street lights
                                                                     4.4: Integrated and cost-effective design and technology features within new development
      NR-26
                      Green Building      Public education           Natural Resources Element
                                                                     2.7: Ensure adequate energy supplies to meet community needs, and promote energy conservation and public education
                                                                     programs
                                          Efficient infrastructure   Natural Resources Element
                                          systems                    2.6: Sustainable building and site designs for new construction and renovation projects
                                                                     4.4: Integrated and cost-effective design and technology features within new development
                      Renewable Energy    Reduced fossil fuel        Natural Resources Element
                                          reliance                   2.2: Alternative transportation modes, alternative technologies, and bicycle- and pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods
                      Transit             Adequate transit to        Circulation & Mobility Element
                                          employment centers         3.3: Incorporate transit-oriented design within commercial, employment, medium density residential, and mixed-use areas
                                          Systems along major        Circulation & Mobility Element
                                          corridors                  1.1: Integrated, hierarchical, and multi-modal system of roadways, pedestrian walkways, and bicycle paths
                                                                     Urban Design Element
                                                                     2.1: Active, pedestrian-friendly streets and corridors that balance auto, transit and pedestrian mobility
                                          Expanded passenger rail Circulation & Mobility
                                          service                 3.1: Assess City public transportation needs and ensure delivery of services when and where they are needed
                                                                  3.2: Convenient and attractive transit amenities and streetscapes to encourage use of public transportation
                                                                              Table NR-1
                                                                    Climate Change Related Policies
                      Issues           Topic                                                                 Policies1
                               Non-motorized    Land Use Element
                               transportation   2.6: Transit, bicycle, and pedestrian sidewalks, paths, paseos, and trail systems in and around mixed-use areas
                                                2.7: High-quality architecture, landscape design, and site planning of mixed-use projects, emphasizing pedestrian orientation
                                                and safe and convenient access
                                                Circulation & Mobility Element
                                                1.4: Prohibit on-street parking to reduce bicycle/automobile conflicts in appropriate target areas
                                                4.1: Comprehensive bicycle network integrated with other transportation systems, including Santiago Creek, the Santa Ana
                                                River, and the proposed Tustin Branch Trail
                                                4.2: Racks and safe storage facilities at parking areas for City facilities
                                                4.4: Provide adequate bikeway system signage, trail markings, and other amenities
                                                4.5: Defensive trail design features, lighting, emergency access, and links to the roadway signal system
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                4.6: Abandoned rail corridors as segments of bikeway and pedestrian trail system
                                                4.7: Accessible sidewalks and pedestrian amenities
                                                Natural Resources Element
                                                6.1: Multi-use trail links that serve recreational and circulation purposes
      NR-27
                                                6.2: Consistent, safe, and efficient maintenance of trails, and minimal trail impacts to the environment
                                                6.3: Pursue joint use of local rights-of-way and easements for multi-use trails
                                                6.5: Safe trail system interface with existing development
                                                6.6: Integrated relationship between trails and developed areas
                                                Public Safety Element
                                                9.1: Traffic control devices, crosswalks, and pedestrian-oriented lighting, within design of streets, sidewalks, trails, and school
                                                routes
                                                9.2: Safe routes that encourage children to walk or bike to schools and recreational facilities
                                                9.3: Remove barriers to pedestrian and bicycle access
                                                                                                                                                                                      NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                Noise Element
                                                2.3: Alternative transportation modes to minimize traffic noise
                                                Growth Management Element
                                                1.7: Expansion and development of alternative methods of transportation
                                                Infrastructure Element
                                                3.5: Preserve and improve existing on-street bike paths within rights-of-way
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                                                  Table NR-1
                                                                                        Climate Change Related Policies
                             Issues                 Topic                                                                       Policies1
                                           Transit-supporting        Circulation & Mobility Element
                                           facilities                2.7: Use of rail corridors for the movement of freight and goods
                                                                     Growth Management Element
                                                                     1.9: New development incorporates non-motorized and alternative transit amenities
                                                                     2.5: Provide bus shelters, shade, and other special streetscape treatments at transit stations that encourage use of regional
                                                                     bus and train services
                      Transportation       Shorten travel distances Growth Management Element
                                                                    2.4: Infill development and mixed-use opportunities wherever possible as developable space becomes more limited
                                           Technical solutions       Growth Management Element
                                                                     1.12: Traffic reduction strategies within the City’s Transportation Demand Management Ordinance
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           Roadway maintenance       Land Use Element
                                           and design                5.7: Roadway improvements within Old Towne designed to promote walkability and a safe pedestrian environment
                                                                     5.9: Promote attractive and safe pedestrian access between the Santa Fe Depot and the Plaza
      NR-28
                                                                     Circulation & Mobility Element
                                                                     1.3: Improve street capacity and increase safety on City arterials and neighborhood streets
                                                                     Growth Management Element
                                                                     1.4: Transportation impact fees for improvements within the City and within established County Growth Management Areas
                                                                     2.2: Maintain and expand roadway and bikeway systems
                                                                     Infrastructure Element
                                                                     3.6: New developments funds fair-share costs associated with City provision of right-of-way maintenance services
                      Air quality          Reduce vehicle            Natural Resources Element
                                           emissions                 2.1: Implement and enforce regional air quality management plans
                                                                     2.2: Support alternative transportation modes, alternative technologies, and bicycle- and pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods
                                           GHG emission reduction Natural Resources Element
                                           strategies             3.1: Evaluate the potential effects of climate change on the City’s human and natural systems and prepare strategies that allow
                                                                  the City to appropriately respond and adapt
                                                                  3.2: Develop and adopt a comprehensive strategy to reduce greenhouse gasses within Orange to at least1990 levels by 2020
                      Water management Water use efficiency and Natural Resources Element
                                       reduced consumption      2.3: Native and drought-tolerant plants, proper soil preparation, and efficient irrigation systems for landscaping

                                                                                                     Table NR-1
                                                                                           Climate Change Related Policies
                            Issues                   Topic                                                                        Policies1
                                                                       2.4: Recycled and reclaimed water for landscaping projects
                                                                       2.11: Ecological integrity and health of watersheds
                                                                       2.12: Protect the quantity and quality of local groundwater supplies
                                                                       2.13: Control surface runoff water discharges into the stormwater conveyance system
                                                                       2.14: Reduce pollutant runoff from new development through use of Best Management Practices
                                                                       2.15: Minimize impervious surfaces and associated urban runoff pollutants in new development and redevelopment
                                                                       Infrastructure Element
                                                                       1.2: Correct deficiencies in the City’s infrastructure systems and work toward environmentally sustainable systems
                                                                       1.3: Water conservation programs aimed at reducing demands
                                                                       1.4: Environmentally efficient infrastructure improvements
                                                                       1.5: Cost-effective methods to reduce storm water infiltration into the sewer system
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       1.6: New development to fund fair-share costs associated with water, sewer, and storm drain service
                      Waste reduction       Waste management and Natural Resources Element
                                            recycling            2.5: Local and regional waste-reduction and diversion goals
      NR-29
                                                                       Infrastructure Element
                                                                       2.3: Programs for residents to donate or recycle surplus furniture, old electronics, clothing, and other household items
                                                                       2.4: Outreach and education to all City customers regarding residential collection of household hazardous wastes
                                            Solid waste reuse          Infrastructure Element
                                                                       2.2: Expand outreach and education regarding recycling opportunities
                      Note:
                      1 – Policies are abbreviated for presentation in this table. Please refer to the text of each policy in the identified General Plan element and corresponding Implementation
                      Programs in the General Plan Appendix.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NATURAL RESOURCES

NATURAL RESOURCES
     The City will continue to require flood/storm control facilities for proposed development and
     redevelopment projects, and upgrade street storm drains to deal with potential flooding
     hazards. These programs not only take into account the potential flood events now, but are
     adaptable enough to account for a potential increase.
     Water Supply
     Several recent studies have shown that existing water supply systems are sensitive to climate
     change; however, experts are uncertain about what the overall effects will be on water supply.
     Some models indicate that drier conditions will cause decreased reservoir supplies and river
     flows. Other models predict wetter conditions with increased reservoir inflows and storage, and
     increased river flows. Although there is some uncertainty, it is widely accepted that changes in
     water supply will occur and that water yields from reservoirs are expected to be unreliable.
     Whether or not climate change is responsible, Orange must prepare for a future where
     competition for water resources is even greater than at the present time.
     Many of the policies and programs governing water resources under Goal NR-2 will serve to
     prepare the City for the possible consequences of climate change on water supply. Such policies
     include protecting groundwater supplies, using native or drought-tolerant plants in landscaping,
     using recycled water in irrigation, and promoting other water conservation efforts.
     Climate Action Plan
     Primary among the City’s climate change planning efforts is the development and adoption of
     the City of Orange Climate Action Plan (CAP), as outlined in the General Plan Implementation
     Program Appendix. The City will develop and adopt the CAP by December 31, 2012. The CAP will
     address both GHG emissions from activity within Orange (residential, commercial, industrial, and
     transportation sectors) and the emissions specifically from City government operations. The
     plan will first create a GHG emissions inventory for the base year and forecast GHG emissions for
     the year 2020. The Plan will determine the quantity of emissions to be reduced to meet the GHG
     reduction target of 15 percent below current levels by 2020.
     Together, the policies contained in the General Plan and additional GHG reduction measures to
     be developed as part of the CAP will allow Orange to respond to this critical issue. Achieving the
     targeted GHG reductions and successful adaptation to the effects of climate change will
     demand genuine and significant effort from civic leaders, residents, and businesses.
Ecological, Biological and Mineral Resources
     In order to ensure preservation of plant and wildlife resources, some land must be protected
     from development to provide areas for native plants and wildlife to thrive. Additionally, many
     significant mineral resources are present within the City. The following sections describe the
     City’s approaches to conservation of ecological, biological, and mineral resources.
     Ecological and Biological Resources
     Though a large part of Orange consists of urbanized areas that generally have low habitat value
     for wildlife, a significant amount of land in east Orange, Santiago Oaks Regional Park, and Peters
     Canyon Regional Park is set aside as open space, which includes the Irvine Ranch Land Reserve
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 NR-30

                                                                           NATURAL RESOURCES
(IRLR) and the Nature Reserve of Orange County (NROC) established by the Central/Coastal
Orange County NCCP. These areas contain valuable ecological and biological resources.
Important vegetation communities located in these areas include coastal sage scrub,
woodlands, grasslands, chaparral, and riparian habitat. Characteristic vegetation species
associated with scrub habitat include coastal sage brush and various species of sage and
buckwheat. Woodland communities are multilayered, non-riparian, with tree canopies that have
20 to 80 percent tree cover. Local grassland communities consist of native bunchgrasses and
non-native annual grasses. Chaparral communities are characterized by sclerophyllus shrubs.
Species found in riparian habitats are associated with and dependent upon bodies of water,
such as streambeds.
Sensitive wildlife, fish, amphibian, and reptile species in these Orange habitats include Santa Ana
speckled dace, Western spadefoot toad, Southern pacific pond turtle, banded gecko, horned
lizard, orange-throated whiptail, silvery legless lizard, coast patch-nosed snake, mountain
kingsnake, two-striped garter snake, and the northern red-diamond rattlesnake. Sensitive bird
species include the double-crested cormorant, osprey, white-tailed kite, northern harrier, sharp-
shinned hawk, cooper’s hawk, Swainson’s hawk, Ferruginous hawk, golden eagle, Merlin,
American peregrine falcon, prairie falcon, Western burrowing owl, long-eared owl,
southwestern willow flycatcher, loggerhead shrike, least Bell’s vireo, California horned lark,
coastal cactus wren, gnatcatcher, California yellow warbler, yellow-breasted chat, rufous-
crowned sparrow, Bell’s sage sparrow, grasshopper sparrow, tricolored blackbird, and the
black-chinned sparrow. Sensitive mammal species include the pallid bat, pale big-eared bat,
California mastiff bat, pocketed free-tailed bat, small-footed myotis, yuma myotis, San Diego
black-tailed jackrabbit, dulzura pocket mouse, northwestern San Diego pocket mouse, southern
grasshopper mouse, San Diego desert woodrat, American badger, and mountain lion.
The City’s main approach to conserving the many ecological and biological resources in the
planning area is participation in the Orange County NCCP. Orange lies within the Coastal
subregion of the Orange County NCCP. In 1996, the County of Orange and participating
jurisdictions approved the Central and Coastal Subregion NCCP and an associated
Implementation Agreement. Both the City of Orange and The Irvine Company are signatories to
this agreement. Three species were designated as “target species” by the NCCP to be used as
umbrella species to guide the design of a permanent habitat system within the Central and
Coastal Subregion. The three species are the coastal California gnatcatcher, coastal cactus wren,
and the orange-throated whiptail lizard, all of which are currently on the federal list of
threatened or endangered species. By providing long-term protection for habitat required by
the three target species, sufficient coastal sage scrub (CSS) and other habitat would be
protected to benefit a much broader range of CSS-related species.
The 37,000-acre NCCP Habitat Reserve area borders the eastern portion of the planning area on
the north and south, and includes portions of Santiago Hills II and east Orange. As shown in
Figure NR-3, areas designated as NCCP Habitat Reserve include areas surrounding Irvine Lake,
Santiago Reservoir, Peters Canyon Reservoir, and along Cannon Street at the “El Modena Open
Space Area.” Within the Habitat Reserve area, the NCCP restricts the kinds of permitted uses to
protect long-term habitat values. Residential, commercial and industrial uses are prohibited, as
are new active recreational uses outside already disturbed areas. However, the NCCP recognizes
that some new non-habitat uses, particularly involving public infrastructure, will need to be sited
in the Reserve area, and that some current uses will be maintained. New recreational facilities
                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           NR-31

NATURAL RESOURCES
     will be sited in locations compatible with habitat protection based on the understanding that
     recreational use is subordinate to habitat protection within the reserve. The Reserve area is
     administered by the NROC, which includes representatives of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
     California Department of Fish and Game, participating landowners, and three public members.
     Implementation of the Reserve policies will protect sensitive plant and wildlife species in
     accordance with the NCCP.
     Substantial area is also designated as Non-Reserve Open Space located primarily in the East
     Orange area. Non-Reserve Open Spaces designate regional open spaces that were in public
     ownership prior to adoption of the NCCP. A “special linkage area” is also designated along the
     Southern California Edison corridor that traverses the northern portion of the City and along
     Santiago Canyon Road in East Orange. These open spaces are not subject to the development
     requirements associated with the Reserve system, but they are recognized as integral
     components of the overall subregional conservation strategy.
     The City’s General Plan land use designations in these areas conform to the NCCP in that all
     areas currently proposed for urban development are areas identified as permitted for
     development and “take” by the Central/Coastal NCCP. All remaining areas are designated Open
     Space. Landowners in Orange who have properties within the boundaries of the NCCP Reserve
     area are classified as either “participating landowners” or “non-participating landowners.”
     Participating landowners have the option to develop their properties without preparing a
     Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP). The Irvine Company is the City’s only participating landowner.
     The Irvine Company donated the 50,000-acre Irvine Ranch Land Reserve to the NCCP, and pays
     for the management of the area as part of the mitigation plan for new development in the
     easternmost portion of the planning area. Lands located within the Reserve must be “reserved
     in perpetuity as open space and for recreational purposes.” As a participating jurisdiction, the
     City is responsible for project review for participating landowners. The City is responsible for
     ensuring that non-participating landowners have paid “in-lieu” fees to the NROC for the native
     areas that will be removed due to development. In this case, the City is also responsible for
     coordinating with the NROC to make sure that the development is not in a restricted native
     open space area. The City will continue to ensure that all development proposals conserve the
     greatest amount of open space possible.
     The City is committed to the protection and preservation of plant and wildlife resources, and will
     ensure the preservation of such resources wherever possible. The City will also encourage the
     use of native landscape materials in new and renovated project sites.
     Mineral Resources
     Mineral resource deposits in Orange are primarily limited to the sand and gravel resources
     contained in and along the Santa Ana River and Santiago Creek. Sand and gravel resources are
     referred to collectively as “aggregate.” Aggregate is the primary component of Portland
     cement concrete, a material widely used in the construction industry. The state requires general
     plan land use policy to recognize the importance of these deposits to the region’s economy. As
     these resource deposits are important to the region’s economy, the City will evaluate
     development proposals within these areas, and ensure adequate mitigation or preservation of
     the areas for future aggregate mining activity.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              NR-32

NR-33 Figure NR-3 NCCP Habitat Reserve Are
NATURAL RESOURCES
                  (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                           ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                 NR-34
                                                                                 NATURAL RESOURCES
    The Land Use Element provides a means to protect the aggregate resource areas from
    premature urbanization. Historically, Orange contributed to the gravel industry, but the City’s
    mineral resources have been mostly exhausted. Over the years, Orange has been characterized
    by numerous state-designated Mineral Resource Zones (MRZs), which identify the locations of
    regionally significant aggregate deposits. The MRZs have since been declassified, either as a
    result of completed mining activity, or as a result of urban development.
    However, the Land Use Policy Map (in the Land Use Element) designates an area comprising
    and surrounding the two groundwater recharge pits (Bond Pits) on Santiago Canyon Road
    within the northeastern portion of the City as a Resource Area for the purpose of conserving
    mineral resources and allowing mining activities. Additionally, the approximately 18-acre site of
    the R.J. Noble Company, which lies within the northwestern unincorporated portion of the
    planning area, is another Resource Area currently used for aggregate extraction and crushing
    operations. Portions of Irvine Lake in East Orange that are currently designated as Open Space
    may be used in the future for desilting activities, with the possibility of aggregate extraction.
    The Resource Area land use designation allows for only aggregate extraction or recreation uses.
    Although the Open Space designation does not permit mining, it will protect areas from
    urbanization, making it possible to mine the areas at some future date if necessary. Areas
    containing mineral resources protected in this manner include the resource zones at the west
    end of Lincoln Avenue, areas adjacent to Santiago Creek, and the north, east, and west sides of
    Irvine Lake in East Orange. The mineral resource areas in East Orange would also require
    amendment to the NCCP before extraction could occur.
Visual and Aesthetic Resources
    Preservation of ridgelines and steep hillsides is an important objective for the City, for both
    aesthetic and public safety reasons. To that end, Orange has adopted a hillside grading policy
    that prohibits grading on ridgelines designated Open Space Ridgeline on the Land Use Policy
    Map. Wherever hillside grading occurs, the policy requires that graded slopes must be
    contoured and extensively landscaped with native vegetation or other compatible plant
    materials.
    The largely undeveloped Santiago Hills II and East Orange portions of the planning area have
    many scenic resources that include Irvine Lake, grassy valleys, rugged hillsides, rock
    outcroppings, and winding canyons. People traveling along Santiago Canyon Road have
    spectacular views of these abundant scenic resources. These views should be protected while
    still allowing development to occur. As identified on Figure NR-4, the City will work to designate
    Santiago Canyon Road as a City Scenic Highway, and will develop standards for appropriate
    treatment of the roadway and its surroundings.
    In the more urbanized areas of the City, boulevard landscaping can effectively provide a sense of
    visual open space. The City will review and strengthen landscaping standards as necessary to
    provide green areas within commercial and industrial districts, consistent with strategies
    outlined in the Urban Design Element.
    The City will also promote provision of street trees on City streets, in accordance with the Street
    Tree Master Plan. The City of Orange currently has over 22,000 public street trees along
    residential and arterial streets. The Street Tree Master Plan was adopted in 1999 in an effort to
    provide guidelines for all future street tree planting projects, as well as for the removal and
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-35

NATURAL RESOURCES
     replacement of trees and shrubs on public rights-of-way or streets. An update to the Street Tree
     Master Plan will be completed to emphasize aesthetics, theme, and maintenance of both trees
     and sidewalks. The Master Plan update will also consider safety issues posed by street tree
     debris and roots.
     The City will also continue to enforce its Street Tree Ordinance and Tree Preservation
     Ordinance as part of the City of Orange Municipal Code. The Street Tree Ordinance has clear
     specifications and requirements for the planting, removal and maintenance of trees and
     shrubs. The Tree Preservation Ordinance provides protection for healthy, mature trees on
     private property and provides criteria under which trees may be removed. The Street Tree
     Master Plan, Street Tree Ordinance, and Tree Preservation Ordinance will help preserve and
     manage the City’s urban forest, and maintain the City’s Tree City U.S.A. status.
     To reduce visual clutter along commercial corridors, the City will work with utility providers
     to identify existing arterial corridors that would benefit from moving overhead utilities
     underground and improving the placement of utility service boxes, consistent with the City’s
     Utility Undergrounding Master Plan. Undergrounding minimizes unsightly views of utility lines,
     which are currently prominent in areas such as the Lincoln Avenue corridor. The City will also
     encourage developers of all new infill projects to include underground utilities. Where
     placing utilities underground is not feasible, the City will work with utility providers and
     developers to relocate utilities away from arterial roadways. The City will also update and
     implement the sign provisions of the Zoning Ordinance to reduce visual clutter caused by
     signage and improper setbacks.
Parks and Recreation Plan
                                  Parks and recreation facilities are vital resources for the City.
                                  They provide residents with a broad range of health benefits,
                                  and the quality of these resources helps attract new residents
                                  and businesses to Orange. The City currently lacks adequate
                                  lands designated for public parks and open space to meet the
                                  recreational needs of its residents. Park facilities and recreation
                                  programs are essential to the health and economic well-being of
                                  Orange residents. The City has made improving its park system
                                  and recreational programs a high priority so that all residents
     can enjoy close access to a playground, a park, or a natural area. The City offers a full range of
     recreational programs and facilities that are heavily used by people of all ages.
     This section of the Natural Resources Element establishes long-range strategies and
     standards for the maintenance of existing park facilities and the development of new parks
     and recreational programs in Orange. This plan will serve as a basis for future park facilities
     planning. In addition, the Element identifies standards that apply not only to the
     development of future parks and facilities, but also to the type and nature of sites and
     facilities obtained through purchase or dedication, as well as their intended role in the
     community.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             NR-36

Source: City of Orange 2015
                            NR-37 Figure NR-4 Viewscape Corridors
NATURAL RESOURCES
                  (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                  NR-38
                                                                               NATURAL RESOURCES
    A number of key issues will continue to affect the City’s ability to maintain and expand
    recreation facilities and services in coming years. First, the easternmost portion of the City
    will continue to experience a substantial amount of residential development. The increased
    population will require a full range of services, including those related to parks and
    recreation. These needs are addressed by the parklands provided in the development plan
    for East Orange. The recreation needs of the older, well established neighborhoods in
    Orange will also have to be monitored, particularly in light of the combined public desire for
    more parkland and the expanded opportunities for mixed-use residential and commercial
    development advocated by the Land Use Element
    Additional issues and concerns that will have a bearing on the future maintenance and
    development of parks and recreation facilities include the following:
        Orange will find it increasingly difficult to finance major capital improvements for parks.
         In addition, obtaining land for new park sites in the western portion of the city is
         challenging because the amount of undeveloped land is limited, and costs and competing
         priorities for this land have increased.
        Orange is presently deficient in improved recreational open space, according to
         standards established by the National Recreation and Parks Association (NRPA). A
         number of park sites have been acquired that, when developed, will reduce the gap
         between the standards and available parkland. Also, school grounds, through joint use
         agreements with the City, will help to meet parkland needs.
        Orange maintains and provides a wide range of specialized facilities such as game courts,
         athletic fields, and community buildings in existing parks. However, additional facilities
         are needed to meet future demands.
        A number of easements, including those for flood control, rail lines, and utilities, are
         located in Orange and present the City with unique opportunities to expand the existing
         system of trails and bikeways.
        Recent trends in land use law will make it increasingly difficult for the City to reserve
         private open space lands for future recreational use.
Park Types
    A Master Plan for the City’s park facilities and recreation and community services was
    completed in November 1999. The Master Plan for Parks Facilities establishes an organized
    and structured process for the development of new recreation facilities and the renovation
    of existing City parks and facilities. The Plan also discusses the preservation of open space
    and the development of new recreational programs.
    The City maintains three types of park facilities: neighborhood parks, community parks, and
    special use recreational facilities.
    Neighborhood Parks (4 to 10 acres) provide for the daily recreation needs of residents in the
    immediate area. Typical facilities may include landscaped picnic areas, tot lots, hard court
    areas, multipurpose ball fields, and limited parking.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                NR-39

NATURAL RESOURCES
     Community Parks (15 to 40 acres) are larger in scale and provide a greater variety of
     recreational opportunities and facilities. Six of the community parks (Hart, Grijalva, El Camino
     Real, El Modena, Handy, and Shaffer) host active organized sports leagues and have lighted
     sports fields. Special use recreational facilities provide a wide range of activities to serve the
     community. These facilities include joint-use properties and historic community assets such
     as Plaza Park, Pitcher Park, and Depot Park and Veterans Memorial.
     Orange’s parks also provide passive recreation opportunities that include walking, hiking,
     and biking. Most of the parks have picnic sites, many with barbeques. Programs for seniors
     are available at the Orange Senior Center. The senior program is largely funded by the City
     and administered by a non-profit organization. Orange also provides a wide variety of
     recreational programs for all ages. Many of the programs are joint ventures with local
     nonprofits, commercial vendors or volunteer groups. The most popular activities include
     swimming and sports.
Parks Inventory and Acreage Standards
     Figure NR-5 shows the locations of City parks and recreation facilities, and Table NR-2
     provides a summary of the City’s existing parks, recreation and joint-use facilities, future
     planned City parks, and County regional parks.
     The City owns and has developed 22 parks, which consist of about 246 acres of parkland, and
     also enjoys about 19 acres of additional joint-use school/City recreation facilities. Additional
     parkland is planned in the eastern portion of the planning area. A combination of active and
     passive neighborhood parks, as well as a sports park, will be developed to serve the new
     population in East Orange. The City may also consider the use of joint school/park facilities if
     the option presents itself.
     The precise location and size of future parks will be defined in conjunction with the approval
     of specific development plans and as further elaborated on in the future preparation of
     planned communities or specific plans. Because of proximity in East Orange to the existing or
     proposed natural and/or active regional parks, along with the extent of scenic open space
     preserved in the immediate area, the emphasis on park planning should be on active
     neighborhood or sport park facilities.
     Table NR-3 presents estimates of the City’s current and future ratios of parkland per 1,000
     persons. Separate ratios are presented for facilities provided or planned for by the City and
     those provided or planned for by the County.
     To calculate the parkland ratio per 1,000 residents, the acreage of currently developed City
     parks, City open space areas, and joint-use recreation facilities listed in Table NR-2 are
     combined for a total of about 256 acres. Given the City’s estimated 2014 population of
     139,279, this equates to a current ratio of 1.84 acres of current parkland per 1,000 persons,
     which is notably lower than the National Recreation and Park Association’s recommendation
     of 3 acres per 1,000 population. According to this recommendation, the City has a current
     park shortage of approximately 162 acres. However, City residents also enjoy access to
     approximately 1,187 acres of County regional parks. If regional parks are factored into the
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-40

Source: City of Orange 2015
                            NR-41 Figure NR-5 Parks Master Plan
NATURAL RESOURCES
                  (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                  NR-42
                                                                                                         NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                  Table NR-2
                                                   Orange Park System Inventory
                                                                                      Date
                                                         Location                  Acquired         Acres                 Function
                                                                                 (for City parks)
Belmont Park                                  4536 E. Via Escola Ave.                 1994            2.50       Neighborhood
Cerro Villa Park                              5850 Crest de Ville                      1971          26.70       Open space
Eisenhower Park                               2864 N. Tustin Ave.                     1969           16.46       Community
El Camino Real Park                           400 N. Main St.                          1978          18.67       Community
El Modena Basin                               Hewes St. & Jordan Ave.                  1973           7.37       Neighborhood
El Modena Park                                555 S. Hewes St.                         1974           9.32       Neighborhood
Fred Barrera Park                             8380 East Serrano Ave.                  2006            3.00       Neighborhood
Grijalva Park at Santiago Creek               368 N. Prospect Ave.                    2003           37.00       Community
Handy Park                                    2143 E. Oakmont Ave.                     1978           7.31       Neighborhood
                                                                                                     41.76       Community
Hart Park                                     701 S. Glassell St.                      1934
                                                                                                     12.00       Open space
Killefer Park                                 615 N. Lemon St.                        1956            4.95       Neighborhood
                                                                                                      1.62       Neighborhood
La Veta Park                                  3705 E. La Veta Ave.                    1956
                                                                                                      1.00       Open space
Olive Park                                    2841 N. Glassell St.                     1975           8.02       Neighborhood
Pitcher Park                                  204 S. Cambridge Ave.                    1992           0.50       Special use
Plaza Park                                    Plaza Circle                            1886            0.72       Special use
Santiago Hills Park                           8040 E. White Oak Ridge                 1990            7.95       Neighborhood
Serrano Park                                  2349 Apache Creek Dr.                   2004            4.00       Neighborhood
Shaffer Park                                  1930 Shaffer St.                        1964            7.32       Neighborhood
Veterans Memorial at Depot Park               100 N. Atchison St.                      1887           0.44       Special use
Yorba Park                                    190 S. Yorba St.                         1962           8.54       Neighborhood
Steve Ambriz Memorial Park                    610 Riverbend Parkway                   2008           10.50       Neighborhood
                                                                      Subtotal Current City Parks   237.65
Fred Kelly Stadium                            3920 Spring St.                                         2.00       Joint-use (OUSD)
McPherson Athletic Facility*                  333 S. Prospect Ave.                     1997          9.00        Joint-use (OUSD)
Santiago Canyon College                       8045 E. Chapman Ave.                                    2.58       Joint-use (RSCCD)
                                                          Subtotal Current Joint-use Agreements      13.58
Irvine Company I                              East Orange                             N/A**          6.00        Neighborhood
Irvine Company II                             East Orange                             N/A**           3.00       Neighborhood
                                                                   Subtotal Planned Future Parks     9.00
                    Subtotal City Current and Planned Future Parks and Joint-use Facilities         260.23
Irvine Regional Park                          East Orange                            N/A***           477        Regional Park
Santiago Oaks Regional Park                   Northeast Orange                       N/A***           356        Regional Park
Peters Canyon Regional Park                   East Orange                            N/A***           354        Regional Park
                                                                  Subtotal County Regional Parks     1,187
                                                                                                   1,447.23
                                                                              Total Park Acreage
Sources: Orange Master Plan for Park Facilities, 1999; Community Services Department staff interview, 2015; Orange County Parks
Department, 2007.
Notes:
*     Although the McPherson Athletic Facility encompasses 18 acres, the City of Orange only uses the facility half of the time. This results in
      the designation of 9 acres of joint-use acreage allocation.
** Planned future parks scheduled for construction.
*** Regional parks not owned by the City.
                                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   NR-43
NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                                Table NR-3
                                                     Park Ratio Calculations
                                                                   Current (2014)                       Future (post-2030)
                                                               Population: 139,279                     Population: 178,471
                                                                            Ratio (Acres/                          Ratio (Acres/ 1,000
                                                             Acres        1,000 Population)         Acres                Population)
 City parks, open spaces and joint-use facilities            251.23               1.80              260.23                   1.46
 County regional parks                                        1,187               8.52               1,187                   6.65
 Total                                                      1,443.33             10.33             1,449.33                  8.12
 Note:     Population totals, City park acreages, and resulting ratios are based on the 2007 incorporated City limits. They do not include
           the City’s sphere of influence, where parks are provided and maintained by the County of Orange.
         parkland ratio, the ratio improves to approximately 10.36 acres of parkland per 1,000
         population.
         If further growth occurs in accordance with policies described in the Land Use Element,
         Orange’s population may increase to approximately 178,471 at some point in time after 2030.
         Assuming that the planned park improvements in east Orange (described in Table NR-1) are
         completed prior to 2030, this would result in a future ratio of 1.46 acres of parkland per 1,000
         residents. Approximately 275 acres of additional parkland beyond the planned parks in east
         Orange is required to achieve the recommended ratio of 3 acres per 1,000 population. An
         additional 632 acres would be required to achieve the desired ratio of 5 acres per 1,000
         persons, as stated in General Plan policy. If County regional parks are factored into the ratio,
         the future ratio would be approximately 8.1 acres of parkland per 1,000 population.
                                                         Strong demand and immediate need exist for more parks,
                                                         accessible open spaces, active recreational areas, and well-
                                                         lit multi-use facilities in Orange. The current shortage of
                                                         parkland in Orange has caused the City to develop joint-use
                                                         facilities agreements, specifically with the Orange Unified
                                                         School District (OUSD) and Rancho Santiago Community
                                                         College District. Although joint-use arrangements have
                                                         been successful, they are sometimes difficult to implement,
                                                         and result in the City being able to claim only 50 percent of
                                                         the use or effectiveness of a facility toward its objectives.
New Parks and Recreation Facilities
         Because City residents will benefit from additional parkland and recreation programming,
         Orange will work actively to acquire, build, and maintain additional parkland and park
         facilities. Specifically, the City will pursue adding approximately 246 acres of additional
         parkland beyond the inventory of current and planned facilities listed in Table NR-2, in order
         to achieve a minimum parkland ratio of 3 acres per 1,000 persons by 2030, working toward a
         desired ratio of 5 acres per 1,000 persons by 2050. The City will evaluate progress toward
         achieving this goal in a report to the City Council and community every five years.
                                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  NR-44

                                                                        NATURAL RESOURCES
As a separate, but compatible, objective, the City will work with the County to facilitate the
provision of overall parkland, inclusive of both City facilities and County regional parks, at a
ratio of 10 acres per 1,000 population. Achieving this objective by 2030 would require
acquisition of an additional 303 acres of parkland beyond the inventory listed in Table NR-1,
and this additional acreage could be provided by either the City or the County.
To support these objectives, the City will require dedication of parkland at a rate of 3 acres
per 1,000 anticipated residents or payment of in-lieu fees for new residential projects.
Payment of in-lieu fees constitutes sufficient mitigation for parks impacts under California
law, and new development projects cannot be required to directly mitigate existing parkland
deficiencies. However, the City will utilize fees collected to the fullest extent possible to
improve current park facilities and to acquire additional lands for the construction of new
parks.
To increase incentives for new projects to provide
viable, active park space, and to help compensate for
current parkland deficiencies, the City will offer a
variety of development incentives, including transfer
of development rights (TDR) strategies, to
developers of residential or mixed-use projects who
are willing to provide community open space in
excess of the standard 3 acres per 1,000 persons
requirement. TDR refers to a method of transferring
development rights from one property to another or
from one part of a property to another part of the same property. In this context, a TDR
would allow for conservation of open space or creation of a new community park at one
location, in exchange for increased density or larger building sizes at another location.
Furthermore, the City will continue to pursue all available joint-use opportunities with school
districts, community college districts, and institutions, including Chapman University, in an
effort to increase the utility of spaces throughout the City that are already functioning as
open space. In its reviews of mixed-use developments within the focus areas established in
the Land Use Element, the City will encourage such developments to include not only
required park space but also common open spaces, portions of which may be required to be
accessible to the public.
Meeting the stated needs for additional recreational open space will also require the City to
pursue new types of parks and open spaces, such as pocket parks, linear parks, public plazas
and paseos. Provision of these spaces is strongly encouraged by land use policy supporting
the development of mixed-use residential and commercial areas in the Land Use Element.
The City will also acquire land for, build, and maintain parks currently identified in the Master
Plan for Parks Facilities, and will amend the Master Plan on a periodic basis to reflect current
conditions. The City’s Park, Planning and Development Commission is currently working
through the planning stages of several new parks throughout the City, which are identified
within the Master Plan for Parks Facilities.
                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          NR-45

NATURAL RESOURCES
Site Selection Standards for New Parks
     The City of Orange and areas within the City’s sphere of influence have grown considerably in
     recent decades. While the rate of growth in the future is difficult to predict, thousands of
     new housing units will be constructed during the next several decades, both in east Orange
     and within the focus areas established in the Land Use Element. This in turn will require the
     development of new parks and facilities, and of convenient ways to access them.
     A major goal of the City’s Community Services Department is to make sure that all future
     park sites obtained through dedications or purchases are adequate in terms of meeting the
     recreational needs of the City. A “park” that is inaccessible, lacks usable open space, or is
     otherwise constrained has limited utility to the residents it is designated to serve. To ensure
     that this does not happen, the following standards are established to apply to the acquisition
     of new parkland:
        The service area should not be divided by natural or man-made barriers such as arterial
         highways, railroads, freeways, and commercial or industrial areas that would render the
         site inaccessible or undesirable as a park.
        Neighborhood parks should be located adjacent to elementary schools whenever
         possible. The primary consideration should be whether the existing school has adequate
         play space to serve both its educational needs and the needs of the neighborhood for
         playground space.
        The site for a community park should be of sufficient size to include a recreation building
         unless adjacent school facilities can be designated to serve public uses when school is not
         in session.
        The site for a neighborhood park should have street frontage. If it is located where
         adjacent streets are not sufficient for parking, the site should have a parking lot.
         Community park sites should have direct access to an arterial street.
        All neighborhood and community park sites should be accessible by foot, by bicycle, or
         within a short drive.
Santiago Creek and the Santa Ana River
     Santiago Creek is one of a limited number of natural creeks in southern California, and
     provides recreational, ecological, flood control and cultural benefits to the City. Orange
     residents strongly identify with the Creek, and are unified in their desire to preserve the
     natural characteristics of the Creek, and to use it as a link that connects City parks and other
     gathering places. Residents also seek long-term preservation of the hydrologic and ecologic
     functions of the creek.
     In 1999, the City applied for, and was granted, technical assistance from the National Park
     Service Rivers, Trails, and Conservation Assistance Program to prepare a conceptual master
     plan for Santiago Creek. The plan, which is under preparation, will address three major
     components: recreation trails, open space, and flood control. The City will continue to work
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               NR-46

                                                                            NATURAL RESOURCES
    toward completion of the Vision Plan for Santiago Creek, and will implement its
    recommendations, consistent with General Plan policies concerning the Creek.
    The Santa Ana River also provides important flood control benefits and recreational
    opportunities for City residents. Current and planned land uses located along the Santa Ana
    River are among the City’s highest intensity uses, providing great opportunities to improve
    access to the recreational trails that follow the River. The City supports future development
    of highly-visible access points to the River, particularly at Chapman Avenue, Katella Avenue,
    and Lincoln Avenue. Also, the City seeks to partner with the City of Anaheim, resource
    agencies, water districts, the Orange County Flood Control District, and community
    organizations to complete a vision plan for the Santa Ana River, similar to efforts currently
    underway for Santiago Creek. A key objective of the vision plan should be achieving more
    flexible use of the Santa Ana River corridor as a recreational amenity.
    For both Santiago Creek and the Santa Ana River, the City supports preserving undeveloped
    portions of the waterways to support riparian habitat areas and improve surface water
    quality. Such preservation would be accomplished through the use of Open Space land use
    designations. For portions of Santiago Creek that abut developed areas, the City desires that
    future commercial and residential projects respond to the presence of the creek as a
    community and ecological amenity to be incorporated in their site plans, building design and
    orientation, and landscaping.
Recreational Programs and Services
    The City will also establish an ordinance to provide opportunities for funding for recreational
    services and facilities. Additionally, Orange will off-set and minimize impacts to the existing
    system caused by increased population associated with new residential development.
Comprehensive Trails Network
    Trails serve important transportation and recreational needs for both City residents and
    visitors. They also help link the community through greater accessibility between
    neighborhoods, employment and retail centers, civic and cultural areas, nature areas, and
    schools. Pedestrian trails and bikeways enhance Orange’s community mobility, provide
    opportunities for recreation and exercise, and also reduce dependence on the automobile.
    Orange’s warm, dry climate and generally flat landscape make it perfect for walking and
    bicycling amenities such as trails, walkways and bike paths.
    The City experienced tremendous growth in the 1980s. During the 1989 General Plan update,
    the City Council identified a need for additional recreational opportunities and recognized
    that construction on previously undeveloped areas rendered many “open spaces” no longer
    usable or accessible to the public. Recognition of this need was the motivation for
    development of the Recreational Trails Master Plan in 1993. Master Plan objectives include:
    goals for development of the trails system, a set of design standards, and an implementation
    and management maintenance program. Implementation of the Master Plan relies on the
    combination of City efforts and the efforts of a dedicated, well-informed and highly
    organized group of trail activists who devote their time and economic resources to
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              NR-47

NATURAL RESOURCES
     preserving and enhancing current trails and to developing and maintaining new trail
     opportunities.
     The City is pursuing strategies for the maintenance and enhancement of the following
     community trail assets:
        Over 70 miles of existing trails
        Numerous City and County administered parks and open spaces located throughout the
         City that provide natural destination points, staging areas, and rest areas
        Santiago Creek, which provides potential for a trail traversing the City from east to west,
         with connections to regional trails on each end
        The Santa Ana River, which provides multiple benefits, including a multi-purpose
         recreational trail that connects the San Bernardino Mountains to the Pacific Ocean
     Additionally, 104 miles of proposed future trails are planned throughout the City on land
     currently used for a variety of purposes, including flood control, railroad rights-of-way, and
     roadways.
     Although the City’s trails are heavily used by residents, often trails are located in areas that
     are disconnected and not readily accessible from neighborhoods. For example, horse trails
     are located in single-family neighborhoods, and pedestrian trails are located in equestrian
     areas. The City will work in the future to refine the definition, purpose and use of trails, as
     well as appropriate links and access from neighborhoods.
     The City has also put a high priority on creating a trail network that links the City’s open
     spaces, featuring the Santiago Creek Trail as the spine of the network. Orange recently
     completed a paved bike trail along Santiago Creek from Tustin Street to the Santa Ana City
     limit, at which point the trail continues on to Main Place Mall and the Discovery Science
     Center. Three additional segments of this bike trail are complete; they connect Tustin Street
     to Grijalva Park, as well as Collins Avenue along Santiago Creek, and then travel north from
     Walnut Avenue to Collins Avenue along the City-owned portion of the Santiago Creek Bike
     Trail Right-of-Way. The Santiago Creek Trail then extends through the City with a future
     connection to the regional Santa Ana River trail to Santiago Oaks Regional Park and
     wilderness areas east of Orange. The City will continue to work toward designing a
     comprehensive trail system that is highly accessible and safe for those who wish to use it.
     Additional information, maps and policies related to Orange’s comprehensive trails system
     are provided in the Circulation & Mobility Element.
NATURAL RESOURCE IMPLEMENTATION
     The goals, policies and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of
     City plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing
     collaborations with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation
     measures for this Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              NR-48

                                                                                   NOISE
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
        The urban environment contains a variety of noise sources that can affect the way people
        live and work. Some types of noise are only short-term irritants, like the pounding of a
        jackhammer or the whine of a leaf blower. These noise sources can generally be controlled
        through City noise regulations, including noise ordinances. However, certain noises, such as
        freeway, road, aircraft, and train noise, may be permanent fixtures in the community,
        diminishing its quality of life. In Orange, because of its location, transportation corridors are
        the major source of noise.
        Orange’s Vision for the Future, presented in the General Plan introduction, includes the
        following objective related to the Noise Element:
            The City will work to improve the quality of life for all residents by providing residential,
             commercial, industrial, and public uses that exist in harmony with the surrounding urban
             and natural environments.
        The Noise Element is a mandatory General Plan element, required by California’s Health and
        Safety Code Section 46050.01. The goal of the Noise Element is to identify problems and
        noise sources threatening community safety and comfort and to establish policies and
        programs that will limit the community’s exposure to excessive noise levels. It addresses
        both existing and foreseeable future noise abatement issues.
Purpose of the Noise Element
        Recognizing that excessive or unusual noise can have significant adverse impacts on human
        health and welfare, the state has developed definitive guidelines for determining community
        noise levels and for establishing programs aimed at reducing community exposure to noise
        levels defined to be adverse. Policies, plans, and programs outlined within the Noise Element
        are designed to minimize the effects of human-caused noise in the community, and to
        improve residents’ quality of life by regulating and reducing noise, particularly within
        residential areas and near such noise-sensitive land uses as residences, hospitals,
        convalescent and day care facilities, schools, and libraries. The Element provides direction
        regarding best practices and strategies to protect City residents and businesses from severe
        noise levels.
        The Noise Element recognizes that multiple noise environments exist within the City,
        including rural, suburban, and urban environments. As Orange evolved from a rural
        agricultural town to a bustling suburban community in the middle to late 20th century, the
        noise environment similarly changed. Rural roads were replaced by the arterials and
                                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                    N-1
REV. GPA NO. 2014-0001 (12/2015)

NOISE
      freeways present in Orange today. Relatively quiet suburban residential noise levels became
      the norm for most City residents. At the outset of the 21st century, Orange still has semi-rural
      areas in the eastern portions of the City, in addition to the suburban noise environment
      found in most of its residential neighborhoods and commercial areas. However, a noisier,
      more urban environment is now emerging in Uptown, and Land Use Element policies
      promote reinvention of certain City commercial corridors into mixed-use activity centers. At
      these mixed-use activity centers, residents, shoppers, and businesspeople alike may be
      exposed to higher noise levels due to traffic and human activity.
Scope and Content of the Noise Element
      The Noise Element consists of three sections:
              (1) Introduction;
              (2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and
              (3) Noise Plan.
      This Introduction summarizes the general purpose of the Noise Element. The Issues, Goals,
      and Policies section outlines the most relevant noise issues affecting the City. The goals are a
      statement of the general direction and broad ideals that capture the desire of the
      community. The policies provide potential solutions for decreasing noise. The Noise Plan
      defines noise standards, presents noise contour maps, and recommends strategies to
      achieve goals and implement policies. Implementation programs for the Noise Element are
      provided in an Appendix to the General Plan.
      The Noise Element addresses noise concerns that influence the comfort and quality of life of
      Orange residents. Excessive noise may originate from many sources, including vehicle traffic
      on freeways and arterial roadways, construction activities and machinery in industrial areas,
      railroads, and aircraft. Beyond direct mitigation strategies to address these sources of noise,
      the City is also committed to establishing and upholding guidelines for noise levels
      compatible with various types of land use activity.
      Mixed-use residential and commercial development presents unique noise reduction
      challenges. Although located in commercial environments, the residential portions of mixed-
      use projects are nonetheless subject to residential noise standards and guidelines established
      by the state. Strategies to address noise in these environments focus on incorporation of
      noise reducing measures in project design.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
      Accomplishing the goals and policies of the Noise Element requires coordination with other
      related components of the City’s General Plan. Other topics that are affected by the Noise
      Element include the Land Use, Circulation & Mobility, and Housing Elements.
      Impacts of noise policies and programs on the Land Use Element arise during identification
      of noise sources and noise-sensitive uses. The noise contours and land use compatibility
      standards contained in the Noise Element should be used when making planning and
      development decisions.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 N-2

                                                                                                   NOISE
    The contents of the Noise Element are also related to the Circulation & Mobility and Housing
    Elements, because Orange’s primary noise sources include freeways, arterial roadways,
    railways, and aircraft. In turn, Noise Element policies are intended to mitigate excessive noise
    along transportation routes and direct housing to appropriate sites away from sources of
    excessive noise.
ISSUES, GOALS AND POLICIES
    Certain areas of Orange are subject to high levels of noise from one or more of the following
    sources: freeways and arterial roadways, construction activities and machinery in industrial
    areas, railroads, aircraft, and fireworks noise from nearby Disneyland and Angel Stadium. All of
    these noise sources reduce the quality of life within the City. Considering noise sources in the
    planning process, identifying the noise impacts of potential development projects, and
    planning accordingly are effective methods of minimizing the impacts of noise on residents.
    The goals, policies, and implementation programs of the Noise Element address seven issues:
    (1) noise and land use compatibility; (2) vehicular traffic noise; (3) train noise; (4) aircraft noise;
    (5) noise associated with mixed-use development; (6) industrial noise; and (7) construction,
    maintenance, and nuisance noise.
Noise and Land Use Compatibility
    Land use directly affects noise compatibility, because higher noise levels often associated
    with industrial, commercial, and mixed commercial and residential development can
    encroach upon more noise-sensitive land uses. Noise-sensitive land uses include: residences,
    hospitals, convalescent and day care facilities, schools, and libraries. Noise producing and
    noise-sensitive land uses should be either sufficiently separated or sufficiently buffered from
    one another to ensure that sensitive uses are not exposed to unacceptable noise levels.
    Proposed land uses should be compatible with existing and forecasted future noise levels.
    Incompatible land use noise exposures should incorporate noise attenuation and/or control
    measures within project design to reduce the noise to an acceptable interior level of 45 A-
    weighted decibels (dBA) community noise equivalent level (CNEL) or lower, as required by
    state regulations (CCR Title 24) for residential uses. (For an explanation of these terms and
    the relative noise levels of common noise-producing activities, see the discussion
    accompanying Table N-2 in the “Measuring Noise” section that follows.)
    GOAL 1.0:        Promote a pattern of land uses compatible with current and future noise
                     levels.
    Policy 1.1:      Consider potential excessive noise levels when making land use planning
                     decisions.
    Policy 1.2:      Encourage new development projects to provide sufficient spatial buffers to
                     separate excessive noise generating land uses and noise-sensitive land uses.
    Policy 1.3:      Incorporate design features into residential and mixed-use projects that can
                     be used to shield residents from excessive noise.
    Policy 1.4:      Ensure that acceptable noise levels are maintained near noise-sensitive uses.
    Policy 1.5:      Reduce impacts of high-noise activity centers located near residential areas.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                N-3

NOISE
      Policy 1.6:     Require an acoustical study for proposed developments in areas where the
                      existing and projected noise level exceeds or would exceed the maximum
                      allowable levels identified in Table N-3. The acoustical study shall be
                      performed in accordance with the requirements set forth within this Noise
                      Element.
Vehicular Traffic Noise
      Vehicular traffic is the most common source of noise experienced throughout the City.
      Primary sources of traffic noise include: the Interstate 5 and State Route (SR) -22, -55, -57, and
      -91 Freeways which surround and traverse the City; the SR-241/261 Foothill Transportation
      Corridor; and City arterial roadways. Arterials such as State College Boulevard/The City Drive,
      Chapman Avenue, La Veta Avenue, Batavia Street, Glassell Street, Tustin Street, Katella
      Avenue, and Jamboree Road are all high traffic volume roadways that generate traffic noise
      levels well above 65 dBA CNEL. Traffic noise is dependent on vehicle volume, speed, flow,
      and fleet mix, as well as distance from the roadway to the receptor.
      GOAL 2.0:       Minimize vehicular traffic noise in residential areas and near noise-sensitive
                      land uses.
      Policy 2.1:     Encourage noise-compatible land uses along existing and future roadways,
                      highways, and freeways.
      Policy 2.2:     Encourage coordinated site planning and traffic control measures that
                      minimize traffic noise in noise-sensitive land use areas.
      Policy 2.3:     Encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as walking,
                      bicycling, mass transit, and alternative fuel vehicles to minimize traffic noise.
      Policy 2.4:     Continue to work with the California Department of Transportation
                      (Caltrans), the Orange County Transit Authority (OCTA), and Transportation
                      Corridor Agencies (TCA) to install, maintain, and update freeway and highway
                      rights-of-way buffers and soundwalls.
      Policy 2.5:     Work toward understanding and reducing traffic noise in residential
                      neighborhoods with a focus on analyzing the effects of traffic noise exposure
                      throughout the City.
Train Noise
      Train noise currently experienced within the City results from the locomotive engines and
      warning horns associated with rail operations. These daily operations tend to produce high
      short-term noise levels that can be a source of annoyance to nearby sensitive uses.
      Depending on the number of daily movements, train operations also have the potential to
      generate noise levels that exceed 65 dBA CNEL along the rail corridors.
      GOAL 3.0:       Minimize train noise in residential areas and near noise-sensitive land uses.
      Policy 3.1:     Encourage noise-compatible land uses and incorporate noise-reducing design
                      features within transit oriented, mixed-use development near rail corridors.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 N-4
                                                                                             NOISE
Aircraft Noise
    Although no airports or airfields are located in Orange, noise generated by aircraft
    overflights can be noticeable throughout the City. Aircraft operations associated with John
    Wayne Airport, Long Beach Airport, and even Los Alamitos Army Airfield use the airspace
    above the City in arrival and departure operations. The general noise environment in the City
    also includes helicopter noise from private, police, emergency medical, and news/traffic
    monitoring helicopters.
    GOAL 4.0:        Minimize aircraft related noise in residential areas and near noise-sensitive
                     land uses.
    Policy 4.1:      Continue to provide input to the Orange County Airport Land Use
                     Commission as appropriate to minimize airport noise.
    Policy 4.2:      Continue to work with regional, state, and federal agencies, including officials
                     at John Wayne Airport and Long Beach Airport, to implement noise-reducing
                     measures and to monitor and reduce noise associated with aircraft.
    Policy 4.3:      Continue to coordinate with the Federal Aviation Administration, Caltrans
                     Division of Aeronautics, and the Orange County Airport Land Use Commission
                     regarding the siting and operation of heliports and helistops in order to
                     minimize excessive helicopter noise.
Mixed-use Development
    Mixed-use development projects often include both residential uses located above or in
    close proximity to commercial uses and stand-alone multi-family residential uses, especially in
    areas served by rail and bus transit, along major roadways and the railroad corridor. Noise
    generated by commercial uses can include mechanical equipment operations, maintenance
    activities, public address systems, vehicles, entertainment, parking lots, loading operations,
    and trash collection, as well as pedestrian and business patron noise. A unique challenge
    presented by mixed-use development is that on one hand, such uses desire locations along
    busy street corridors and within activity centers, and on the other hand, state-mandated
    interior noise requirements for residential uses must be met within the residential portions of
    such use.
    GOAL 5.0:        Minimize commercial activity noise in residential portions of mixed-use
                     areas where residential units are located above commercial uses or within
                     the same development.
    Policy 5.1:      Encourage the design and construction of mixed-use structures to minimize
                     commercial noise within the residential components of the development.
    Policy 5.2:      Encourage new mixed-use development to locate the residential component
                     of the development away from noise-generating sources such as mechanical
                     equipment, entertainment facilities, gathering places, loading bays, parking
                     lots, driveways, and trash enclosures.
    Policy 5.3:      Encourage residential developments within mixed-use developments and
                     located adjacent to commercial or retail and entertainment related uses to
                     notify potential residents that they may be affected by noise from these uses.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               N-5
NOISE
Industrial Noise
      Industrial land uses have the potential to generate noise that can be considered intrusive to
      sensitive land uses. Depending on the type of industrial operation, noise sources could
      involve mechanical equipment, loading and unloading of vehicles and trucks, as well as
      amplified or unamplified communications. The level and intrusiveness of the noise generated
      also vary depending on the size of the facility, type of business, hours of operation, and
      location relative to sensitive land uses.
      GOAL 6.0:        Minimize industrial activity noise in residential areas and near noise-
                       sensitive land uses.
      Policy 6.1:      Encourage the design and construction of industrial uses to minimize
                       excessive noise through project design features that include noise control.
      Policy 6.2:      Encourage industrial uses to locate vehicular traffic and operations away
                       from abutting residential zones as much as possible.
Construction, Maintenance, and Nuisance Noise
      Construction operations and maintenance vehicles such as refuse trucks and parking lot
      sweepers generate noise throughout the City. Although these types of noise sources tend to
      be short term, temporary, and limited, they can be a source of annoyance, especially during
      the late night or early morning hours.
      GOAL 7.0:        Minimize construction, maintenance vehicle, and nuisance noise in
                       residential areas and near noise-sensitive land uses.
      Policy 7.1:      Schedule City maintenance and construction projects so that they generate
                       noise during less sensitive hours.
      Policy 7.2:      Require developers and contractors to employ noise minimizing techniques
                       during construction and maintenance operations.
      Policy 7.3:      Limit the hours of construction and maintenance operations located adjacent
                       to noise-sensitive land uses.
      Policy 7.4:      Encourage limitations on the hours of operations and deliveries for
                       commercial, mixed-use, and industrial uses abutting residential zones.
NOISE PLAN
      Noise is most often defined as unwanted sound. Potential noise problem areas are
      considered to be those areas where ambient noise levels exceed established noise standards,
      and areas where sensitive land uses are exposed to excessive ambient noise levels. Excessive
      noise is viewed as a disturbance, especially to residential communities and other noise-
      sensitive uses. Noise sources in Orange fall into two categories: transportation oriented and
      non-transportation oriented. Examples of transportation oriented noise include noise
      generated by vehicles, airplanes, and rail cars operating within the City. Examples of non-
      transportation noise include noise generated from mechanical or industrial processes and
      lawn equipment.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 N-6
                                                                                                             NOISE
    The most prevalent noise source within the City is vehicular traffic on highways, freeways,
    toll roads, and arterials—specifically, the I-5, SR-55, SR-57, SR-91 and SR-22 freeways that
    surround and pass through the City; the SR-241 toll road that crosses the eastern portion of
    the City; and the many arterial roadways that traverse almost all areas of the community.
    Other noise sources include passenger and freight rail operations, industrial facilities, loading
    docks and mechanical equipment at retail centers. Periodic sources of noise include train
    traffic (Amtrak, Metrolink, and freight trains); aircraft overflights into and out of John Wayne
    Airport, Long Beach Airport, and Los Alamitos Army Air Station; helicopter traffic along the
    Main Street and Katella Avenue corridors and over residential neighborhoods; sporting and
    exhibition events and fireworks shows in the City of Anaheim; and operation of trucks and
    machinery throughout Orange’s industrial areas.
Measuring Noise
    Although sound can be easily measured, the perception of noise levels is subjective and the
    physical response to sound complicates the analysis of its effects on people. People judge
    the relative magnitude of sound sensation in subjective terms such as noisiness or loudness.
    Sound pressure magnitude is measured and quantified using a logarithmic ratio of pressures,
    the scale of which gives the level of sound in decibels (dB). Table N-1 presents the subjective
    effect of changes in sound pressure levels.
                                                             Table N-1
                                           Changes in Sound Pressure Levels, dB
                               dB Change                                      Change in Apparent Loudness
                                 +/- 3 dB                           Threshold of human perceptibility
                                 +/- 5 dB                           Clearly noticeable change in noise level
                                 +/-10 dB                           Half or twice as loud
                                 +/-20 dB                           Much quieter or louder
      Source: Engineering Noise Control, Bies and Hansen (1988).
    To account for the pitch of sounds and an average human ear’s response to such sounds, a
    unit of measure called an A-weighted sound pressure level (dBA) is used. To provide some
    perspective on the relative loudness of various types of noise, Table N-2 lists common
    sources of noise and their approximate noise levels.
    Many metrics have been developed to account for the way humans perceive sound. The
    most common of these descriptors are the average “equivalent” noise level (Leq), the Day
    Night noise level (Ldn), and the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL). Leq represents a
    measure of the average noise level at a given location over a specified period of time. Ldn
    and CNEL are based on a 24-hour Leq which applies offsets to evening and nighttime noise
    levels to account for the increased sensitivity of people to noise occurring at night. The Ldn is
    a 24-hour average sound level (similar to a 24-hour Leq) in which a 10 dB penalty is added to
    any sound occurring between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. CNEL is similar to Ldn,
    except that a five dB penalty is also added for noise occurring during evening hours from
                                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                           N-7

NOISE
           7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. Therefore, both the Ldn and CNEL noise metrics provide 24-hour
           averages of noise level exposure at a particular location, with temporal adjustments that
           reflect the increased sensitivity to noise during the evening and nighttime hours1. CNEL is the
           noise level descriptor, consistent with state guidelines, applied by the City throughout this
           Noise Element to describe the current and future noise environment affected by
           transportation-generated noise.
                                                               Table N-2
                                Typical Noise Levels of Common Outdoor and Indoor Activities
                 Common Outdoor Activities             Noise Level (dBA)                Common Indoor Activities
                                                               110             Rock Band
            Jet Fly-over at 1,000 feet                        100
                                                               90
            Diesel Truck at 50 feet, at 50 mph                                 Food Blender at three feet
                                                               80              Garbage Disposal at three feet
            Noisy Urban Area, Daytime
            Gas Lawn Mower at three feet                       70              Vacuum Cleaner at 10 feet
            Commercial Area                                                    Normal speech at three feet
            Heavy Traffic at 300 feet                          60
                                                                               Large Business Office
            Quiet Urban Daytime                                50              Dishwasher Next Room
            Quiet Urban Nighttime                              40              Theater,      Large     Conference        Room
                                                                               (background)
            Quiet Suburban Nighttime
                                                               30              Library
            Quiet Rural Nighttime                                              Bedroom at Night, Concert Hall (background)
                                                               20
                                                                               Broadcast/Recording Studio
                                                                10
            Lowest Threshold of Human Hearing                   0              Lowest Threshold of Human Hearing
            Source: Table N-2136.2 of California Department of Transportation’s Technical Noise Supplement to the Traffic Noise
            Analysis Protocol (October 1998).
Noise Standards and Land Use Compatibility
           Orange has developed its own land use compatibility standards, based on recommended
           parameters from the California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, that rate
           compatibility in terms of normally acceptable, conditionally acceptable, normally
           unacceptable, and clearly unacceptable. Using these land use compatibility guidelines, the
           City has established interior and exterior noise standards.
1
  In practical implementation CNEL and Ldn could be used interchangeably for traffic generated noise as the difference
between these two descriptors for urban / suburban noise levels is less than one dB.
                                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                            N-8

                                                                                          NOISE
The City’s compatibility standards provide only for normally acceptable conditions, based on
state recommendations and City land use designations. The City’s Land Use Compatibility
standards are presented in Table N-3. These standards, which use the CNEL noise descriptor,
are intended to be applicable for land use designations exposed to noise levels generated by
transportation related sources. Land use compatibility noise exposure limits are generally
established as 65 dBA CNEL for a majority of land use designations throughout the City.
Higher exterior noise levels are permitted for multiple-family housing and housing in mixed-
use contexts than for single-family houses. This is because multiple-family complexes are
generally located in transitional areas between single-family and commercial districts or in
proximity to major arterials served by transit, and a more integrated mix of residential and
commercial activity (accompanied by higher noise levels) is often desired in mixed-use areas
close to transit routes. These standards establish maximum interior noise levels for new
residential development, requiring that sufficient insulation be provided to reduce interior
ambient noise levels to 45 dBA CNEL.
The City’s land use compatibility standards are based first on the General Plan land use
designation of the property, and secondly on the use of the property. For example, within
the Urban Mixed-use designation, a multiple-family use exposed to transportation related
noise would have an exterior noise standard of 65 dBA CNEL, and an interior noise standard
of 45 dBA CNEL. Noise standards for multiple-family and mixed-use land use designations
shown in Table N-3 are higher than those for rural or single-family residential areas, reflecting
the gradually changing character of Orange and a more urban environment planned for
certain areas of the City. The standards shown in Table N-3 are purposefully general in nature,
and not every specific land use which could be accommodated within each General Plan
designation is identified. Application of the standards will vary on a case-by-case basis
according to location, development type, and associated noise sources.
When non-transportation (stationary) noise is the primary noise source, and to ensure that
noise producers do not adversely affect noise-sensitive land uses, the City applies a second
set of standards when planning and making development decisions. These hourly and
maximum performance standards (expressed in Leq) for non-transportation or stationary
noise sources are designed to protect noise sensitive land uses adjacent to stationary sources
from excessive noise. Table N-4 summarizes City stationary source noise standards for
various land use types. These standards represent the acceptable exterior noise levels at the
sensitive receptor.
For City analysis of noise impacts and determining appropriate mitigation under the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), in addition to the maximum allowable noise
level standards outlined in Tables N-3 and N-4, an increase in ambient noise levels is assumed
to be a significant noise impact if a project causes ambient noise levels to exceed the
following:
    Where the existing ambient noise level is less than 65 dBA, a project related permanent
     increase in ambient noise levels of 5 dBA CNEL or greater.
    Where the existing ambient noise level is greater than 65 dBA, a project related
     permanent increase in ambient noise levels of 3 dBA CNEL or greater.
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           N-9

NOISE
                                                              Table N-3
                         Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure—Transportation Sources
                                              Land Use                                                             CNEL (dBA)
                 Designations
                                                                          Uses                              Interior1,3        Exterior2
        (as shown on Figure LU-5)
Estate Low Density Residential                        Single-family, duplex, and multiple-family                 45                65
Low Density Residential
                                                                  Mobile home park                               N/A               65
Low Medium Density Residential
Medium Density Residential Neighborhood                               Single-family                              45                65
Mixed-use
                                                                  Mobile home park                               N/A               65
Neighborhood Office Professional
Old Towne Mixed-use                                           Multiple-family, mixed-use                         45               654,5
General Commercial                                       Transient lodging—motels, hotels                        45                65
Yorba Commercial Overlay
Urban Mixed-use                                        Sports arenas, outdoor spectator sports                   N/A              N/A
Urban Office Professional                             Auditoriums, concert halls, amphitheaters                  45               N/A
                                                     Office buildings, business, commercial and                  50               N/A
                                                                      professional
Light Industrial                                         Manufacturing, utilities, agriculture                   N/A              N/A
Industrial
Public Facilities and Institutions                   Schools, nursing homes, day care facilities,                45                65
                                                          hospitals, convalescent facilities,
                                                                      dormitories
                                                         Government Facilities—offices, fire                     45               N/A
                                                            stations, community buildings
                                                             Places of Worship, Churches                         45               N/A
                                                                        Libraries                                45               N/A
                                                                         Utilities                               N/A              N/A
                                                                       Cemeteries                                N/A              N/A
Recreation Commercial                                    Playgrounds, neighborhood parks                         N/A               70
Open Space
                                                         Golf courses, riding stables, water                     N/A              N/A
Open Space—Park
                                                                recreation, cemeteries
Open Space—Ridgeline
Resource Area
Notes:
(1) Interior habitable environment excludes bathrooms, closets and corridors.
(2) Exterior noise level standard to be applied at outdoor activity areas; such as private yards, private patio or balcony of a multi-family
     residence. Where the location of an outdoor activity area is unknown or not applicable, the noise standard shall be applied inside
     the property line of the receiving land use.
(3) Interior noise standards shall be satisfied with windows in the closed position. Mechanical ventilation shall be provided per Uniform
     Building Code (UBC) requirements.
(4) Within the Urban Mixed-Use, Neighborhood Mixed-Use, Old Towne Mixed-use, and Medium Density Residential land use
     designations, exterior space standards apply only to common outdoor recreational areas.
(5) Within Urban Mixed-Use and Medium Density Residential land use designations, exterior noise levels on private patios or balconies
     located within 250 feet of freeways (I-5, SR-57, SR-55, SR-22, or SR-241) and Smart Streets and Principal Arterials identified in the
     Circulation & Mobility Element that exceed 70 dB should provide additional common open space.
N/A=Not Applicable to specified land use category or designation
Source: Alliance Acoustical Consultants, modified by EDAW, 2008
                                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  N-10

                                                                                                                                  NOISE
                                                                  Table N-4
                         Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure—Stationary Noise Sources
         Noise Level Descriptor                          Daytime (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)               Nighttime (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
Hourly Equivalent Level (Leq), dBA                                        55                                        45
Maximum Level (Lmax), dBA                                                 70                                        65
Notes:
(1) These standards apply to new or existing noise sensitive land uses affected by new or existing non-transportation noise sources, as
    determined at the outdoor activity area of the receiving land use. However, these noise level standards do not apply to residential
    units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings).
(2) Each of the noise levels specified above should be lowered by five dB for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or
    music, or for recurring impulsive noises. Such noises are generally considered by residents to be particularly annoying and are a
    primary source of noise complaints. These noise level standards do not apply to residential units established in conjunction with
    industrial or commercial uses (e.g. caretaker dwellings).
(3) No standards have been included for interior noise levels. Standard construction practices that comply with the exterior noise levels
    identified in this table generally result in acceptable interior noise levels.
(4) The City may impose noise level standards which are more or less restrictive than those specified above based upon determination of
    existing low or high ambient noise levels. If the existing ambient noise level exceeds the standards listed in Table N-4, then the noise
    level standards shall be increased at 3 dB increments to encompass the ambient environment. Noise level standards incorporating
    adjustments for existing ambient noise levels shall not exceed a maximum of 70 dB Leq.
          Noise Contours and Impact Areas
          The community noise environment can be described using contours derived from monitoring
          major sources of noise. Noise contours define areas of equal noise exposure. Future noise
          contours have been estimated using information about both current and projected future
          land use development and traffic volumes. The contours assist in setting policies for
          distribution of land uses and establishing development standards.
          A study of baseline noise sources and levels was completed by Alliance Acoustical
          Consultants in November 2004. Noise level measurements were collected during a typical
          weekday at 28 locations throughout Orange. Criteria for site selection included geographical
          distribution, land uses suspected of noisy activities, proximity to transportation facilities, and
          noise-sensitive land uses. The primary purpose of noise monitoring was to establish a noise
          profile for the planning area that could be used to estimate levels of current and future
          noise.
          Measurements represent motor vehicle noise emanating from freeways, the local roadway
          network, and industrial land uses. Typical noise sources measured during the short-term
          survey included vehicular traffic, aircraft, trains, emergency sirens, industry, mechanical
          equipment, sporting events, firework shows, children playing, motorcycles, car alarms, and
          car audio systems. Of all these sources, traffic noise was determined to be the predominant
          noise source.
          Figure N-1 identifies noise contours for baseline year 2004. Major arterials and the railroad
          and freeway network represent the major sources of noise. A number of areas are exposed
          to traffic noise from arterials in excess of 65 dBA CNEL, including areas near State College
          Boulevard/The City Drive, Chapman Avenue, La Veta Avenue, Batavia Street, Glassell Street,
          Tustin Street, Katella Avenue, and Jamboree Road.
                                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     N-11

NOISE
      The Land Use Element indicates that the planning area will accommodate additional future
      growth, accompanied by an increase in citywide traffic volumes. Traffic volume increases
      represent the major anticipated measurable new noise sources in the community over the
      long term. Potential future ambient noise levels can be estimated by modeling. Figure N-2
      displays projected year 2030 noise contours based upon future traffic levels.
      Figure N-2 indicates that noise levels may be expected to rise in areas where roadways will
      experience the greatest increase in traffic volumes over time. Specifically, these areas include
      Tustin Street, State College Boulevard/The City Drive, Chapman Avenue, Jamboree Road,
      Santiago Canyon Road, Glassell Street, Main Street, I-5, SR-57, SR-22, SR-55, SR-241, SR-261,
      the Burlington Northern/Santa Fe Railroad, and throughout the City’s industrial area,
Identification of Noise Problem Areas
      Potential noise problem areas are considered to be those areas where ambient noise levels
      exceed established noise standards and areas where sensitive land uses are exposed to
      ambient noise levels in excess of standards identified in Tables N-3 and N-4. For the most
      part, these problem areas lie along freeways, toll roads, and arterial and secondary roadways
      where noise barriers have not been installed.
      Beneath the landing pattern for aircraft approaching John Wayne Airport in Santa Ana, Long
      Beach Airport, and Los Alamitos Army Air Station, some residents in the area find the aircraft
      noise disturbing. The aircraft noise may be considered an intermittent, recurring noise
      problem. Helicopter noise from private, police, emergency medical, and news and traffic
      monitoring helicopters also contributes to the general noise environment in the City,
      particularly approaching University of California Irvine (UCI) Medical Center and Children’s
      Hospital of Orange County (CHOC).
      An additional noise problem cited by residents citywide is noise associated with the
      operation of hand-held, motorized leaf blowers. Gasoline powered blowers, which are
      generally used to clear debris from driveways, sidewalks, and landscaped areas generate
      noise levels in the range of 60 to 85 dBA Leq (measured 50 feet from the source). This noise
      level may exceed the standard established for stationary noise sources during both daytime
      and nighttime hours.
Noise Control Techniques
      The most efficient and effective means of controlling noise is to reduce noise at the source.
      However, regarding noise generated from transportation systems, the City has no direct
      control over noise produced by trucks, cars, and trains, because state and federal noise
      regulations preempt local laws. Given that the City cannot control transportation noise at the
      source, City noise programs and standards focus on reducing transportation noise along
      freeways, arterial roadways, and rail corridors, through noise reduction methods that
      interrupt the path of the noise or directly shield the receiver. The emphasis of such noise
      reduction methods should be placed on site planning and design. Such reduction measures
      may include building orientation, spatial buffers, landscaping, and noise barriers. The use of
      noise barriers, such as sound walls, should be considered as a means of achieving the noise
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               N-12

Note: Large format map available at the Community Development Department
                                                                         N-13 Figure N-1. 2004 Noise Contours
NOISE
      (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                       N-14
Note: Large format map available at the Community Development Department
                                                                         N-15 Figure N-2. 2030 Noise Contours
NOISE
      (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                       N-16
                                                                                                                                  NOISE
        standards only after all other practical design-related noise reduction measures have been
        integrated into the project.
        Sound walls may not be desirable in some cases, such as intersections in commercial areas
        where visibility and access are important. Additionally, effective acoustical design features in
        new development can provide additional interior noise reduction. Regarding stationary and
        non-transportation generated noise, noise levels are to be addressed at the source as a
        primary focus. For mixed-use development in particular, acoustical design should be applied
        that isolates residential portions of mixed-use development from both commercial portions
        and external noise sources. When it is not feasible to address stationary noise at the source,
        the aforementioned noise reduction methods will be employed to reduce noise exposure to
        the levels presented in Table N-5.
                                                             Table N-5
                                       Sample Interior Noise Control Measures
                     Exterior to Interior
   Noise
                  Noise Level Reduction
 Exposure                                                      Noise Control Measures and Façade Upgrades
                     (NLR) Required to
    Level
                   Achieve 45 dBA CNEL
 > ≤60 dBA                   15 dBA              Normal construction practices consistent with the Uniform Building Code
    CNEL                                         are typically sufficient.
  60 dBA to                  20 dBA              Normal construction practices consistent with the Uniform Building Code
   65 dBA                                        are sufficient with the addition of the following specifications:
    CNEL                                           Air conditioning or mechanical ventilation systems are installed so that
                                                     windows and doors may remain closed.
                                                   Windows and sliding glass doors are mounted in low air infiltration rated
                                                     frames (0.5 cfm or less).
                                                   Exterior doors are solid core with perimeter weather-stripping and
                                                     threshold seals.
  65 dBA to                  25 dBA              Normal construction practices consistent with the Uniform Building Code
   70 dBA                                        are sufficient with the addition of the following specifications:
    CNEL                                           Air conditioning or mechanical ventilation systems are installed so that
                                                     windows and doors may remain closed.
                                                   Windows and sliding glass doors are mounted in low air infiltration rated
                                                     frames (0.5 cfm or less).
                                                   Exterior doors are solid core with perimeter weather-stripping and
                                                     threshold seals.
                                                   Glass in both windows and exterior doors should have a Sound
                                                     Transmission Classification (STC) rating of at least 30.
                                                   Roof or attic vents facing the noise source of concern should be boxed,
                                                     or provided with baffling.
Notes:
(1) The information listed in this table is sample guidance for interior noise control recommendations and is not intended for
     application to individual development projects, renovations, or retrofits. Noise-sensitive land uses located in areas with noise level
     exposures exceeding 60 dBA CNEL should have a detailed acoustical analysis performed on a case by case basis.
        The most common and feasible method to control exterior-to-interior noise levels is achieved
        through improvements to the building structure and use of wall/façade treatments that
        reduce noise levels. Buildings constructed consistent with the Uniform Building Code (UBC)
        typically provide approximately 15 dBA of exterior-to-interior noise level reduction (NLR) with
                                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                               N-17

NOISE
      windows open, and 25 dBA of NLR with windows closed. Therefore, special consideration
      must be given to reducing interior noise levels to the required 45 dBA CNEL at noise-sensitive
      land uses exposed to noise levels in excess of 60 dBA. The NLR of a wall element or building
      façade can be calculated by first assuming a generalized A-weighted noise frequency
      spectrum for roadway traffic noise. Then, the composite transmission loss of the various wall
      materials and the wall’s structural design is considered in determining the resulting noise
      level in the receiving room. After correcting for room absorption, the overall noise level in
      the room is calculated. The ability to perform these calculations requires detailed floor plans
      and façade construction details. Calculation of required NLR and resultant interior noise
      levels should be conducted by a qualified acoustical consultant. Table N-5 provides an
      example of varying levels of building façade improvements that may be required to achieve
      compliance with the interior noise level standard of 45 dBA CNEL for land uses exposed to
      three different noise levels: 60 dBA CNEL, 65 dBA CNEL, and 70 dBA CNEL.
      City Noise Control Ordinance
      The primary tool used to implement noise policy will be the City’s noise control ordinance
      (Title 8 Health and Safety, Chapter 8.24, Orange Municipal Code). The ordinance gives the
      City authority to regulate noise at its source and thereby protect noise-sensitive land uses. It
      also establishes exterior and interior noise standards for all residential properties. The
      ordinance specifies permitted days and times for construction, repair, remodeling, or grading
      of real property, and exemptions to the ordinance.
      The City will continue to apply provisions of the noise control ordinance, and will modify the
      noise ordinance as needed to respond to policy direction within this Element, including the
      noise standards specified in Table N-4, and policies addressing noise in mixed-use land use
      districts.
      State Noise Standards
      The City will continue to enforce state laws which set forth requirements for the insulation of
      residential dwelling units from excessive and potentially harmful noise. Title 25, Section 1092
      of the California Administrative Code establishes exterior and interior noise standards for
      multi-family residential development. Units established in areas where ambient noise levels
      exceed 65 dBA CNEL must incorporate noise reduction features into project design and
      construction. To reduce exterior noise levels, open space and other outdoor private areas
      should be shielded from the primary noise source (e.g., a freeway or railroad track).
      Insulation must be provided to reduce interior ambient noise levels to 45 dBA CNEL or lower,
      pursuant to Title 24 requirements. The City will continue to enforce these regulations.
      Particular challenges arise in the application of standards to mixed-use areas. Residential
      portions of mixed-use projects must meet the 45 dBA CNEL Title 24 interior noise
      requirements while located on busy commercial corridors. This obligation can be met by
      incorporating design features that insulate residential uses from commercial portions of the
      project.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                N-18

                                                                                            NOISE
Sound Walls Along Toll Roads, Arterials, and Secondary
Roadways
The City will encourage Caltrans and the TCA to abide by Section 215.5 of the State Streets
and Highway Code, which establishes a priority system for constructing noise barriers in the
form of sound walls along freeways, to minimize exposure of residential or other noise-
sensitive land uses to excessive freeway noise. Furthermore, all new residential development
proposed adjacent to toll roads, arterials, and secondary roadways will be required to buffer
itself by providing sound walls or a combination of berms and walls designed to achieve the
noise and land use compatibility standards indicated in Table N-3 within common open
spaces. In the event that sound walls are used, the analysis should include evaluation of
multiple reflections between parallel noise barriers (e.g., large structures, noise barriers on
each side of the highway) which could reduce the acoustical performance of individual
barriers or result in unintended impacts to other parts of the community.
Land Use Policy and Design of Residential Projects
To mitigate non-transportation-related noise, the City will require site plan adjustments,
higher insulation performance, spatial buffers, and other mitigation measures to absorb and
block sound as needed. Design features incorporated into residential projects can be used to
shield residents from excessive noise. For example, bedrooms, balconies and open space
areas can be located away from streets and focused toward the interior of a project. The City
will develop guidelines to assist developers to design structures that respond to noise
concerns.
Acoustical Studies
Under certain conditions, the City may require acoustical studies to be prepared as part of
the development review process to ensure adequate analysis of proposed development
projects. Acoustical studies will be required for all discretionary projects where any of the
following apply:
    The project includes a noise-sensitive land use that is located within the existing or future
     65 dBA CNEL contour for transportation noise sources.
    The project will cause future traffic volumes to increase by 25 percent or more on any
     roadway that fronts a sensitive land use.
    The project will expose a noise-sensitive land use to a stationary noise source or vibration
     source exceeding the standards outlined in Table N-4. Such stationary sources may
     include mechanical equipment operations, entertainment venues, and industrial facilities.
    The project includes a noise-sensitive land use in the vicinity of existing or proposed
     commercial and industrial areas.
    The project is a mixed-use development that includes a residential component. The focus
     of this type of acoustical study is to determine likely interior and exterior noise levels and
     to recommend appropriate design features to reduce noise.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            N-19

NOISE
      An acoustical analysis prepared in accordance with this Noise Element shall:
         be the financial responsibility of the applicant seeking City approval of a project;
         be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise
          assessment and architectural acoustics;
         include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and
          locations to adequately describe local conditions and predominant noise sources;
         estimate existing and projected cumulative noise in terms of CNEL or Leq, and compare
          those noise levels to the adopted standards and policies of the Noise Element;
         recommend appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies and
          standards of the Noise Element. Where the noise source in question consists of
          intermittent single events, the report must address the effects of maximum noise levels
          in sleeping rooms in terms of possible sleep disturbance; and
         estimate noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been
          implemented.
      Truck Routes
      Truck traffic generates noise that can disturb people in residential and other noise-sensitive
      land uses. Heavy trucks will not be permitted to drive through residential neighborhoods.
      Truck routes in Orange are located mostly in the general industrial area in the western part of
      the City, as well as on the higher capacity roadways that traverse the planning area. Truck
      routes are identified for such purposes as noise reduction, safety, roadway maintenance, and
      traffic operations. The Orange Municipal Code identifies trucks as motor vehicles designed,
      used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and having an unladen
      weight of six thousand pounds or more.
Air Traffic Noise
      To lessen the impacts of noise associated with air traffic into and out of John Wayne Airport,
      Long Beach Airport, and Los Alamitos Army Air Station, the City will participate in regional
      efforts to require airlines to use quieter aircraft. Also, the City will work with airport officials
      and surrounding jurisdictions to restore instrument approach patterns (as opposed to visual
      approach) at John Wayne Airport. Finally, the City will continue to register noise complaints
      with the airport’s Noise Abatement Office to ensure airport officials are made aware of any
      noise problems.
      A limited number of heliports and helistops are located throughout the City, with the most
      active locations being UCI Medical Center and Childrens’ Hospital of Orange County.
      Helicopter operations at these facilities are regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration,
      Caltrans Division of Aeronautics, and the Orange County Airport Land Use Commission. The
      City will work with these parties to ensure compliance with all state and federal laws
      pertaining to helicopter operations.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 N-20

                                                                                            NOISE
Rail Traffic Noise
    The City has established a “quiet zone” along portions of the Burlington Northern/Santa Fe
    Railroad corridor. Federal Railroad Administration regulations allow cities to delineate zones
    where trains are not allowed to blow warning horns. Without a formally established “quiet
    zone”, trains approaching all railroad crossings that intersect public streets are required to
    blow a warning horn at the intersection to warn motorists and pedestrians. “Quiet zones”
    may reduce noise impacts at these crossings, and will continue to be supported so long as
    they do not increase traffic and pedestrian hazards.
NOISE IMPLEMENTATION
    The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of
    City plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing
    collaboration with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation
    measures for this Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              N-21

                                            CULTURAL RESOURCES &
                                        HISTORIC PRESERVATION
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
        Orange’s sense of place and strong community identity can be attributed, in large part, to
        efforts by the City and community members to recognize and preserve the traditions and
        physical features that are manifestations of its culture and history. Special efforts have been
        made by the City through the preservation of catalogued historic maps, directories, photos,
        documents, and other assorted memorabilia in the City’s Local History collection at the
        Orange Public Library & History Center. In addition, careful planning and adoption of
        protective regulations have encouraged retention of significant physical features, such as
        buildings, parks, signage, and landscape elements, that communicate the City’s cultural,
        historical, and architectural past.
        Orange’s Vision for the Future, described in the General Plan Introduction, recognizes the
        City’s historical and cultural resources, and includes the following objectives related to
        Orange’s cultural resources:
           The City will build upon existing assets to create a living, active, and diverse environment
            that complements all lifestyles and enhances neighborhoods, without compromising the
            valued resources that make Orange unique.
           The City will continue efforts to protect and enhance its historic core. This same type of
            care and attention will be applied throughout the rest of the City.
           We will continue to protect our critical watersheds, such as Santiago Creek, and other
            significant natural, open space, and cultural resources.
        This Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element of the General Plan is an outgrowth
        of previous actions taken to recognize historic resources within the City. Such actions include
        undertaking surveys of historic resources, adopting the City’s first Historic Preservation
        element in 1982, and designating the local Old Towne Historic District. This Element is also an
        effort to expand the City’s historic preservation program to ensure recognition and
        preservation of the City’s diverse cultural resources. By identifying and sustaining historically
        or culturally significant places, the City of Orange strengthens community identity and
        enriches lives, providing not only a constant reminder of the culture and history of the local
        community, but also a valuable educational resource to residents and visitors alike. This
        Element also addresses the City’s continuing commitment to support the educational and
        informational resources provided through its public libraries, which also serve as community
        gathering places.
                                           ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  CR-1
REV. GPA NO. 2014-0001 (12/2015)

CULTURAL RESOURCES
Purpose of the Cultural Resources & Historic
Preservation Element
     The Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element is not a state-mandated element of
     the General Plan, but it is important because it provides guidelines to preserve those
     resources that represent the history and culture of Orange. Specifically, its purpose is to
     provide guidance in developing and implementing programs that ensure the identification,
     designation, and protection of cultural resources in the City’s planning, development, and
     permitting process. The Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element also identifies
     ways in which the City can encourage and coordinate with private property owners in
     support of historic preservation.
Scope and Content of the Cultural Resources & Historic
Preservation Element
     The content of the Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element is organized into three
     sections:
         1.) Introduction;
         2.) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and
         3.) The Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Plan.
     The Introduction sets the stage by defining the purpose of the Cultural Resources & Historic
     Preservation Element and outlining the legal framework and historical context for Orange’s
     cultural preservation issues. The Issues, Goals, and Policies section describes the City’s intent
     to protect and preserve its historic and cultural resources, and provides guidelines and
     direction on how to accomplish the related goals. The Cultural Resources & Historic
     Preservation Plan shows how these goals and policies will be achieved and implemented.
     Detailed descriptions of the various implementation programs recommended within this
     Element can be found in the Appendix to the General Plan.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
     The Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element is most closely tied to the Land Use,
     Urban Design, and Housing Elements. Protection and promotion of the City’s historic and
     cultural resources affect the Land Use Element by designating certain neighborhoods and
     resources as valuable reminders of the City’s cultural past and placing certain restrictions on
     land uses and development. The Urban Design Element is influenced by the history of the
     City in particular because design and physical guidelines also help to visually integrate
     references to the City’s past in the appearance of streetscape enhancements and building
     design. Policies in this Element that encourage adaptive re-use of historic structures for
     housing affect how the City will accommodate the housing development described in the
     Housing Element.
Legal Framework for Cultural Resource Protection
     This section describes the various elements that constitute the legal framework of cultural
     resource protection at the federal, state, and local levels.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-2

                                                                           CULTURAL RESOURCES
National Historic Preservation Act
Enacted in 1966, the National Historic Preservation Act The Secretary of the Interior's
(NHPA) established the National Register of Historic Standards for the Treatment of
Places (NRHP) program under the Secretary of the Historic Properties are basic
Interior, authorized funding for state programs with principles created to help preserve
provisions for pass-through funding and participation by the distinctive character of a
local governments, created the Advisory Council on historic building and its site, while
Historic Preservation, and established the Section 106 accommodating change to meet
review process for protecting historic resources affected new needs.
by federal undertakings. As part of this process, the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for
Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Preserving Historic Buildings (Secretary’s Standards)
were developed to provide guidance to federal agencies in reviewing potential impacts to
historic resources.
NHPA requires that all states and U.S.
                                                    The Certified Local Government (CLG) program
territories have a historic preservation office
                                                    is a partnership among local, state and federal
and State Historic Preservation Officer. Each       governments. The program encourages the
state receives federal funding for the              direct participation of local governments in the
preservation program, and 10 percent of the         identification, evaluation, registration, and
funding must be passed through to Certified         preservation of historic properties and
Local Governments (CLGs).                           promotes the integration of local preservation
                                                    interests and concerns into local planning and
The NRHP is the nation’s official list of           decision-making processes. To be eligible for
historic and cultural resources. Generally,         CLG status, local governments must:
resources must be more than 50 years old             enforce state and local laws and regulations
prior to listing on the NRHP. Properties that            for the designation and protection of
have not attained 50 years of age may be                 historic properties,
listed if they are of “exceptional                   establish an historic preservation review
                                                         commission by local ordinance,
importance.” Resources may be eligible for
                                                     maintain a system for the survey and
the NRHP if they:                                        inventory of historic properties,
    are associated with events that have            provide for public participation in the local
                                                         preservation program, and
     made a significant contribution to the
                                                     satisfactorily perform responsibilities
     broad patterns of our history; or                   delegated to it by the state.
    are associated with the lives of significant
     persons in our past; or
    embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or
     represent the work of a master, or possess high artistic values, or represent a significant
     and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
    have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory.
A resource that meets one of the above-referenced criteria must also possess integrity.
Integrity refers to the ability of a property to convey its significance. The NRHP recognizes
seven aspects or qualities of integrity: location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           CR-3

CULTURAL RESOURCES
           feeling, and association. To retain integrity, a property must possess several, and usually
           most, of these aspects.
           California Register of Historical Resources
           The Office of Historic Preservation (OHP) administers the California Register of Historical
           Resources (CRHR). The CRHR was established to serve as an authoritative guide to the
           state’s significant historical and archaeological resources (California Public Resources Code
           [PRC] Section 5024.1). State law provides that in order for a property to be considered
           eligible for listing in the CRHR, it must be found by the State Historical Resources
           Commission to be significant under any of the following four criteria (which are almost
           identical to the national criteria) that consider if the resource:
               is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns
                of California’s history and cultural heritage;
               is associated with the lives of persons important in our past;
               embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or method of
                construction, or represents the work of an important creative individual or possesses
                high artistic values; and/or
               has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history.
           The CRHR also includes properties that: have been formally determined eligible for listing in,
           or are listed in, the NRHP; are registered State Historical Landmark number 7701, and all
           consecutively numbered landmarks above number 770; are points of historical interest that
           have been reviewed and recommended to the State Historical Resources Commission for
           listing; or are city- or county-designated landmarks or districts (if criteria for designation are
           determined by OHP to be consistent with CRHR criteria). A resource identified as significant
           in an historical resource survey may be listed in the CRHR if the survey meets all of the
           following criteria:
               The survey has been or will be included in the State Historical Resources Inventory.
               The survey and the survey documentation were prepared in accordance with OHP
                procedures and requirements.
               The resource is evaluated and determined by the office to have a significance rating of
                category 1-5 on Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) form 523.
               If the survey is five or more years old at the time of its nomination for inclusion in the
                CRHR, the survey is updated to identify historical resources which have become eligible
                or ineligible due to changed circumstances or further documentation and those which
                have been demolished or altered in a manner that substantially diminishes the
                significance of the resource.
           While CRHR criteria are essentially identical to those of the NRHP, not all properties eligible
           for listing in the California Register are eligible for listing in the National Register. Besides the
1
  State Historical Landmarks below number 770 were designated as landmarks prior to implementation of the CRHR.
                                               ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                        CR-4

                                                                               CULTURAL RESOURCES
difference in nomenclature (NRHP criteria labeled A-D), the primary difference between the
two registers is that the NRHP imposes a 50-year age requirement whereas the CRHR
employs no age requirement. The other major difference between the two registers is the
manner in which they weigh physical integrity.
In addition to meeting one of the four criteria, CRHR-eligible properties must also retain
sufficient integrity to convey historic significance. CRHR regulations provide for the
possibility that historical resources may not retain sufficient integrity to meet the criteria for
listing in the NRHP but may still be eligible for listing in the CRHR. OHP has consistently
interpreted this to mean that a property eligible for listing in the CRHR must retain
substantial integrity.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
When a proposed project is expected to cause
                                                         According to the California Environmental
substantial adverse change to an historical
                                                         Quality Act (CEQA) Statutes Section 21084.1,
resource, the environmental clearance for the            an historical resource is a resource listed in, or
project usually requires mitigation measures to          determined eligible for listing in, the CRHR.
reduce negative impacts. Substantial adverse             Historical resources included in a local register
change in the significance of an historical              of historical resources are presumed to be
resource means the physical demolition,                  historically or culturally significant for
destruction, relocation, or alteration of the            purposes of this section, unless the
resource or its immediate surroundings such              preponderance of the evidence demonstrates
that the significance of an historical resource          that the resource is not historically or
would be materially impaired. Material                   culturally significant.
impairment occurs when a project:
    demolishes or materially alters in an adverse manner those physical characteristics of an
     historical resource that convey its historical significance and that justify its inclusion in, or
     eligibility for, inclusion in the California Register; or
    demolishes or materially alters in an adverse manner those physical characteristics that
     account for its inclusion in a local register, or its identification in an historical resources
     survey, unless the public agency reviewing the effects of the project establishes by a
     preponderance of evidence that the resource is not historically or culturally significant; or
    demolishes or materially alters those physical characteristics of an historical resource
     that convey its historical significance and that justify its inclusion in, or eligibility for
     inclusion in the CRHR, as determined by a lead agency for the purposes of CEQA.
The City has adopted Local CEQA Guidelines (Guidelines), amended April 11, 2006 to provide
the City, and anyone intending to carry out a project, with the requirements of the
environmental review process established according to state law, local ordinance, and City
practices. The Guidelines contain a section pertaining specifically to historical resources. This
section establishes the existing Historic Building Survey (1982 with updates from 1992 and
2005) as a recognized list of historical resources within the City pursuant to PRC 5020.1(k).
The section authorizes use of the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation, the
Guidelines for Rehabilitation, and the Old Town Design Standards (adopted 1993 and updated
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-5

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     in 1997), for design review purposes. It provides thresholds for substantial adverse change
     and identifies local categorical exemptions and cumulative impacts analysis.
     City of Orange Historic Preservation Program
     The City’s historic preservation program has its roots in community interest and outreach
     during the late-1970s. Spurred by citizen interest in the historic downtown and surrounding
     residential neighborhoods, the City Council formed the official Old Towne Steering
     Committee in 1979 to assess and direct the special planning needs for the square mile of old
     Orange. Other groups with an interest in Orange history and historic preservation that
     formed during this period include the Orange Community Historical Society (organized in
     1973), Preservation Orange (organized in 1982—no longer extant), and the Old Towne
     Preservation Association (OTPA) (organized in 1986).
     Soon after its establishment, the Old Towne Steering Committee took action to recognize
     the unique characteristics of the downtown commercial core, and joined with the Orange
     Community Historical Society and City officials to nominate the four-block commercial area
     to the National Register of Historic Places. This area, now known as the Plaza Historic
     District, was officially listed on the NRHP in 1982 (see Figure CR-1). Also in 1982, the City
     initiated its first historic resources survey to evaluate all pre-1940 homes and buildings in the
     City of Orange with a primary emphasis on Old Towne. The survey provided guidance in the
     establishment of the first Historic Preservation Element of the City’s General Plan, which was
     adopted in 1983. Soon after, the Old Towne Orange local historic district was established (see
     Figure CR-1). In 1993, Old Towne Design Standards (amended 1997) were adopted to provide
     design guidelines for proposed alterations and/or demolitions in Old Towne to be reviewed
     by Planning staff in the Community Development Department and the Design Review
     Committee (DRC).
     In 1997, a more concentrated version of Old Towne was listed on the NRHP as the Old Towne
     Orange Historic District (see Figure CR-1). This National Register district was recognized for
     its significant cultural history related to the City’s founding and early history and its
     concentration of early-period buildings.
     An update of the historic resources survey was conducted in 1992. This survey served as the
     basis for the establishment of the local Old Towne Historic District. The survey update was
     received by City Council and its findings were added to those of the 1982 survey. The
     combined survey is known as the Historic Building Survey pursuant to the City of Orange Local
     CEQA Guidelines.
     The City’s Zoning Ordinance permits the establishment of historic districts through a zone
     change process (Orange Municipal Code 17.020 and 17.17 Historic Districts). The City’s
     Community Development Department oversees application of the City’s Historic
     Preservation Program including the Mills Act program (discussed in the Cultural Resources &
     Historic Preservation Plan section below), provision of educational materials, project
     application review, and permit processes.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 CR-6

                            CULTURAL RESOURCES
                                    Figure CR-1
                 Designated Historic Resources
ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
       CR-7
CULTURAL RESOURCES
Historic and Cultural Context
     Patterns of Development and Architecture
     In order to prepare for the future, it is often worthwhile to
                                                                       The full text of the Historic
     look to the past for inspiration. A review of Orange’s dynamic    Context Statement for the
     history covers six important phases: colonization, early          City of Orange, including
     settlement, agriculture and industry, immigration and ethnic      citations, photographs and
     diversity, interwar development, and postwar development.         maps, is provided in the
     The following paragraphs, which are taken from the Historic       Cultural Resources Technical
     Context Statement prepared in conjunction with this General       Report, which accompanies
     Plan, describe significant events within each of these eras, as   the General Plan EIR.
     well as a summary of physical features and characteristics
     that remain within the community today.
     Colonization (circa 1800-1870)
     The first landowner in the Orange area was Juan Pablo Grijalva, a retired Spanish soldier. His
     land extended from the Santa Ana River and the foothills above Villa Park to the ocean at
     Newport Beach. Along with his son-in-law, Jose Antonio Yorba, he began a cattle ranch and
     built the first irrigation ditches to carry water from the Santa Ana River. After Grijalva’s
     death, Yorba and his nephew, Juan Pablo Peralta, received title to the Rancho Santiago de
     Santa Ana land grant with a total of 78,941 acres.
     After California became a state in 1848, one member of the extended family that owned the
     Rancho—Leonardo Cota—borrowed money from Abel Stearns, who was the largest
     landowner in Southern California. Cota put up his share of the Rancho as collateral. When
     Cota defaulted on the loan in 1866, Stearns filed a lawsuit in Los Angeles Superior Court to
     demand a partition of the land so that Stearns could claim Cota’s section. As a result, the
     Rancho was subdivided into 1,000 units parceled out to the heirs and the claimants in the
     lawsuit.
     Very little above-ground evidence remains from this early period of colonization of the
     Orange area, although any locations identified as related to the colonization period may yield
     archaeological evidence. A total of 33 adobes are thought to have been present on three
     ranchos within the City. Today, the northwest corner of the intersection of Lincoln Avenue
     and Orange-Olive Road in Olive is known as the site of the Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana
     headquarters. Past excavations in this area revealed the remains of two adobes, including
     wall remnants, tile floors and associated artifacts. The Grijalva Adobe site at the corner of
     Hewes Avenue and Santiago Canyon Road is marked by a plaque. This site included at least
     one adobe and some associated outbuildings. Francisco Rodriquez’s property, generally
     bound by present day Main Street, Walnut Street, the Atchison Topeka Railroad and Collins
     Avenue, also contained adobes and is associated with this early period.
     Early Settlement (circa 1870-1920)
     The early roots of the Orange we recognize today had their origins in the partitioning of the
     original Rancho. Two of the most important historic areas within the City—Old Towne and El
     Modena—were established at this time.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-8

                                                                      CULTURAL RESOURCES
Old Towne
When Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana was subdivided in the late 1860s, a Los Angeles lawyer,
Alfred B. Chapman, represented several parties in the partition suit. As payment for his fees,
Chapman acquired approximately 4,000 acres. In 1870, Chapman hired another lawyer,
William T. Glassell, to survey and subdivide his land holdings into farm lots ranging in size
from 10 to 40 acres.
With an eye to the future, the founders set aside eight lots in the center of the newly
subdivided blocks of land, to be used as a public square. This public amenity is now known as
Plaza Square, or simply the Plaza. In honor of the founders, the two main streets, which
intersected at the public square, were named Chapman Avenue (running east-west) and
Glassell Street (north-south).
Orange grew rapidly during the Great Boom of the 1880s. New settlers flocked to the region
due to the cross-country expansion, inexpensive rail fares, and the balmy Southern California
climate. Many of the new settlers entered Orange via the Santa Fe Railroad (later called the
Atchison, Topeka, & Santa Fe) Depot four blocks west of the Plaza (currently the site of
Orange Metrolink Station, Depot Park, and Veterans Memorial). Much of the real estate
boom of the 1880s was driven by landowners subdividing their ranches in order to sell
individual lots, which were often bought by speculators. By 1887, dozens of new subdivisions
and four new townsites were laid out. Connecting these new communities were two horse-
drawn streetcar systems: the Orange, McPherson and Modena; and the Santa Ana, Orange
and Tustin lines.
By the late 1870s and early 1880s, the population of Orange was large enough to support the
construction of civic buildings and gathering places such as churches, schools, and public
parks. As the city continued to grow and lots were further subdivided, the new residents
named the streets after the towns they came from in the East, such as Batavia and Palmyra.
The settlement first tried to incorporate in 1873 under the name Richland. The post office
rejected this application because there was another settlement by that name in Sacramento
County. The name was changed several years later and Orange was incorporated on April 6,
1888. At the time of incorporation, Orange was about three square miles, with 600 people
who predominantly lived on small family ranches surrounding the town. Although most
residents lived on working farms, some homes—generally for the town’s doctors, lawyers,
and merchants—were built on the small lots surrounding the Plaza.
After the boom of the 1880s, major construction in Orange lay dormant for over ten years.
With the new century came growth in the town’s citrus industry and an increase in economic
prosperity. The Plaza soon became the commercial and social hub of Orange and the
principal banks, newspapers, stores, and public institutions were built around its edges along
Chapman Avenue and Glassell Street. Residential development, which increased to meet
growing demand, occurred on the secondary streets beyond the Plaza and commercial
center.
Many commercial, residential, civic, and religious buildings from Orange’s early settlement
years remain today, in addition to the Plaza developed in the 1880s. Early brick commercial
buildings in the Plaza area include the C.M. Woodruff store (1885), D.C. Pixley store (1886),
and Wells Fargo (originally Bank of Orange) building (1886). Existing religious buildings
                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         CR-9

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     include the First Baptist Church (1893), St. John’s Lutheran Church (1914), and Trinity
     Episcopal Church (1908). Later buildings in the Plaza Square area include Watson’s Drug
     Store (1900), the former First National Bank (1928), and the W.O. Hart Post Office (1926).
     Early homes were built in the Victorian or Queen Anne style, characterized by a vertical
     emphasis with simple, jigsawn ornamentation, particularly around the porch, windows, and
     entry. During the years before World War I, residential styles evolved to include Classical
     Revival and Craftsman homes.
     El Modena
     Paralleling the early settlement of Old Towne was the establishment of another town located
     approximately three miles to the east. Known as El Modena, this small enclave evolved from
     a Quaker village into a citrus-farming Mexican-American barrio over the course of its nearly
     120-year history.
     San Francisco millionaire and philanthropist David Hewes became one of the primary
     developers in the area when he bought hundreds of acres around 1885. By 1886, there were
     400 people living in El Modena. In 1888, a horse drawn streetcar connected El Modena to
     Orange. By 1889, the building boom was over and the population declined. The area re-
     established itself as a fruit growing area and became known for its mild climate and rich
     capacity for farming.
     A number of relatively unaltered, small, wood-framed bungalows are scattered throughout El
     Modena, including an eight-building bungalow court on Hewes Street at Montgomery Place.
     Friends Church, the anchor of the original settlement of El Modena, still exists on Chapman
     Avenue at Earlham Street, although it has been converted into a restaurant. The footprint of
     Hewes Park remains at the intersection of La Veta Avenue and Esplanade Street, although
     the park has since been sold as private lots. Small expanses of unaltered open space still exist
     to the south and east of El Modena, although almost all of the former agricultural areas have
     been developed.
     Agriculture and Industry (circa 1880-1950)
     Water became the critical element for ongoing prosperity. In 1871, the A.B. Chapman canal
     began bringing water from the Santa Ana River to the townsite, with ranchers digging lateral
     ditches to their farms. By 1873, settlers began to develop wells, tapping into a water table
     only 18 feet below ground. A drought in 1877 motivated local ranchers to buy out the water
     company and form the Santa Ana Valley Irrigation Company (SAVI).
     As a cooperative water venture, SAVI was vital to the agricultural development of the arid
     Southern California region. Beginning in the 1880s, the transcontinental railroad system
     granted growers in Orange County access to markets across the nation. The introduction of
     reliable irrigation and transportation systems was accompanied by a surge in agricultural
     production and productivity in Orange County. This was particularly true in Orange, where
     from 1880 to 1950, citrus and other agricultural industries were the predominant influences
     on the economic, political, and cultural development of the City.
     By 1893, citrus had become so dominant that the Orange County Fruit Exchange (now known
     as Sunkist) was organized and incorporated. This organization constructed its headquarters
     building at the northeast corner of Glassell Street and Almond Avenue.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-10

                                                                     CULTURAL RESOURCES
The citrus industry continued to grow until the Great Depression. Between 1933 and 1935,
unemployment in Orange County grew to 15 percent. This led to labor issues that culminated
in a farm workers strike in 1936.
Another blow to the citrus industry occurred in the 1950s with the spread of “Quick Decline”
disease, which resulted in reduced crops and loss of trees. This, combined with the strong
demand for housing after World War II and the need for developable real estate, began to
diminish the once-powerful role of the citrus industry. By the late 1990s, the citrus packing
industry had steadily moved out of Orange County.
Three historic packinghouse complexes survive within Old Towne. The oldest existing
packinghouse is the former Red Fox Orchards packinghouse, built in 1909, a Pueblo Revival,
wood frame building at 128 South Cypress Street. The Villa Park Orchard Association’s
packinghouse complex, built in 1919, is located at 350 North Cypress Street. This former
Santiago Orange Growers Association packing plant was built to take advantage of the Santa
Fe Railway on the west side and the Pacific Electric on the east. The Villa Park Orchards
Association’s offices are located one block north of the packinghouse at 544 North Cypress
Street. This building was formerly the segregated Cypress Street School, built in 1931 to
educate the Mexican and Mexican-American children of Cypress Street Barrio and El Modena.
SAVI’s 1931 headquarters are located at 154 North Glassell Street. Another building of
agricultural importance is the Orange County Fruit Exchange, or Sunkist Building, located at
195 South Glassell Street. From the late 1920s through the 1940s, the Orange Mutual Citrus
Association operated a packinghouse at 426 West Almond Avenue adjacent to the Atchison,
Topeka and Santa Fe tracks. In later years, the Orange Cooperative Citrus Association
occupied the building.
Numerous other industrial buildings remain throughout Orange, concentrated around the
railroad tracks running north-south parallel to Cypress Street. In 1927, the Western Cordage
Company, a rope manufacturer established in 1923, moved into what had been the Richland
Walnut Association Building at 501 West Palm Street. In 1928, the California Wire Company
(renamed the Anaconda Wire Company in 1930) built a complex of industrial buildings
adjacent to the rail line between Palm Avenue and Maple Avenue at 200-296 North Cypress
Street. The Chapman University Film School currently occupies a portion of the original
complex. The buildings feature industrial steel windows and skylights to light the interior
work areas. In 1914, the Orange Contracting and Milling Company built their yard and mill at
225 North Lemon Street. The false front industrial building consists of a wood frame
sheathed with corrugated sheet metal panels. Another false front industrial building within
the district is the structure at 145 North Lemon Street, which features pressed metal panels
on the wall of the street façade.
Residential construction associated with industry in Orange centered on bungalows, which
became popular, affordable housing for workers. Imitating large, high-style Craftsman
homes, these homes were decidedly smaller, usually one story, and were less expensive to
construct. Storekeepers, bakers, contractors, packinghouse operators, teachers, carpenters,
and laborers occupied many of the bungalows that remain throughout Old Towne.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         CR-11

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     Immigration and Ethnic Diversity (circa 1910-1980)
     Two international events had significant effects on El Modena and Orange in the 1910s: the
     Mexican Revolution and World War I. Beginning around 1910, many Mexican families came to
     the U.S., seeking refuge from the chaos sparked by the Mexican Revolution. When the U.S.
     entered World War I in 1917, men across the country were drafted into the war effort. As a
     result, the fruit harvesting workforce dwindled, creating employment opportunities for these
     new immigrants. The increased demand for workers and the influx of Mexicans supported
     two vibrant communities: the Cypress Street Barrio and El Modena.
     El Modena
     By the 1920s, El Modena began to take on a distinctly Mexican character. Many Mexican-
     American El Modena families worked in packinghouses and orchards. The area was
     surrounded by fruit tree groves, isolating it from the rest of Orange.
     Isolation and segregation from white residents of Orange were facets of life for the residents
     of El Modena and the Cypress Street Barrio. Many popular recreational activities were
     segregated, including movie theaters. Mexican-Americans were restricted from playing ball
     in public parks and their use of the community pool was limited to Mondays, because the
     pool was drained on Monday night. The impact was felt even at the schools, where Mexican-
     American student enrollment was restricted to “La Caballeriza” (“The Barn”), a two-room
     wooden schoolhouse behind the Lemon Street School.
     The breakthrough came in 1947 when the U.S.
                                                             Mendez v. Westminster sought a court
     Supreme Court ruled in favor of League of United
                                                             injunction that would order integration of
     Latin American Citizens in the case Mendez v.           schools in the Westminster, Santa Ana,
     Westminster, ordering that “school districts not        Garden Grove, and El Modena school
     segregate on the basis of national origin.” In the      districts. Basis for the suit was provided by
     wake of Mendez came the landmark Brown v.               conditions in El Modena where the
     Board of Education decision in 1954. As integration     segregated Lincoln and Roosevelt schools
     slowly commenced, many disgruntled Anglo                sat side-by-side on Chapman Avenue,
     families moved away, settling in newly drawn            making an easy comparison of separate
     school districts that were often “re”-segregated.       and unequal educational opportunities for
                                                             Mexican-American children. The original
     Some of the small bungalows from this period still      site of these two schools has since been
     exist in largely modified forms, typically with         redeveloped.
     clapboard siding, gabled roofs, and small entry
     porches. The most significant commercial building from this period is “La Morenita,” a
     market that still exists on the corner of Washington Avenue and Earlham Street. Around
     1929, the Moreno family, one of the oldest families in El Modena, constructed the small,
     western false-front building.
     Cypress Street Barrio
     Mexican citrus workers settled on Cypress Street beginning in 1893 when a packinghouse
     was built on the 300 block of North Cypress. Growers realized that having an easily
     accessible, stable, and permanently housed workforce assured a lessened chance of labor
     problems. Residents of the Cypress Street Barrio were a tight-knit group with many new
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-12

                                                                       CULTURAL RESOURCES
residents coming from the same villages in Mexico. Today, some residents can trace their
family’s neighborhood roots back four generations.
To support this population, Cypress Street Barrio’s small businesses included grocery stores,
bakeries, tortillerias, restaurants, bathhouses, automobile shops, barbershops, and pool
halls. The Friendly Center, Inc., one of the oldest non-profit family resource centers in
Southern California, offered “Americanization” courses, homemaking classes, health clinics,
and childcare services to Cypress Street Barrio residents. In addition, the popular jamaicas, or
church street fairs, were held in front of the Friendly Center during the late 1940s.
The Cypress Street Barrio still retains some of its original early 20th-century character in the
form of small bungalows, commercial buildings, and packinghouses. The Mission Revival
style Friendly Center, Inc. building was built at 424 North Cypress in 1922; the original
structure has been remodeled for commercial and residential use. Among the long-standing
businesses along North Cypress Street were the Cayatano “Pete” Cruz grocery store (440
North Cypress), Filiberto Paredes/Simon Luna/Emilia Luna’s grocery store (418 North Cypress)
and Pete’s Pool Hall (405 North Cypress).
Very little physical evidence remains of Orange’s segregation history. The most prominent
example is the formerly segregated Cypress Street School at 544 North Cypress Street, which
today houses Chapman University’s Human Resources Development Research Program. The
Colonial Theatre, located at 138 South Glassell Street, which was one of the few movie
houses in Orange County where attendees of all races could sit side-by-side, still exists in a
highly modified form.
Interwar Development (circa 1920-1941)
As the citrus economy continued to flourish into the 1920s, the demand for housing grew and
residential styles evolved. The California-oriented Craftsman houses were followed by
European-influenced Tudor, Provincial, Mediterranean, and Norman Revival styles. The
Mediterranean Revival style was by far the most popular in Orange, and houses in this style
that remain exist primarily on the outskirts of the Old Towne boundaries. Beginning in the
1930s, Ranch and Minimal Traditional style homes became dominant due to the economic
constraints created by the Great Depression. Minimal Traditional homes tend to be boxy,
with flat wall surfaces and little ornamentation or other detailing; they often feature
simplified features of Tudor and Colonial Revival styles. Ranch homes became the most
predominant type of housing built in the United States between the 1930s and the 1960s.
In addition to many existing homes in the Old Towne area, a number of Works Progress
Administration (WPA) projects were built in Orange during this period. The State Emergency
Relief Agency (SERA) and the WPA sponsored the construction of several structures,
including the Bandshell and Bath House/Plunge in Hart Park (1933-1935), the downtown post
office at Chapman Avenue and Lemon Street (1934-35), a new fire station at 153 South Olive
Street, a $45,000 stadium at Orange Union High School (1935), and new bridges on both the
Santa Ana River and Santiago Creek. The Orange-Olive school buildings at 3030 N. Magnolia
Street (also known as Olive Community Center) were also constructed by the WPA in the late
1920s. Of these structures, the fire station and bridges no longer remain.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          CR-13

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     Postwar Development (circa 1945-1975)
     World War II brought prosperity to Southern California’s economy and ended the ravages
     caused by the Great Depression, which had devastated fruit prices. After World War II,
     returning soldiers and a massive influx of new residents to the state changed the face of
     California forever. Orange was no exception; its remaining open and agricultural space
     attracted developers of bedroom communities.
     By the 1950s, many ranchers readily sold their acreage; orange groves were succumbing to
     the “Quick Decline” disease and the demand for real estate for housing construction soared.
     Orange’s explosive suburban residential growth began in 1953 and peaked in 1962, when
     thousands of acres of land were sold for development. Between 1950 and 1960, the local
     population swelled from 10,000 to 26,000 as former orchards were torn out and replaced
     with subdivisions of single-family homes. Most of the larger tracts (50-100 homes) were built
     by outside developers, though a few local developers worked on a smaller scale. One of the
     more notable developers working in Orange during this period was Joseph Eichler, who built
     three tracts to the north and east of Old Towne. These Eichler developments brought distinct
     elegance, originality, and modern design principles to suburban homes.
     Eichler Homes
     Between 1949 and 1974, Joseph Eichler built about 11,000 homes in California, including 575 in
     Southern California, of which 305 are in Orange. Frank Lloyd Wright’s Usonian building
     principles, which included integration with the natural landscape, the use of indigenous
     materials, and an aesthetic to appeal to the “common man,” gave Eichler ideas for his own
     suburban tract housing. Eichler hired a series of progressive firms, including Anshen & Allen,
     Jones & Emmons, and Claude Oakland Associates, to design innovative, modern, and
     affordable homes for California’s growing middle class consumers. For over two decades,
     Eichler Homes would utilize streamlined production methods, specialized construction
     materials, an innovative marketing campaign, and one of the first non-discriminatory
     suburban housing policies in the country to change the shape of California’s suburbs.
     Chapman University
     Chapman College was founded in 1861 as Hesperian College in Woodland, California by the
     Disciples of Christ. By 1920, Hesperian College merged with the new Los Angeles-based
     California Christian College. The major benefactor to California Christian College was
     Fullerton citrus rancher Charles Clarke Chapman, and in 1934 the college was renamed
     Chapman College.
     After World War II, as returning veterans with G.I. Bill funding filled college classrooms across
     the nation, Chapman College required a larger campus to accommodate the increased
     student population. When the Orange Unified School District proposed building a new high
     school, Chapman College purchased the old Orange Union High School campus at Glassell
     Avenue and Palm Street. Chapman College moved to this site in 1954 and became the first
     four-year, accredited college in Orange County.
     Over the years, Chapman has continued to expand its education programs, enrollment, and
     campus facilities. In 1977, a School of Business and Management (now known as the George
     L. Argyros School of Business and Economics) was established. The Law School was added in
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-14

                                                                       CULTURAL RESOURCES
1995. As a result of its academic development, Chapman College became Chapman University
in 1991. Throughout the 1990s, enrollment grew by more than 40 percent and the University
has constructed new facilities, including a building for the new College of Film and Media
Studies and an athletic complex.
Physical Development
The surge in Orange’s population in the 1950s and 1960s created a need for new government
buildings to replace the early City Hall, Fire Station, and Carnegie Library. The Orange Public
Library (then addressed as 101 North Center Street, but now as 407 East Chapman Avenue)
was completed in 1961, replacing the original 1910 Carnegie Library. Welton Becket and
Associates designed a new civic center completed in 1963 on the site of the 1921 City Hall.
Several fire stations were constructed during the 1960s, including new headquarters on
South Grand Street in 1969. A new main post office was constructed on Tustin Street in 1971.
New business districts were also created during the mid-1950s, diminishing downtown
Orange’s importance as the city’s major commercial center. Major shopping centers opened
on the corners of Tustin Street, Chapman Avenue, Collins Avenue, Glassell Street, North
Batavia Street, East Katella Avenue, Meats Avenue, Main Street, and La Veta Avenue,
attracting supermarkets, restaurants, hardware stores, banks and gas stations. Shopping
centers built during the 1960s and 1970s include Town and Country Village Shopping Center,
the Mall of Orange (now the Village at Orange), and The City Shopping Center (now the Block
at Orange).
In the 1960s and 1970s, the ever-growing City of Orange annexed surrounding areas and
towns, including portions of El Modena.
The majority of construction from the postwar period remains largely intact, including the
three Eichler tracts, Chapman University, City Civic Center, and numerous other commercial,
residential, and civic buildings.
1975–Present
During the postwar suburban construction boom, the most desirable land for subdivisions
was the flat coastal plain where cities such as Garden Grove, Westminster, and Costa Mesa
developed. By the late 1960s, construction slowed. Further development stalled with the
energy crisis of 1973. By the 1980s, however, the foothills to the east of El Modena became
prime real estate. Orange Park Acres, which lies between Chapman Avenue and Santiago
Canyon Road, was first subdivided in 1928, but most of the area was annexed by the City of
Orange during the 1990s. In 1989, the City of Orange and the Irvine Company adopted the
East Orange General Plan, a proposal that encouraged a mix of residential, commercial, and
recreational uses for the area east of Orange Park Acres towards Irvine Park and Peters
Canyon. The Orange campus of Rancho Santiago Community College was constructed in 1985
and became Santiago Canyon College in 1997. Most construction from this period remains
intact.
Once the flatlands were fully developed, the remaining undeveloped lands that were
previously thought to be too expensive or complicated to develop, including the hillsides,
became much more desirable. In 2005, the City approved a development proposal for the
remaining undeveloped hillsides to the east of Orange and within its sphere of influence
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          CR-15

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     (SOI). This new development, consisting of approximately 4,000 homes, is known as
     Santiago Hills II and East Orange. The development area is located adjacent to the Irvine
     Ranch Land Reserve, and has significantly expanded the boundaries of Orange towards the
     east.
     Archaeological Resources
     The context statement for archaeological
                                                    The full text of the Archeological Historic Context
     resources in the City of Orange represents Statement for the City of Orange, including
     a synthesis of over 50 years of surveys, citations and maps indicating portions of the
     excavations, and analysis of material planning area with potential for prehistoric and
     culture, written documents and records, historic archeological resources, is provided in the
     and oral histories undertaken by Cultural Resources Technical Report, which
     archaeologists at federal, state, and local accompanies the General Plan EIR.
     agencies and in the private sector. To date,
     over 50 surveys have been conducted within the City or its surrounding unincorporated
     areas. Most of these have been small in size (less than 10 acres), although a few have
     investigated hundreds or thousands of acres. These larger projects have been confined to
     relatively undeveloped areas, such as Burruel Point, Santiago Creek, or the unincorporated
     east Orange hills within the City’s sphere of influence (SOI). These surveys have resulted in
     the recording of only 25 or so sites within the City, although others have been documented
     along the coast or in other portions of Orange County.
     Prehistoric Setting
     Orange County falls within the San Diego sub-region of the southern coast archaeological
     region of California. The history of the archaeology of this period in Southern California reads
     like a novel, with accounts of nationalism and competition between ambitious institutional
     collectors (e.g., museums, universities, public institutions). Intense and competitive, but
     unsystematic institutional collecting persisted in the region into the twentieth century.
     An initial framework of regional prehistory was in place by the 1950s. This framework is not
     specific to Orange County; however, elements of it are derived from work at Newport and
     Laguna Beaches. The generally accepted framework recognizes four broad temporal periods
     or cultural horizons. These are the Paleo-coastal or Early Man Period dating to more than
     10,000 years ago; the Millingstone Period, falling between 10,000 years ago and 3,000 years
     ago; the Intermediate Period from 3,000 years to 1,350 years ago; and, the Late Prehistoric
     Period from 1,350 to 650 years ago.
     Paleo-coastal Tradition
     Initial occupation is thought to have occurred more than 10,000 years ago in Southern
     California. The view is that early occupants were mobile foragers primarily dependent on
     hunting terrestrial game. Recent archaeological evidence from some coastal sites indicates
     the systematic and intensive use of marine resources, including shellfish, during this period.
     One immensely important find was the partial remains of a woman on Santa Rosa Island
     (Channel Islands) in 1959. Now known as the Arlington Springs Woman, the find consisted of
     two femurs recovered at a depth of approximately 30 feet. The discovery was excavated in a
     block and transported to the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History. In 1989, samples of
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-16

                                                                    CULTURAL RESOURCES
the bone were submitted for chemical and radiocarbon analysis. The resulting estimate of
the age of the remains suggests the individual was buried approximately 13,000 years ago,
making the Arlington Springs Woman one of the oldest finds of human remains in the
Americas.
Millingstone Period
Sites dating from around 8,000 years before present (B.P.) are far more common than those
from the Paleo-coastal Tradition period. They typically include groundstone assemblages,
indicating a probable dependence on hard seeds. At coastal sites, there is continued
evidence of a wide variety of marine resource exploitation, most commonly shellfish. Some
archeologists believe that terrestrial game still provided the foundation of the diet. Others
note that the abundance of Millingstone Horizon sites suggests a sedentary settlement
system, rather than a mobile foraging pattern. Under the sedentary settlement system,
central settlements would be supplied from special purpose camps and task sites. Sites of
this time period typically yield large numbers of metates and manos, as well as unique
artifacts of unknown use, called cogged stones or discoidals.
The Intermediate Period
At about 3,000 years B.P., important changes began to occur in settlement, technology, and
subsistence intensification caused by a growing population. Changes included increased use
of acorns, elaborate fishing technology, and a diverse arsenal of hunting tools. The apparent
disuse of the Newport Coast area during this period is thought to have indicated the arrival
of Shoshonean-speaking groups from the deserts to the east. Archaeologists believe these
people were proto-Gabrieleno and Luiseño who were not yet familiar with marine resources.
Late Prehistoric Period
By the Late Prehistoric Period, beginning approximately 1,350 years B.P., high population
densities and complex political, social, technological, and religious systems existed
throughout the Los Angeles Basin. Economic systems, based primarily around growing
marine fisheries, became more diverse and intensive. The growing geographic complexity of
trade networks is reflected in shell-bead currency and a variety of materials traded to or
acquired from remote locations. Technological improvements are apparent in the
appearance of the bow and arrow, the plank canoe in coastal sites, and evidence of a broad
variety of marine resources, including mammals and fish taken in deep sea environments.
Settlements became permanent towns supported by temporary camps set up at resource
procurement sites. Archaeological evidence of this time period includes the presence of
arrowheads, soapstone bowls, callus shell beads, steatite effigies, and cremations. This
period ended abruptly when Spanish colonists began establishing missions along the
California coast.
Ethnographic Setting
The planning area is situated within the ethnographic territory of the Gabrielino Indians of
California. Gabrielino lands included most of present-day Los Angeles and Orange Counties,
and several offshore islands. The Gabrielino spoke a Cupan language in the Takic family,
which in turn is a member of the Uto-Aztecan linguistic stock. The Gabrielino people lived in
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                        CR-17

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     either permanent or semi-permanent villages. Known settlement locations seem to have
     favored two different locales; coastal estuaries and major inland watercourses. Villages are
     thought to have been the focus of family life, with each individual group linked to others by
     paternal kinship relations. Coastal Gabrielino exploited bay and kelp-bed fish, shellfish, and
     occasionally sea mammals. Inland groups collected and processed plants and hunted deer,
     bear, quail, and other terrestrial game.
     Gabrielino culture was heavily affected by colonial Spanish missionary efforts long before
     systematic ethnographic studies could be conducted, indeed before there was such a
     discipline as ethnography. Disease and forced participation in the mission system disrupted
     most traditional cultural ways of life and resulted in a catastrophic reduction of the native
     population. Information about their material culture and lifeways is very limited and derived
     largely from historical sources, such as the diaries and records of early missionaries, soldiers,
     and explorers. While traveling through the area in 1769, Father Juan Crespi, a missionary,
     noted the presence of a large village, Hotuuknga, upstream from present day Olive on the
     north side of the Santa Ana River. Crespi wrote that 52 Indians came to greet them and
     accepted blankets, beads, and other goods. When he returned two years later, the group
     was hostile and the Spaniards quickly continued on their way. As late as the 1870s, a small
     “Indian camp” was visible on the north side of Santiago Creek just west of the Glassell Street
     crossing.
     What little ethnographic information is available suggests that the Late Prehistoric Gabrielino
     settlement pattern may have been characterized by a complex of central villages occupied by
     family lineages and smaller special-purpose sites where specific resources were extracted or
     where food or other resources were collected for transportation back to central villages.
     Such a pattern is consistent with the "collector" economic model for complex hunter-
     gatherer societies such as the Gabrielino.
     Historical Setting
     As mentioned previously, major themes and eras in Orange’s history include colonization,
     early settlement, agriculture and industry, immigration and ethnic diversity, interwar
     development, and postwar development. Considered in light of these themes and eras,
     places of particular archaeological interest include rancho sites, Old Towne, El Modena,
     McPherson, and Olive. Physical developments of particular interest include the railroad,
     packinghouses, private homes, and civic buildings. Social developments of particular interest
     include ethnic settlement, labor issues, and segregation.
     Orange’s early settlers, commercial enterprises, and public facilities had no modern-day
     waste disposal facilities. Typically, outdoor sanitation facilities (privies or outhouses) were
     placed within private property at the rear of the properties, close to alleys. Household trash
     items (discarded bottles and dishes, food remains, and broken objects) were often disposed
     of by spreading across the back or side yards and then covering with dirt (creating horizontal
     layers of discarded refuse) or by digging pits to hold garbage and then covering with dirt.
     According to City sanitation records (these records do not extend to El Modena, Olive, etc.),
     sewer lines were installed in the streets and into parcels within Orange and the general area
     of the Cypress Street Barrio between 1911 and 1914 (after 1915, almost all new development in
     Orange included provision of sewer lines). While the City provided the pipes necessary for
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-18

                                                                      CULTURAL RESOURCES
individual hook ups into the system, it was up to the landowner to install flushing toilets and
sinks, and some residents continued to use outhouses for many years after the main sewer
line was installed. As outhouses were abandoned, they were often filled in with discarded
household debris, creating sealed deposits. These 19th century refuse deposits often contain
information on household demographics, cultural heritage traditions, economic status, and
other research topics that is not available through written documentation. In Orange,
deposits associated with early Hispanic communities, Chinese settlers, German immigrants,
religious organizations, and other heritage or belief groups have the potential to provide
glimpses of the daily lives of Orange’s early settlers. In Cypress Street Barrio’s and El
Modena’s early settlement period, deposits associated with Quakers can provide artifacts
and other organic material useful in interpreting the influence of religious beliefs on material
culture, the everyday practice of a religious philosophy, status, the role of women and
children in the household, and other topics not always addressed in the written record.
Archaeological deposits associated with warehouses, ditches, and workers’ camps are
potentially present at any 19th and early 20th century packinghouse location within the City.
As with residential areas, industrial work sites established outhouses, waste disposal areas,
and residential areas for workers. Often, large organizations employed on-site blacksmiths to
maintain freight wagons and shoe stock, and fix machinery and tools. Analysis of functional
use areas can aid in reconstructions of 19th-century technology, industrial design and layout,
and technological changes, innovations, or modifications made at individual company sites.
Household debris discarded at workers’ camps allows a comparison of the economic and
social status of foremen, managers, owners, and laborers (as interpreted through the
material culture). Such debris also allows insights into division of labor camps based on
cultural heritage, comparisons of conditions at camps owned by different companies, and
other research topics that can enrich the known history and interpretation of Orange’s
important agricultural and industrial development.
New developments and existing urban areas of the City continued to tie into the City’s ever-
expanding sewer system in the Interwar Development period, eliminating the potential for
hollow-filled significant archaeological deposits associated with individual households. Rural
areas, however, relied on outhouses or septic systems and were often responsible for
disposal of their own household trash. Deposits associated with farmhouses, small scale
orange growers, and agricultural enterprises have the potential to allow interpretation of
individual farm and household response to the Depression, adaptations in diet and material
culture in light of reduced economic status, changes in farm technology or equipment in light
of the Depression, and other topics related to interpreting this era of Orange history.
The explosive growth of Orange and establishment of planned subdivisions in the Postwar
Development period is unlikely to have resulted in significant archaeological deposits. By the
end of World War II, new developments included installation of sewer, water, and electrical
utilities. New homeowners and tenants were provided with garbage collection services, and
the likelihood of encountering significant archaeological deposits associated with this period
is considered low.
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         CR-19

CULTURAL RESOURCES
Orange’s Public Library System
     Orange’s Public Library was founded prior to incorporation in 1885, making it one of the
     oldest public libraries in Orange County. Postmaster Robert E. Tener donated his collection of
     about 300 books and ran the library as a private organization, using dues from the members
     to build and maintain the collection. The library itself was housed in the Post Office Building
     on South Glassell Street. It remained as a private organization until 1894 when it was turned
     over to the newly-formed City.
     In 1905, the collection needed a new building and was granted a Carnegie building to house
     the library on the corner of Center Street and Chapman Avenue, where the Main Library is
     still located today. In 1961, the original Carnegie building was demolished and a 17,000 square
     foot building was erected, increasing in size to provide service to an anticipated population
     of 40,000.
     An expanded new Orange Public Library & History Center reopened on April 21, 2007. At
     45,000 square feet, the new library building includes a Children's Library, Teen Zone,
     Homework Center and a History Center.
ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
     The goals and policies of the Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element address five
     issues: (1) identifying and protecting historic resources, (2) protecting neighborhood
     character, (3) providing incentives and expanding education efforts for historic preservation,
     (4) recognizing and protecting archeological and cultural resources within the planning area,
     and (5) meeting life-ling learning needs of residents through provision of library services.
     Implementation programs related to these goals and policies are contained in the General
     Plan appendix.
Architecture and Community Character
     One of the most distinguishing features of Orange is the community’s dedication to
     recognizing, acknowledging, and preserving its past. The NRHP-listed Old Towne Historic
     District has the largest number of resources of any historic district in California, and provides
     a strong sense of place in the City and a unique identity within Orange County as a whole.
     The City recognizes that the architectural strength of Old Towne results from the contextual
     environment of historic structures, and further recognizes that in some cases, individual
     structures are best appreciated in a neighborhood context. The City also realizes that some
     individual structures worthy of protection may not be located within an intact historic
     neighborhood (for example, historic farmhouses located throughout the City or La Morenita
     market in El Modena).
     Historic preservation in Old Towne has been a significant factor in the revitalization and
     economic vitality of downtown Orange, resulting in increased property values and low
     vacancy rates. Old Towne preservation has created a potential model for other locations
     within the City. However, efforts to identify and protect resources beyond Old Towne have
     been limited. The City seeks to build upon the successes of Old Towne and the existing
     historic preservation program, to use new techniques and technologies to assist in historic
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 CR-20

                                                                            CULTURAL RESOURCES
    preservation, and to prepare for a future wherein an increasing number of resources will
    qualify as potentially historic.
    GOAL 1.0:        Identify and preserve potential and listed historic resources, including
                     buildings, structures, objects, sites, districts, and archaeological resources
                     citywide.
    Policy 1.1:      Maintain an accessible inventory of designated and potential historic
                     resources.
    Policy 1.2:      Promote community education and awareness of the significance of Orange’s
                     potential and listed historic resources.
    Policy 1.3:      Provide long term assurance that potential and listed historic resources will
                     be used, maintained, and rehabilitated in conformance with Secretary of the
                     Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for
                     Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Preserving Historic Buildings
                     (Secretary’s Standards).
    Policy 1.4:      Encourage alternatives to demolition such as architecturally-compatible
                     rehabilitation, adaptive re-use, new construction, and relocation.
    Policy 1.5:      Require that no permit for alteration or demolition of properties identified in
                     the Orange Historic Resources Inventory as potential historic resources shall
                     be issued until alternatives to demolition have been duly considered.
    Policy 1.6:      Promote the preservation of cultural and historical resources controlled by
                     governmental agencies, including those related to City, School District, and
                     other agencies.
Preserving Historic Neighborhood Character
    Historic preservation goes beyond protecting a select number of buildings. The overall goal
    of historic preservation is to link current residents to the City’s rich heritage, create a sense
    of place, and protect architectural context and diversity. Preservation efforts should enhance
    neighborhoods by rehabilitating individual structures and addressing neighborhood
    character in areas that are rich in history but that may not retain enough integrity to qualify
    as local, state, or national historic districts. While they may not have high integrity, these
    neighborhoods are culturally, historically, and architecturally significant and feature distinct
    physical and/or architectural characteristics.
    GOAL 2.0         Identify and preserve neighborhoods that are culturally and historically
                     significant but do not retain sufficient integrity for eligibility as a local,
                     state, or national district.
    Policy 2.1:      Encourage identification and listing of Neighborhood Character Areas within
                     the El Modena, Cypress Street Barrio, Railroad/Packinghouse Corridor, and
                     Orange Park Acres neighborhoods.
    Policy 2.2:      Promote community and visitor awareness and education concerning the
                     unique and special history and architecture found in Neighborhood Character
                     Areas.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-21

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     Policy 2.3:     Ensure that those qualities that contribute to the historic character of
                     designated Neighborhood Character Areas are retained through application
                     of design guidelines consistent with the local context and key physical
                     attributes of each neighborhood.
Incentives and Education
     Historic resources throughout the City provide opportunities for both rehabilitation and
     adaptive reuse as commercial, residential, or office spaces. Encouragement and incentives to
     achieve long-term preservation and context-sensitive reuse of historic buildings will be
     provided through financial, planning, and zoning tools that assist property owners seeking to
     rehabilitate and preserve their homes and buildings. Many of these resources also provide
     opportunities to promote community awareness and support for historic preservation
     through public education.
     GOAL 3.0:       Provide incentives and expand education efforts for historic preservation.
     Policy 3.1:     Expand education efforts to facilitate and encourage historic preservation
                     and recognition of the City’s historic resources.
     Policy 3.2:     Provide incentives to encourage and support historic preservation.
     Policy 3.3:     Actively seek funding for historic preservation activities.
     Policy 3.4:     Leverage recognition of the City’s historic preservation program, participate
                     directly in federal and state historic preservation programs, and gain access
                     to designated historic preservation funding.
     Policy 3.5:     Explore additional funding sources for maintenance and rehabilitation of
                     historic resources.
Archaeological and Cultural Resources
     Orange County is rich in human history, with a record of occupation by many cultures. The
     City recognizes the importance of preserving archaeological resources and making them
     accessible for educational purposes as a means of understanding our cultural heritage.
     GOAL 4.0:       Identify and preserve archaeological and cultural resources.
     Policy 4.1:     Identify, designate, and protect historically and culturally significant
                     archaeological resources or sites.
     Policy 4.2:     Recognize the importance of Santiago Creek as an archaeological resource.
     Policy 4.3:     Encourage curation of any cultural resources and artifacts recovered in the
                     City for public education and appreciation.
     Policy 4.4:     Celebrate the cultural history of the community by increasing community
                     awareness through the design features of public projects and facilities such
                     as parks, plazas, and community buildings.
     Policy 4.5:     Encourage private development to celebrate the cultural history of the
                     community through project design.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-22

                                                                                CULTURAL RESOURCES
    Policy 4.6:       Provide additional resources and promotion for the Orange Public Library
                      Local History Collection.
Library Services
    The Orange Public Library has been providing library services to residents since 1885. The
    Library has always played a central role in the development of civic life in Orange, and
    continues to do so today and in the future through its presence as both a formal and informal
    community gathering place. This role will become increasingly important as the population of
    Orange continues to grow and diversify.
    GOAL 5.0:         Meet the educational, cultural, civic, information, recreation, business, and
                      life-long learning needs of residents through the provision of library
                      resources.
    Policy 5.1:       Continue to expand, coordinate and modernize the City’s public library
                      system, ensuring that it becomes the premier information and learning
                      resource for the City to meet the needs of Orange’s growing and diverse
                      population.
    Policy 5.2:       Support the strategies and recommendations of the Orange Public Library
                      Facilities Master Plan 2002-2020, and continue to explore new strategies that
                      make the library accessible to all members of the community.
    Policy 5.3:       Work with the community to assess, select, organize, and maintain desired
                      collections of library materials and information sources and make these
                      materials available to the public free of charge to promote information
                      literacy.
    Policy 5.4:       Promote collaborations among community groups, educational institutions
                      and the Public Library to enhance sharing of information, resources and
                      financial support for library facilities, services and programs.
    Policy 5.5:       Provide friendly and welcoming library facilities that support the creation of
                      both formal and informal neighborhood commons.
CULTURAL RESOURCES & HISTORIC PRESERVATION PLAN
    Orange has traditionally focused its historic preservation efforts primarily on Old Towne.
    Since 1982, when the City of Orange undertook its first historic resources survey, enacted its
    first historic preservation element, and established the Old Towne Historic District through a
    zoning overlay, historic preservation has been a significant factor in the revitalization and
    economic vitality of Orange’s historic downtown. The current process of establishing an
    historic district is through a zoning overlay as outlined in the Zoning Ordinance; the City does
    not have a Historic Preservation Ordinance. By combining historic district designation with
    design standards, design review, and preservation incentives, the historic character of Old
    Towne has been maintained and preserved. As part of this effort, the City has developed
    public programs that provide City residents with a variety of informational tools advertising
    different options for historic preservation. The City actively promotes the Old Towne Design
    Standards, educates the public regarding architectural styles found in Old Towne, and
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                CR-23

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     provides public information on the Mills Act program, which provides incentives that may
     reduce property taxes on historic buildings in exchange for rehabilitation and maintenance of
     the owner’s historic resource. City Hall makes all of this information available, in addition to
     preservation maps and brochures, and City staff includes experts who work on historic
     preservation projects throughout the City. A Design Review Committee reviews building
     projects throughout Old Towne.
     Achievements of the Old Towne preservation program have been recognized by the
     community, and throughout the region. However, other potential historic districts and
     individual resources within the City do not receive the same attention. The City has a unique
     opportunity to examine and learn from the Old Towne experience, and to redefine the goals
     of its preservation program. This Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element includes
     issues, goals, and policies directed at facilitating a comprehensive preservation program.
     Figure CR-2 presents additional resources recommended for designation within the City.
     Subsequent portions of the Plan describe intended programs and objectives associated with
     these resources.
Architecture and Community Character
     The City’s original Preservation Element and current historic preservation program focus on
     preservation of neighborhoods, specifically Old Towne. This approach, which has been
     extremely successful, does not address the full extent or quality of architectural resources in
     Orange. The City of Orange, which has evolved and developed over the course of more than
     100 years, contains significant concentrations of properties that reflect a variety of
     architectural styles, patterns of development, and important cultural history.
     Old Towne Orange
     Old Towne Orange, comprising the central Plaza, surrounding commercial buildings, and four
     adjacent residential quadrants, represents the period of development when the City evolved
     from pioneer settlement into thriving center of the Orange County citrus industry. Originally
     settled in the mid- to late-1800s, after the dissolution of Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana,
     Orange emerged as a robust industrial and commercial center between 1888 and 1940. Citrus
     and construction-related materials yards, packinghouses, and shipping and receiving
     businesses all flourished within the three short blocks between the Plaza and Santa Fe rail
     lines. Development over this 50-year period is represented by distinct styles of architecture,
     methods of construction, and details of craftsmanship, examples of which have been
     substantially retained over the ensuing years.
     Many commercial, residential, civic, and religious buildings from Orange’s early settlement
     years remain today, in addition to Plaza Square, developed in the 1880s. Early homes were
     built in the Victorian or Queen Anne style, characterized by a vertical emphasis with simple,
     jigsawn ornamentation, particularly around the porch, windows and entry. Prior to World
     War I, residential styles evolved to include Classical Revival, Craftsman and Bungalow, and
     Mediterranean Revival examples.
     Eichler Homes
     Between 1949 and 1974, Joseph Eichler built about 11,000 homes in California, including 575 in
     Southern California, of which 305 are in Orange. Once a successful butter-and-egg wholesaler
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-24

                                                                          CULTURAL RESOURCES
in New York, Eichler drew inspiration for his change in profession from his time renting Frank
Lloyd Wright’s Bazett House. Wright’s Usonian building principles, which included integration
with the natural landscape, the use of indigenous materials, and an aesthetic to appeal to the
“common man,” inspired Eichler to incorporate similar principles into his suburban tract
homes. For over two decades, Eichler Homes would employ streamlined production
methods, specialized construction materials, an innovative marketing campaign, and one of
the first non-discriminatory suburban housing policies in the country to change the shape of
America’s suburbs.
The 305 Eichler homes in Orange provide a unique opportunity for the City to recognize some
of its lesser known historic neighborhoods. The three Eichler tracts (see Figure CR-2) include
Fairhaven, constructed in southeast Orange from 1960-1962; Fairmeadow, constructed in
north Orange in 1963; and Fairhills, constructed in east Orange from 1963-1964. They typify
the eclectic mix of Eichler’s California-modern aesthetic, and his affinity for high-quality,
architect-designed “modernism for the masses.” The residences in all three tracts remain
largely unaltered and are a source of great pride for residents. Orange’s Eichlers attest to the
high quality of materials and craftsmanship used in Eichler homes, and serve as a reminder of
early suburban integration in Southern California. Due to their architectural significance and
integrity, these three tracts appear to be eligible for listing as historic districts in local, state,
and national registers. The City has an opportunity to recognize a significant part of its post-
WWII development history.
Individual Resources
Certain resources are worthy of protection       California and Local Register Criteria
as individual resources. These properties          1) The resource is associated with events that
may be significant because of their relative           have made a significant contribution to
rarity, notable architecture, links to cultural        broad patters of local or regional history or
history, or their association with significant         the cultural heritage of California or the
people. Two examples are discussed below.              United States.
                                                   2) The resource is associated with the lives of
Farmhouses                                             persons important to local, California or
                                                       national history.
In its early years, Orange flourished as a         3) The resource embodies the distinctive
farming community. The Plaza and                       characteristics of a type, period, region, or
downtown were dwarfed by surrounding                   method of construction or represents the
expanses of citrus groves. Many residents              work of a master or possesses high artistic
lived on farms that stretched in all                   value.
directions. With modernization and growth,         4) The resource has yielded, or has the
                                                       potential to yield, information important to
most of the area’s citrus groves and
                                                       the prehistory or history of the local area,
associated farms have been subdivided and
                                                       California or the nation.
redeveloped for residential or industrial
uses. According to previous historic resource surveys, several late 19th century farmhouses
still exist in areas that would have been the outskirts of the original City core and in dispersed
locations throughout Orange. These farmhouses, and any original outbuildings that remain
on each property, are among the only tangible resources that remain to denote Orange’s
significant history as an agricultural community. While the City has surveyed many of the
individual farmhouses, regulations tailored to preservation of these resources are needed to
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          CR-25


Note: Information about individual resources is available in the City of Orange 2010 Historic Resources Inventory at the Community Development Department
                                                                                                                                           CR-27          Figure CR-2. Resources Recommended for Designation

                                                                                         CULTURAL RESOURCES
          ensure that these remnants of Orange’s early citrus history retain their integrity and receive
          appropriate community recognition
          La Morenita
          Around 1929, a small western false-front market was constructed by the Moreno family, one
          of the oldest families currently living in El Modena. The market, called La Morenita, still exists
          on the corner of Washington Avenue and Earlham Street. The building was constructed at a
          time when many Mexican-American El Modena families worked in packinghouses and
          orchards in the nearby neighborhoods of Villa Park, Placentia, and Orange. A market like La
          Morenita provided necessary household and personal items for the surrounding Mexican-
          American community. As an important symbol of El Modena’s Mexican-American heritage, La
          Morenita is also eligible for listing on a local register.
          Preservation Tools
          A variety of preservation tools are available to assist the City in identifying and preserving
          potential and listed historic resources.
          Orange Inventory
          The City will continue to maintain an accessible and periodically updated inventory of
          potential historic resources. All surveyed properties will be included in the City’s Inventory of
          Historic Resources (Orange Inventory), and the Orange Inventory will be a valuable planning
          tool to be used in evaluating possible impacts a proposed project might have on previously
          evaluated potential and identified historic resources. Properties to be included in the Orange
          Inventory include those that have been surveyed, but that may not have complete
          documentation as to their historical, cultural, or architectural significance.
          The City will formally recognize the architectural and archaeological reconnaissance survey
          prepared in conjunction with the Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element, and will
          incorporate the findings into the existing Inventory. The Orange Inventory serves as a
          valuable resource for consideration of potential historically significant resources when
          undertaking environmental review for projects.
          Historic Context Statement
          Historic context statements have been prepared for the City, as well as for several individual
          neighborhoods within Orange, in tandem with this General Plan update2. Historic context
          statements document themes significant to community history and culture, and can be used
          both to educate the community regarding the significance of places and times in Orange’s
          past and to identify, document, and evaluate the significance of historic resources.
          The City will formally recognize the historic context statement prepared in conjunction with
          the Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element, and will use the statement as a tool
          to evaluate potential historical resources. The City will also update the statement on an
          ongoing basis through collaborative partnerships with local organizations and universities.
2 These historic context statements are on file in the Community Development Department.
                                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                          CR-29

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     Orange Register of Historic Resources
     The City will create a Local Register of Historic Resources (Historic Register) which will serve
     as a local register of historical resources under CEQA. The criteria for listing in the Historic
     Register will be the same as for listing in the CRHR, as such criteria may be updated from
     time to time by the State of California. To be listed in the Historic Register, a property or
     district must demonstrate eligibility under one or more of four basic significance criteria, be
     representative of at least one theme identified in the Historic Context Statement, and retain
     substantial integrity.
     Upon establishing the Historic Register, all previously evaluated resources that have been
     designated or officially determined eligible for listing in the NRHP and/or CRHR will be
     automatically listed in the Historic Register. The Historic Register will include all contributors
     to NRHP- and/or CRHR-listed historic districts, as well as individual resources listed on the
     Historic Register and contributors to listed local historic districts. Notwithstanding the
     foregoing, “historical resource” for the purposes of CEQA means “historic district” in the
     case of a contributor to an historic district.
     The City will expand upon existing procedures for designation of local resources to expressly
     include separate or individual resources, structures, objects, sites, as well as districts and
     archaeological resources. Resources identified as potentially eligible in the Orange Inventory
     may be listed in the Historic Register if they meet the criteria noted above. Specifically, the
     City intends to pursue Historic Register listing for the three Eichler Tracts as historic districts
     and the approximately 60 potential individually eligible resources identified in the
     reconnaissance survey accompanying the General Plan update and shown on Figure CR-2.
     The City will also expand upon the existing procedure for designation of local historic
     districts. The procedure for designation of such districts should be interactive with property
     owners, should encourage participation in the listing process, and should include at least one
     mailing to property owners of record inviting them to public workshops to discuss proposed
     Historic Register listing.
     Alterations to or new construction on sites with listed historic resources shall be subject to
     City staff and/or DRC review and approval as outlined in Section 17.10.090 (Demolition
     Review) of the Municipal Code, in the Old Towne Design Standards (updated 1999), in the
     City’s Local CEQA Guidelines (updated 2006), or in other adopted design standards.
     Until such time as an Historic Register is established, the City will use the Orange Inventory
     only to the extent that potential historic resources surveyed, listed in, or eligible for listing in
     the CRHR have been identified. Once the Historic Register is established, the City will use the
     Historic Register to identify historic resources for purposes of CEQA, NHPA, and National
     Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) review of proposed projects. Historic resources listed
     in the Historic Register shall have a presumption of significance pursuant to CEQA Section
     21084.1 and shall be treated as historic resources under CEQA.
     Historic Resource Management
     The City will expand DRC and Community Development Department staff authority to
     administer the Orange Inventory survey, Historic Register listings, design review procedures,
     and demolition permits. To increase awareness of historic resources and reduce potential
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-30

                                                                         CULTURAL RESOURCES
harm to such resources, the City will establish a system to ensure that review and approval
by Community Development Department staff and/or the DRC must take place before the
whole or partial demolition of certain types of buildings. Such buildings would include those
surveyed as potential historic resources in the Orange Inventory, those listed in the Historic
Register, or those previously unevaluated properties within a designated historic district or
Neighborhood Character Area that are more than 45 years old. Current ordinances may
require amendment to incorporate preservation goals.
Maintenance and Rehabilitation
The City will work with property owners to ensure that potential historic resources in the
Orange Inventory and listed historic resources in the Historic Register are maintained in good
repair and that property owners take steps to prevent severe deterioration or demolition
caused by neglect. Incentives for maintenance and rehabilitation may include grants and low
interest loans, property tax relief, and other benefits to owners of listed historic resources to
encourage affirmative, active maintenance. The Mills Act program will be expanded to
include listed historic resources in the Historic Register, Eichler tracts, and other potential
historic resources when those properties are designated.
The City will also develop disincentives for not maintaining inventoried potential historic
resources or listed historic resources, including penalties and fines for lack of maintenance
upon serving of notice. Additional provisions may also be made for vacant and vandalized
inventoried potential historic resources or listed historic resources. Such provisions may
include barricading and protection.
The City supports contemporary uses that require minimal change to defining physical
characteristics of potential or listed historic resources, especially adaptive reuse projects that
meet contemporary needs, including housing or commercial uses.
To achieve these objectives, the City will prepare, implement, and update design guidelines
and/or standards for districts containing potential or listed historic resources. The City will
identify smaller character areas where concentrations of potential or listed historic resources
reflect unique senses of time and place. In some instances this character may be manifested
in utilitarian or decorative features, such as agricultural irrigation implements, decorative
curbing, and stone neighborhood monuments. The City will develop guidelines for
preservation of that character in buildings, structures, landscape, and other site features. The
City will also continue to maintain publicly-owned potential and listed historic resources.
Alternatives to Demolition
The City will work with local preservation organizations and property owners wishing to
demolish potential or listed historic resources to identify potential alternatives to demolition,
and will explore alternatives, including building relocation and sale or transfer of ownership,
prior to demolition of privately- or publicly-owned historic resources. Furthermore, the City
will consider updates to current demolition ordinances to protect potential or listed historic
resources.
                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                           CR-31
CULTURAL RESOURCES
Preserving Historic Neighborhood Character
     The City contains, in addition to Old Towne, a number of groupings of homes, businesses,
     and public buildings in dispersed locations that have a unique neighborhood character
     important to Orange history. Many of these areas contain buildings individually eligible for
     listing on a local, state, or national register and surroundings that retain physical
     characteristics that reflect the valuable historic context of the neighborhood. This physical
     character may be expressed as generally as streetscapes, historic street grid patterns,
     setbacks, or use categories; or as specifically as the predominance of a building type,
     prevalence of certain building materials or architectural styles, or characteristic building
     heights and/or sizes. Without regulation, this physical context will dissolve and eventually
     disappear into surrounding, incompatible modern development.
     Neighborhood Character Areas
     As uses and occupants change, one potential means of
                                                                     A Neighborhood Character Area
     preserving the physical characteristics that survive in         (NCA) is a form of Conservation
     the City’s older neighborhoods is through designation           District. According to the National
     of one or more areas as Neighborhood Character Areas            Park Service, conservation districts
     (NCAs). Applied as an overlay zone, an NCA can ensure           are “usually designated as an
     that development and alterations within the                     overlay on a basic land-use
     designated area are consistent with, and reinforce, the         category or geographically over a
     historic context of the neighborhood. With a number of          neighborhood. It provides less
     properties serving as anchors and the use of                    stringent design restrictions than a
     appropriate design guidelines, an NCA could encourage           historic district. The focus is on
                                                                     maintaining the basic character of
     preservation of the historic physical qualities and
                                                                     the area, but not the specific
     context of these neighborhoods, while still allowing            historic details of buildings. For
     both changes in use and new development.                        example, a conservation district
                                                                     may simply ask that all buildings
     To qualify as an NCA, an area must be culturally or
                                                                     maintain a front yard, with garages
     historically significant under at least one of the themes       being set behind the main
     identified in the City’s Historic Context Statement; must       building, to maintain the
     contain several individual buildings, structures, objects,      established pattern of front
     or sites that are individual potential or listed historic       yards.”
     resources; and must retain physical characteristics that
     contribute to a unique neighborhood character. The Orange Inventory, surveys, and Historic
     Context Statement all identify potential or listed historic resources that may serve as anchors
     for NCAs. Individual properties identified as anchors to an NCA are also to be listed on the
     Historic Register.
     Establishment of an NCA overlay zone requires the following:
         Identification of criteria and theme(s) for which the proposed NCA is significant.
         Identification of those physical architectural and/or design characteristics (e.g., building
          scale, story height, materials, relationship to street, width of streets, depth of setbacks)
          that are unique to the NCA being designated or that help convey its significant historic
          context and that should be preserved.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 CR-32

                                                                            CULTURAL RESOURCES
        Proposed design guidelines for each NCA that seek to preserve the unique physical
         architectural and/or design characteristics of the neighborhood.
    Initially, the City intends to designate El Modena, Cypress Street Barrio, the
    Railroad/Packinghouse Corridor, and Orange Park Acres as NCAs, as shown on Figure CR-2. In
    the future, other neighborhoods that meet the criteria listed above may qualify for such
    status, and the City will actively promote such future designations.
    NCAs are considered important only as a sum of their parts. Unlike properties in designated
    historic districts, properties located within an identified and listed NCA are not to be
    considered potential or listed historic resources when undertaking environmental review for
    projects. Within an NCA, only those properties identified as potential or listed individual
    historic resources on the Orange Inventory or Historic Register have a presumption of
    significance pursuant to CEQA Section 21084.1. Such properties should be treated as
    historical resources under CEQA only if they are listed in or eligible for listing in the CRHR for
    CEQA or the NRHP for NHPA and NEPA.
    The City will promote community awareness and education concerning the unique and
    special history and architecture found in NCAs by developing educational brochures and
    interpretive displays describing the NCA program.
    The City will also ensure that qualities contributing to the historic character of designated
    NCAs are retained through application of design guidelines consistent with the local context
    and key physical characteristics of each neighborhood. To ensure that the historic and
    cultural integrity of NCAs are maintained, the City will also provide educational materials and
    technical assistance for property owners.
Incentives and Education
    Given Orange’s numerous historic resources and active local preservation organizations such
    as OTPA, the Orange Public Library & History Center, the Orange Community Historical
    Society, and the Orange Barrio Historic Society, a wealth of interest and material is available
    to promote educational opportunities related to the City’s architectural and cultural history.
    A citywide historic interpretation program comprising written histories, photographs,
    artifacts, and signage would promote community awareness and education in historic
    preservation.
    Certified Local Government Program
    Another significant opportunity to advance local preservation efforts is the Certified Local
    Government (CLG) program. A CLG is a local government certified under federal law by the
    California Office of Historic Preservation for the purpose of more direct participation in
    federal and state historic preservation programs. Orange has a definite opportunity to
    become a CLG given the City’s well-established regulation of Old Towne. Local governments
    become certified by demonstrating their ability to enforce preservation laws and provide for
    adequate public participation. In addition, a CLG must have a qualified historic preservation
    review commission, and must maintain a comprehensive historic inventory. For Orange,
    certification as a CLG would be relatively simple because the City has already instituted many
    of the required elements, including design review, a design commission, a historic resources
    inventory, and an established method of public participation. Primary benefits of CLG status
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-33

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     include recognition of a local government preservation program, direct participation in
     federal and state preservation programs, and access to designated preservation funding.
     Development and Preservation Incentives
     Although the City already provides for use of the Mills Act program and application of the
     State Historical Building Code, additional incentives are available and should be considered.
     Adopting additional incentives could encourage responsible historic preservation and lessen
     the associated restrictions or burdens that may be felt by property owners.
     The City will continue to allow use of the State Historical Building Code for qualified historic
     buildings and properties, and will continue to administer the Mills Act Program, which can
     provide a property tax reduction for owners of historic resources.
     Future incentives may include potential fee reductions or waivers for building permits and
     business licenses, streamlined development permit review and issuance for projects
     involving listed historic resources and contributors to listed historic districts, and/or
     development transfers and bonuses. The City could also consider developing a voluntary
     conservation easement program in coordination with local preservation organizations that
     would provide a potential tax benefit to property owners and preserve listed historic
     resources and contributors to listed historic districts.
     Public Education
     To expand education efforts, the City will continue to develop and promote existing
     educational programs and materials relating to historic preservation and the City’s historic
     resources. Educational programs and materials will address:
        significance of the City’s cultural and historical resources;
        methods of conducting historic research;
        criteria for historic designation;
        historic resource design review processes;
        building permit requirements; and
        methods and incentives for rehabilitating and preserving historic and cultural resources.
     The City will utilize resources available through the Orange Public Library & History Center
     and establish partnerships with local preservation organizations to develop and present
     educational programs and materials relating to historic preservation, historic resources, and
     City history. Promoting an understanding and appreciation of the importance of historic
     preservation within City departments, boards, commissions, and elected officials also
     remains an important objective.
     Funding Historic Preservation
     Although many sources are available, funding historic preservation efforts remains a
     challenge. The City will take steps to improve access to historic preservation funding,
     including allocating or prioritizing a portion or percentage of the City’s Community
     Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding to projects involving listed historic resources.
     Proposed work on listed historic resources using CDBG resources must be consistent with
     applicable design standards. The City will also explore facilitating zero- or low-interest loans
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-34

                                                                                CULTURAL RESOURCES
     for maintenance and rehabilitation work, consistent with design standards, for listed historic
     resources and contributors to listed historic districts.
Archaeological Resources
     Potential and identified archaeological resources (or sites) in the City consist of a range of
     sites from both the prehistoric period and the historic period. Archaeological sites in Orange
     have significant interest to the California Native American community, and to the public.
     Such sites have the potential to provide data to support ongoing research and education.
     Prehistoric archaeological sites provide traces of direct ancestry for California Native
     Americans. Prehistoric archaeological remains may include cemeteries containing the
     physical remains. Considerate and humane attitudes, as well as state and federal laws,
     demand that such remains be treated with courtesy and respect and appropriately
     protected.
     Archaeological prehistoric and historic remains are also of great interest to the general public,
     and the manner in which they are treated can enhance or detract from Orange’s image
     nationally and internationally. Archaeological and prehistoric data can enhance and expand
     student learning opportunities, and can be used to train students in scientific and critical
     thinking. Historic archaeological sites may include residential, industrial, and occupational
     specific deposits and features associated with Orange’s history and growth. They reflect the
     ethnic diversity of the City, and show how different national and cultural groups have
     contributed to our history and development. Historic archaeological remains also have an
     important educational advantage in that they are often far more accessible, recognizable, and
     understandable than prehistoric materials. Archaeological evidence of this period may include
     household trash (discarded bottles and dishes, food remains, and broken items), industrial
     waste, architectural remains, evidence of industrial processes, and evidence of agricultural
     practices.
     Assessing Archaeological Resources in Project Design and
Approval
     Demonstrating a strong commitment to the             CEQA Section 21083.2(g), defines a “Unique
     preservation of archaeological resources, the        Archaeological Resource” as:
     City will pursue all available measures to avoid       “An archaeological artifact, object, or site
     development on sensitive archaeological sites.         about which it can clearly be demonstrated
     Such measures may include project redesign             that, without merely adding to the current
     and obtaining archaeological easements. The            body of knowledge, there is a high
     City will formally recognize the archaeological        probability that it meets any of the
     resources survey and resource sensitivity maps         following:
                                                            1) Contains information needed to answer
     prepared in conjunction with the General Plan
                                                                 important scientific research questions
     update and will use these documents to
                                                                 and that there is a demonstrable public
     evaluate potential historical resources when                interest in that information.
     reviewing proposed projects involving ground           2) Has a special and particular quality such
     disturbing activities.                                      as being the oldest of its type or the
                                                                 best available example of its type.
     The City will also establish procedures for            3) Is directly associated with a scientifically
     listing archaeological resources, such as                   recognized important prehistoric or
                                                                 historic event or person.”
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              CR-35

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     prehistoric settlements and adobe sites, in the Historic Register. The City will employ
     appropriate criteria for evaluating the potential significance of historical resources and will
     encourage voluntary listing of eligible resources. The historical significance of an
     archaeological historic resource is evaluated using the criteria of Public Resource Code Section
     5024.1 and CEQA Guidelines Sections 15064.5 et seq. The City will also establish procedures for
     evaluating potential “unique archaeological resources” pursuant to CEQA Sections 21083.2 et
     seq.
     The City will require cultural resource inventories of all new development projects in areas
     identified on resource sensitivity maps with medium or high potential for archaeological or
     cultural resources (prehistoric occupation, special task and ritual sites, or historic settlement
     areas such as adobe sites, etc.). Reports shall be prepared in a standard format
     (Archaeological Resources Management Report format) by a Registered Professional
     Archaeologist knowledgeable in Native American cultures and/or historical archaeology
     (qualified archaeologist). Where a preliminary site survey finds the potential for substantial
     archaeological remains, the City shall require a mitigation plan to protect the resource(s)
     before issuance of permits. In addition, the City will require Community Development
     Department staff review of cultural resource inventories and surveys and will expand staff
     authority to recommend designation and/or identify potential or listed archaeological
     historical resources for CEQA purposes. Community Development Department staff will also
     review site survey reports and mitigation plans for compliance with CEQA.
Consultation with Native American Groups
     The City seeks to encourage participation of interested Native American groups in establishing
     guidelines for resource assessments and mitigation. These guidelines will include consultation
     and participation of the Native American community during archaeological excavation and
     construction on potential or identified prehistoric or Native American sites. If construction of
     a proposed project will unavoidably affect Native American traditional properties, cemeteries,
     or sacred sites, the City will request a list of contacts from the California Native American
     Heritage Commission and consult with interested Native American parties to establish a
     mutually agreeable resolution. Such a resolution may include such steps as recovery and
     museum curation of archaeological resources, or relocation and re-interment of human
     remains and of associated grave goods.
     Preserving Sacred Sites
     The City intends to ensure the protection of archaeological sites that may be culturally
     significant to Native Americans if the sites have religious or intrinsic value, even if the sites
     have compromised scientific or archaeological integrity due to disturbance. If a significant or
     unique archaeological resource cannot be left intact, then its character, nature, and unique
     features should be documented and preserved for the future.
     Native American traditional cultural properties including historical, cultural, and sacred sites
     and cemeteries on public land are explicitly protected by California Public Resources Code
     Section 5097.9. Similar protection is provided to such sites on both public and private land by
     California Public Resources Code Section 5097.993-5097.994, with criminal and civil penalties
     for acts of theft, deliberate destruction, or vandalism.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               CR-36

                                                                             CULTURAL RESOURCES
    Preservation Incentives
    Project applicants that avoid and preserve listed archaeological and cultural resources
    through site planning of open space, development of parks, and other similar conservation
    techniques may receive incentives related to density, parking requirements, grants and low
    interest loans, tax relief, and other benefits. The City will encourage voluntary contribution of
    conservation easements for listed archaeological resources, which may provide tax relief to
    the property owner.
    Celebrating our Cultural History
    The City will work toward recognizing the importance of Santiago Creek as an archeological
    resource, and incorporating appropriate elements of the Creek’s cultural history in design of
    public spaces and recreational features surrounding the Creek. Beyond Santiago Creek, the
    City will strive to incorporate historical and cultural motifs significant in Orange history into
    the design of public projects and facilities such as parks, plazas, and community buildings.
    Materials recovered from archaeological excavations may be employed in interpretive
    displays in public buildings and may be used to enrich museum or archive holdings and
    exhibits.
    In addition, the City will encourage curation of cultural resources and artifacts for public
    education, appreciation, and interpretive programs. The City will assist in the preparation of
    short videos, pamphlets, books, and other media presentations documenting archeological
    excavations within the City. These resources can provide valuable additions to the Orange
    Public Library’s Local History Collection.
Library Services
    The Orange Public Library functions as an independent City department. The library system
    consists of three facilities: the Orange Public Library & History Center (Main Library), the Taft
    Branch Library, and the El Modena Branch Library. The City’s role and preferred future
    strategies for providing library services are outlined in the City’s Public Library Facilities Master
    Plan, which was adopted in October 2002 and extends to 2020. The objective for the Master
    Plan was to “address future facility needs of the Orange Public Library necessary to support
    the delivery of materials and services that the community needs, now and in the future.” The
    Plan focuses on:
       identifying the libraries’ existing strengths as well as opportunities;
       ensuring that all residents of Orange have reasonably convenient access to high quality
        library services; and
       exploring how existing and proposed facilities can expand their role as neighborhood civic
        places.
    The General Plan defers to the Library Master Plan to establish service standards, prioritize
    future system improvements, and secure financing for needed improvements. Goals and
    policies of this Element focus on broad strategies to guide future library services. The Library
    Master Plan will be updated in future years to be consistent with the policies and growth
    projections established in this General Plan.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                CR-37

CULTURAL RESOURCES
     The Main Library was greatly expanded in 2007, but the two branches are currently too small
     to adequately serve the City’s growing population. The City will work to achieve the California
     State Library recommended standard of four volumes and 0.7 square feet of library space per
     capita. The City also plans to upgrade the two library branches to help improve services,
     library materials and programs. In order to improve community access to library services, and
     to better support library services and programs, the City will explore building a new library
     branch in east Orange and/or expanding the El Modena Branch.
     The City’s library services will maintain the vision of service as a resource for education,
     enrichment, imagination, safety, and community-building. Through various programs and the
     use of library facilities, library services will also continue to be a resource in collaborative
     partnering with community organizations and businesses.
CULTURAL RESOURCE & HISTORIC PRESERVATION IMPLEMENTATION
     The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of
     City plans, ordinances, development requirements, and capital improvements, and through
     ongoing collaboration and consultation with State and regional agencies, Native American
     groups, and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation measures for this Element are
     contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                CR-38

                                            INFRASTRUCTURE
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
        Orange residents, businesses and visitors rely on public infrastructure to carry out their daily
        duties. Population growth and new development continues to increase demand for
        infrastructure services. The Infrastructure Element includes guidelines and policies that
        address this demand for the community’s existing and future needs for public utilities and
        infrastructure. Infrastructure services discussed in this Element include water, sewer, and
        storm drain systems, and solid waste services. The Element also addresses “dry” utilities such
        as natural gas, electrical, telephone, data, and cable television services. Further, the Element
        discusses lifeline infrastructures, which connect Orange to outside services during an
        emergency.
        Availability of infrastructure determines growth patterns, density, and intensity of land use.
        Roadways are a critical part of the City’s infrastructure system, providing for the movement
        of goods and services that support the local economy. The City maintains the local roadway
        system and supports efforts of the County, the California Department of Transportation
        (Caltrans), and the Transportation Corridor Agencies (TCA) to maintain regional roadways
        serving the City. The Circulation & Mobility Element provides policies and plans for future
        maintenance and enhancement of the roadway circulation system. Infrastructure also
        provides water and roadways that support emergency fire, police, and medical response. The
        Public Safety Element provides policies and plans addressing these topics.
        Water, and access to water, has always been integral to the development of Orange. It is not
        by accident that the City is located at the intersection of the Santa Ana River and Santiago
        Creek. The City was incorporated in 1888 and the water system was privately owned until
        1904, when it was purchased by the City. At that time, the domestic water supply came
        exclusively from wells or canals leading from the Santa Ana River. The water was used to
        irrigate the surrounding citrus groves and various agricultural crops.
        After World War II, growing residential, commercial, and industrial development forced the
        City to look elsewhere for an adequate water supply. In 1951, the City joined with five other
        water agencies to form the Municipal Water District of Orange County (MWDOC), which led
        to annexation to the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (Metropolitan). The
        first pipeline of imported water was activated in 1954.
        The City’s Water Division, a part of the Department of Public Works (DPW), is responsible for
        providing clean, safe water to the City of Orange and for designing and constructing the
        system that supplies City residents and businesses with water. The City is a member agency
        of MWDOC, which in turn is a member agency of Metropolitan. This entitles the City to
                                          ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 INF-1
REV. GPA NO. 2014-0001 (12/2015)

INFRASTRUCTURE
     receive water from available Metropolitan sources. The City has a number of service
     connection agreements with MWDOC whereby MWDOC will deliver water to the City as it
     receives water from Metropolitan in the amount requested by the City, subject to
     Metropolitan water availability.
     To meet its infrastructure needs, the Water Division collaborates with other jurisdictions,
     agencies, and service providers, including MWDOC, Metropolitan, Orange County Water
     District, Irvine Ranch Water District, Golden State Water Company, Serrano Water District,
     and East Orange County Water District. Water delivery requires a large number of sources
     and substantial coordination between agencies. The Lower Santa Ana River groundwater
     basin provides the main source of water for Orange, and is maintained by the Orange County
     Water District.
     The Infrastructure Element also addresses wastewater systems. Cities throughout Orange
     County, including the City of Orange, rely on the Orange County Sanitation District (OCSD)
     for the regional collection and treatment of domestic, commercial, and industrial sewage.
     Although OCSD operates a comprehensive regional system of collection mains and treatment
     plants, individual cities are responsible for installing and maintaining local collection facilities.
     The City also collaborates with other agencies in the development and maintenance of
     infrastructure facilities, including working with the Public Works Department of the County
     of Orange to maintain the Santa Ana River, Santiago Creek, and other flood control facilities
     not owned by the City.
     The City’s DPW collaborates with private contractors for some services, such as the collection
     of solid waste, recyclable, and green waste materials and the disposal of household
     hazardous waste. “Dry” utilities, such as natural gas, telephone and data services, electricity,
     and cable television are serviced by contracted private agencies, including Southern
     California Edison Company, Southern California Gas Company, AT&T, Time Warner Cable and
     Cox Communications Orange County.
     Orange’s Vision for the Future, described in the General Plan Introduction, recognizes the
     City’s infrastructure as a key component, and includes the following objectives:
        Orange recognizes the importance of managing development in a manner that ensures
         adequate and timely public services and infrastructure and limits impacts on the natural
         environment.
        We will continue to protect our critical watersheds, such as Santiago Creek, and other
         significant natural and open space resources.
Purpose of the Infrastructure Element
     Although the State does not require preparation of an Infrastructure Element, the City places
     high importance on its ability to meet infrastructure demands. The Infrastructure Element
     identifies and assesses existing and future needs of the City’s growing population and of
     future proposed development within Orange. The intent of the Infrastructure Element is to
     consider the various infrastructure resources provided by public agencies and private
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               INF-2

                                                                                INFRASTRUCTURE
    purveyors, and to provide guidelines for current and future development to best utilize and
    improve infrastructure.
Scope and Content of the Infrastructure Element
    The Infrastructure Element is comprised of three sections:
    1) Introduction;
    2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and
    3) Infrastructure Plan.
    The Issues, Goals, and Policies section provides guidance for the City to address current and
    future infrastructure needs of the community. The goals express general and broad
    statements describing the community’s desires regarding infrastructure. The policies provide
    guidelines for local agencies to provide efficient, affordable, and adequate infrastructure to
    serve Orange. The Plan explains how the goals and policies will be achieved and
    implemented.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
    Proposed infrastructure goals, policies and plans must be consistent with all other elements
    of the General Plan. The issues addressed in the Infrastructure Element relate most closely to
    the contents of the Land Use, Growth Management, and Housing Elements.
    The Land Use Element directs the location of current and future development that relies on
    available infrastructure. Furthermore, the Land Use Element establishes standards for use
    intensity, population density, and types of land uses that influence the design, layout, and
    funding sources for infrastructure.
    The Growth Management Element contains policies to ensure that growth is accompanied by
    needed capital facilities to properly address infrastructure needs concurrently with
    development. Growth Management Element policies ensure that new growth is managed in
    a way that does not overwhelm current infrastructure, or diminish the level and quality of
    services provided to current residents. The growth patterns and level of growth included in
    the Growth Management Element must be consistent with those of the Infrastructure
    Element. Similarly, the Housing Element relies on available infrastructure to guide new
    housing to suitable sites.
ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
    The goals and policies of the Infrastructure Element address five key issues: (1) maintenance
    of the City’s aging water, sewer, and storm drain infrastructure in the face of increased
    growth pressures; (2) provision of high-quality solid waste collection services and
    encouragement of recycling; (3) maintenance of right-of-way areas; (4) provision of
    adequate electricity, natural gas, telephone and data services, and other “dry” utilities; and
    (5) protection of lifeline infrastructure systems that meet the public health and safety needs
    of the City.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              INF-3

INFRASTRUCTURE
Water, Sewer, and Storm Drain Systems
     Protection and proper management of the storm drain infrastructure system is essential to
     prevent pollution of rivers, lakes, and the ocean by contaminants from urban runoff. A
     detailed discussion of water resource issues is provided in the Natural Resources Element.
     Infrastructure (including sewer, storm drain, and water lines, and solid waste collection and
     disposal services) must be sufficient to accommodate the present and future needs of the
     community. As infrastructure ages, or growth outpaces capacity, isolated failures represent a
     real problem. One of the most critical issues facing the City is how to improve and maintain
     infrastructure to protect water quality and supplies, ensuring that residents fully enjoy the
     health, economic, and social benefits that sound infrastructure systems provide.
     GOAL 1.0:       Ensure water, sewer, and storm drain systems that meet the needs of
                     residents and businesses.
     Policy 1.1:     Provide sufficient levels of water, sewer, and storm drain service throughout
                     the community.
     Policy 1.2:     Correct known deficiencies in the City’s sewer, storm drain, and water
                     systems and work toward environmentally sustainable systems.
     Policy 1.3:     Promote water conservation programs aimed at reducing demands.
     Policy 1.4:     Explore environmentally efficient infrastructure improvements such as the
                     use of reclaimed water, maximizing percolation, and similar technologies.
     Policy 1.5:     Investigate and carry out cost-effective methods to reduce storm water
                     infiltration into the sewer system.
     Policy 1.6:     Require that new developments fund fair-share costs associated with City
                     provision of water, sewer, and storm drain service and are consistent with
                     City and service provider plans to complete needed improvements and
                     funding capacity for such improvements.
Solid Waste
     Nearly everything we do leaves behind some kind of waste. Households create ordinary
     garbage, industrial and manufacturing processes create solid and hazardous waste, and
     construction activities create large chunks of debris and inorganic materials.
     Orange contracts with a private sector provider to collect solid waste, green waste, and
     recyclables. By actively recycling, reducing, and reusing waste, residents and businesses
     reduce the need for new landfills and incinerators, prevent the emission of many greenhouse
     gases and water pollutants, supply valuable raw materials to industry, and conserve land and
     natural resources.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              INF-4

                                                                                INFRASTRUCTURE
    GOAL 2.0:       Reduce the amount of waste material entering regional landfills with an
                    efficient and innovative waste management program.
    Policy 2.1:     Provide sufficient levels of solid waste service throughout the community.
    Policy 2.2:     Expand outreach and education regarding recycling opportunities to all City
                    customers.
    Policy 2.3:     Develop programs that encourage residents to donate or recycle surplus
                    furniture, old electronics, clothing, and other household items rather than
                    disposing of such materials in landfills.
    Policy 2.4:     Expand outreach and education to all City customers regarding residential
                    collection of household hazardous wastes including paint containers,
                    electronics, household chemicals, motor oils, and pesticides.
Public Rights-of-Way
    Maintaining safe, clean rights-of-way is important for promoting circulation and the public
    health and safety of Orange’s residents. Through the DPW, the City provides street
    sweeping, tree trimming, graffiti removal, and installation and maintenance of street lights
    on public rights-of-way. The DPW also provides maintenance of and repair services for all
    public rights-of-way, including roadways, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property within
    Orange.
    GOAL 3.0:       Ensure adequate maintenance of public rights-of-way to enhance public
                    safety and improve circulation.
    Policy 3.1:     Continue to maintain and repair sidewalks and pavement surfaces on public
                    rights-of-way.
    Policy 3.2:     Provide sufficient levels of street sweeping, landscaping, graffiti abatement,
                    shopping cart and bulk item removal from streets, sidewalks alleys, and other
                    public rights-of-way.
    Policy 3.3:     Continue to design, install, and maintain signals, signage, street lights, and
                    traffic control devices within rights-of-way.
    Policy 3.4:     Investigate the feasibility of using energy-efficient street lights to conserve
                    energy.
    Policy 3.5:     Preserve and improve existing on-street bike paths within rights-of-way.
    Policy 3.6:     Require that new developments fund fair-share costs associated with City
                    provision of right-of-way maintenance services and are consistent with City
                    and service provider plans to complete needed improvements and funding
                    capacity for such improvements.
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             INF-5

INFRASTRUCTURE
Dry Utilities
     Dry utility services, such as electricity, natural gas, telephone and data services, and cable
     television both meet basic needs and enhance quality of life for Orange residents. These
     services are provided by independent entities that set their own service standards and facility
     improvement strategies. Demand for services and ability to serve new developments are
     generally determined on a case-by-case basis. The City works with service providers to ensure
     that City goals and service expectations are met for both current and future development.
     GOAL 4.0:        Ensure adequate provision of electricity, natural gas, telephone and data
                      services and cable television.
     Policy 4.1:      Continue to work with dry utility service providers to ensure that the
                      community’s current and future needs are met.
     Policy 4.2:      Continue to require utilities to be placed underground for new development.
     Policy 4.3:      Promote the use of new and emerging communication technologies.
     Policy 4.4:      Encourage integrated and cost-effective design and technology features
                      within new development to minimize demands on dry utility networks.
Lifeline Infrastructure
     Lifeline infrastructures, such as electric, water, gas, and telecommunications utilities and
     transportation systems, connect Orange to outside services during an emergency.
     Maintaining and protecting the City’s lifeline infrastructure systems against damage from
     disasters is essential to ensuring the public health and safety of residents. Loss of electric,
     water, gas, and telecommunications services and transportation systems can not only
     severely impair police and fire agencies’ efforts to respond to emergencies, it can also
     displace residents and economically impact businesses. The City works with regional agencies
     and utility service providers to ensure the system of lifeline infrastructures is maintained and
     retrofitted against disaster and against deterioration from increasing demands and long-term
     use.
     GOAL 5.0:        Ensure lifeline infrastructure systems that meet the City’s public health and
                      safety needs.
     Policy 5.1:      Continue to work with regional and federal agencies to ensure that
                      infrastructure for transportation systems, water, gas, electricity, and
                      telecommunications meet regional emergency preparedness standards.
     Policy 5.2:      Work with utility service providers to create resiliency performance standards
                      for water, gas, electricity, and telecommunications infrastructure.
     Policy 5.3:      Identify engineering vulnerabilities in lifeline utilities exposed to human-
                      caused and natural hazards, including seismic activity, wildland fire, and
                      flooding.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                INF-6

                                                                                    INFRASTRUCTURE
    Policy 5.4:       Incorporate disaster mitigation strategies into the City’s infrastructure master
                      plans for retrofitting water, gas, electricity, telecommunications utilities, and
                      transportation infrastructure.
    Policy 5.5:       Review and limit the location and intensity of development and placement of
                      lifeline infrastructure in identified earthquake fault zones.
INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN
    The Infrastructure Plan documents current infrastructure conditions in the City, and assesses
    the projected future capacity of the infrastructure system. This includes the water systems,
    wastewater systems, storm drain systems, public rights-of-way, such dry utilities as
    electricity, gas service, and telephone and cable facilities, and lifeline infrastructure.
Water, Sewer and Storm Drain Systems
    Orange’s water, sewer, storm drain and solid waste management systems represent the
    City’s hidden support network. Managing infrastructure can be a challenge because these
    services are often taken for granted. They are "forgotten" services in the sense that in
    Orange, when we turn on the faucet, direct our downspouts and yard drains away from the
    house, or place garbage out at the curb, it seems that clean water simply appears, rainwater
    drains, and garbage is taken away. These systems must be maintained to ensure that our
    infrastructure systems will not fail and public facilities will be available when we need them.
    The City’s role and preferred future strategies for providing these services are outlined in
    infrastructure master plan documents prepared by the City and updated on an ongoing basis.
    These master plans provide detailed descriptions of each infrastructure system and prioritize
    future system improvements in response to projected future growth.
    The General Plan defers to the City’s infrastructure master plans to establish service
    standards, prioritize future system improvements, and secure financing for needed
    improvements. Goals and policies of this Element focus on broad strategies to guide future
    infrastructure development. Each of the master plans will be updated in future years to be
    consistent with the policies and growth projections established in this General Plan.
    Water Systems
    The City’s water supply comes from several sources: local groundwater basins, Northern
    California waters via the State Water Project, the Colorado River, local watersheds,
    reclamation, and water reuse projects. The City is a member agency of MWDOC, and MWDOC
    is a member agency of Metropolitan. Metropolitan supplies imported water to six Southern
    California counties, including Orange County. As a Metropolitan member, MWDOC
    represents the interests of its 29 member-agencies at the Metropolitan Water District of
    Southern California.
    The City of Orange is also a member of the Orange County Water District (OCWD). OCWD’s
    primary responsibility is managing the vast groundwater basin under north and central
    Orange County. The Orange County Groundwater Basin is the main source of water supply
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 INF-7

INFRASTRUCTURE
     for the City. The City obtains approximately 64 to 75 percent of its water from City-owned
     wells. The City purchases approximately 25 to 36 percent from Metropolitan through the
     MWDOC. In addition, the City purchases approximately 3 to 5 percent from the Serrano
     Water District. The OCWD, along with MWDOC and Metropolitan, carry out long-term water
     management planning, and provide public awareness, education, and water conservation
     activities on behalf of their member agencies. The following four water districts serve the
     City of Orange:
        Irvine Ranch Water District
        Golden State Water Company
        Serrano Water District
        East Orange County Water District (EOCWD)
     Figure INF-1 shows the location of each District’s service area within Orange’s planning area.
     The Orange County Groundwater Basin is actively managed by OCWD and has a history of
     supporting between 64 percent and 75 percent of the City’s water demand. The basin’s
     management plan allows for drawdown during dry periods and for replenishment during
     normal or wet periods. The City does not anticipate current, short-term, or long term supply
     deficiencies in its ability to pump groundwater into the water system. The greatest challenge
     for water supply in the near future will be to meet the water needs of a growing population,
     particularly with projected population growth in not only the focus areas identified in the
     Land Use Element, but also in east Orange.
     The City of Orange completed an Urban Water Management Plan Update in 2010. In order to
     improve the reliability and efficiency of the ground water producing facilities and ultimately
     the water supply system, the City plans to replace older wells with more efficient wells. The
     new wells will provide the City with increased pumping capacity, though the amount of
     water produced from the wells will continue to be regulated by the Basin Production
     Percentage as set by OCWD in April of each year. The City will continue to analyze storage
     capacity needs and add additional storage as recommended in the Water Master Plan. The
     City will continue to implement the Water Master Plan and the Urban Water Management
     Plan and will update each Plan on an ongoing basis throughout the planning horizon of this
     General Plan.
     In Orange, runoff from local rainfall is the main source of recharge for the smaller basins, and
     accounts for some of the recharge of the groundwater basin. The amount of runoff recharge
     can only be estimated because it is highly variable. Most of the recharge of the basin is from
     Santa Ana River flows percolated instream or diverted to off-stream spreading basins
     operated by OCWD. OCWD will continue to develop new replenishment methods and
     supplies, as well as improve recharge capacity and implement basin protection programs to
     meet the projected demand from the basin during both normal and drought periods.
     Sewer Systems
     The City of Orange owns the local collection systems which feed regional trunk lines owned
     by OCSD. OCSD is responsible for the treatment of residential, commercial and industrial
     sewage in Orange. Collected effluent is treated at Reclamation Plant No. 1 in Fountain Valley
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               INF-8

Rev. 12/8/15 (GPA 2014-0001) INF-
INFRASTRUCTURE
               (This Page Left Intentionally Blank)
                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                              INF-10
                                                                             INFRASTRUCTURE
or Treatment Plant No. 2 in Huntington Beach. Though OCSD operates the regional collection
mains and treatment plants, the City’s DPW is in charge of the daily operation and
maintenance of the local sewer collection system owned by the City.
To respond to the increased need for sewage treatment in Orange County, OCSD needs to
replace aging regional collection and treatment infrastructure and build additional secondary
treatment facilities. A portion of the sewage fee charged to developers in the City of Orange
will be paid to the OCSD for improvements of regional facilities, which are currently strained
by the County’s rapidly growing population. A Capital Facilities Capacity Charge, designed to
fund improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness of OCSD operations, is applied to
cities and developers for new residential, commercial, or industrial development and/or
expansion of existing facilities.
The City of Orange completed a Sewer Master Plan Update in 2003. In order to improve the
reliability and efficiency of the sewer system, the City plans to replace older sewer lines. The
new lines will maintain, and in some cases increase, the City’s sewer line capacity, and
provide adequate sewer collection for the future. The City has designated a 100-year life cycle
for its sewer pipes, and hopes to replace systems that are nearly 100 years old. The City will
continue to implement the Sewer Master Plan and will update the plan on an ongoing basis
throughout the planning horizon of this General Plan.
Storm Drain Systems
Important issues to focus on regarding storm drains include ensuring adequate capacity
necessary to collect and carry stormwater to avoid flooding, and reducing pollutant loads in
stormwater as part of regional efforts to improve water quality in surface waters.
Both the City and the County are responsible for managing the storm drain and flood control
facilities in the City. The County of Orange Public Works Department provides for the
planning, development, operation and maintenance of major flood control facilities on behalf
of the Orange County Flood Control District on a County-wide basis. The City provides
drainage for developments and ensures that storm drains properly feed into the regional
drainage system. The City is also responsible for the operation and maintenance of
stormwater facilities it owns throughout Orange. In addition, the City is served by several
existing stormwater facilities that are operated by other jurisdictions. The Santa Ana River,
which generally marks the western boundary of the City, is the location of the largest
regional facility in Orange County, maintained by the County of Orange Public Works
Department. Twelve flood control channels located throughout the City are maintained by
the County of Orange Public Works Department on behalf of the Orange County Flood
Control District and County of Orange. Within the City, DPW is responsible for developing and
implementing the Master Plan of Drainage (MPD) which identifies the City’s storm drain
facilities and deficiencies.
The City of Orange last completed an update to the MPD in 1997. The biggest challenge
facing the storm drain system in the future will occur as hillsides in relatively undeveloped
east Orange are developed, causing storm water volumes to increase. As it is, existing
development has led to current deficiencies in the drainage system. For this reason, a fair
share allocation method has been devised to spread the entire cost of the system across the
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                         INF-11

INFRASTRUCTURE
     future development area. The City will continue to implement the MPD and will update it on
     an ongoing basis throughout the planning horizon of this General Plan.
Solid Waste
     Within the City, solid waste collection is contracted to a private service provider. The City’s
     contractor collects both solid and green waste (grass clippings, tree and shrub clippings),
     and items for recycling. Most waste is taken to one of the three landfills in Orange County:
     Olinda Alpha in Brea, the Frank R. Bowerman Landfill in Irvine, and the Prima Deshecha
     Landfill in San Juan Capistrano. The Orange County Integrated Waste Management
     Department (IWMD) owns and operates the landfills.
     The amount of hazardous household waste has increased in recent years with the
     widespread use of new technologies. Orange residents are responsible for disposing of
     hazardous household materials at any of the four Household Hazardous Waste Collection
     Centers in Orange County. As the definition of household hazardous waste continues to
     evolve as a result of rapidly changing technology, the City will endeavor to provide
     convenient opportunities for the proper disposal of such waste.
     The City’s Solid Waste and Industrial Waste Ordinances regulate where solid and liquid
     wastes (including hazardous and industrial wastes) may and may not be deposited or
     discharged. Orange operates a curbside recycling program, and the City encourages
     residents and businesses to reduce the amount of solid wastes that enter the regional
     landfills.
Public Rights-of-Way
     The maintenance of public rights-of-way affects circulation, public safety, and pedestrian
     walkability. Broken sidewalks impede pedestrian mobility and deny access for disabled users.
     Uneven surface pavement slows vehicular mobility. Untended trees and shrubs can cause
     branches and tree limbs to fall onto the public right-of-way, potentially causing accidents and
     impairing nighttime visibility for pedestrians. Future maintenance of right-of-way
     infrastructure is closely tied to the City’s projected mobility needs as discussed in the
     Circulation & Mobility Element. The City coordinates with the County through the Orange
     County Transportation Authority (OCTA) to accomplish its circulation and roadway
     infrastructure maintenance goals, and the City assumes responsibility for maintenance
     services of public rights-of-way within Orange.
     Through DPW, the City maintains all public rights-of-way, including streets, sidewalks, alleys,
     and on-street bicycle lanes. DPW installs street lights, provides tree trimming and street
     sweeping services, and responds to graffiti abatement requests. The Street Division
     maintains and repairs roadways and sidewalks, and performs weekly street sweeping
     services. The Traffic Engineering Division responds to street light repair requests, in addition
     to conducting weekly street light checks to identify and repair broken and malfunctioning
     street lights. DPW also responds to graffiti and tagging removal requests on public property,
     including public rights-of-way, and on private property adjacent to public rights-of-way. This
     department is also responsible for providing such landscaping services as tree trimming to
     prevent and minimize debris and obstacles within rights-of-way. DPW follows the adopted
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             INF-12

                                                                                  INFRASTRUCTURE
    Street Tree Master Plan that details City-approved species and sets the maintenance
    schedule and appropriate size of street trees. Through these services, the City will continue
    to ensure that public rights-of-way are safe, clean, and well maintained to provide improved
    mobility within Orange.
Dry Utilities
    Dry utilities, such as electricity, natural gas, telephone, and cable enhance quality of life for
    Orange residents. These services are provided by independent entities that set their own
    service standards and facility improvement strategies. The City works with service providers
    to ensure that City goals and service expectations are met for both current and future
    development.
    Electricity
    Southern California Edison (SCE), an independently owned utility, provides electrical power
    service to the Orange planning area. SCE distributes electricity purchased through the
    California Power Exchange, which is the electricity marketplace for about 80 percent of
    California’s electricity customers. The California Independent System Operator coordinates
    the scheduling and dispatch of electricity bought and sold through the power exchange,
    which is essentially a statewide grid of electricity generation and distribution.
    The rate of electricity consumption, generally referred to as demand or load, is what power
    grid operators are most concerned with when deciding whether electricity generation and
    transmission resources are adequate to serve consumers. Peak electricity demand is a
    measure of the largest electricity usage rate during the day, measured in megawatts. A single
    megawatt is generally enough power to meet the expected electricity needs of 1,000 typical
    California homes. Orange’s peak demand typically occurs in August between 3 p.m. and 5
    p.m. High temperatures during the summer months lead to increased use of air conditioning,
    which, in combination with industrial loads, commercial lighting, office equipment, and
    residential refrigeration, compose the major consumers of electricity during the peak
    demand period. Because electricity is not a storable commodity, the ability of electricity-
    generating and transmitting resources to provide electricity becomes an issue of the
    generation rate instead of total amount that may be consumed within a given time period.
    Recent summertime energy crises are an indication that peak energy demand will be an
    important future planning issue, particularly in Southern California. In order to meet future
    energy needs, SCE has developed several energy-efficiency programs for residential, non-
    residential, new construction, and low-income subscribers. These include rebate and cash
    incentive programs for completion of energy-efficiency projects in residences and
    businesses, providing energy-efficient solutions for new developments as well as programs
    that aid low-income customers to purchase energy-efficient refrigerators and outdoor
    lighting. SCE will continue to promote the resourceful use of energy, and in turn, a reduction
    in electricity bills. The City will fully support these strategies by SCE to encourage energy
    conservation, including adoption of a green building program. Refer to the Natural
    Resources Element for policies and discussion concerning green building techniques and
    other related energy conservation measures.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               INF-13

INFRASTRUCTURE
     Natural Gas
     California’s gas supply is regionally diverse and includes supplies from both onshore and
     offshore sources, including the southwestern United States, the Rocky Mountains, and
     Canada. Gas pipelines serving the Orange planning area include the El Paso Natural Gas
     Company, Kern River Transmission Company, and Pacific Gas and Electric Company facilities.
     The Southern California Gas Company (The Gas Company) supplies natural gas to both
     businesses and residents within the Orange planning area. The Gas Company is a division of
     Sempra Energy, and is the largest natural gas utility in the nation.
     Southern California relies on a consistent supply of natural gas to meet residential, business,
     and industrial energy demand. Natural gas is also needed to produce electricity. Projected
     population growth in the region is expected to increase demand for natural gas. The Gas
     Company participates in the California Energy Star® New Homes Program, a performance-
     based program that provides builders with incentives for developments that use at least 15
     percent less energy than standards set forth in the 2001 California Energy Efficiency
     Standards. The City will continue to support The Gas Company in these and other efforts to
     improve energy efficiency.
     Telephone
     The Orange planning area is within the service area of AT&T. AT&T has existing telephone
     facilities within or adjacent to each of the land use focus areas described in the Land Use
     Element, and fiber optic lines in Santiago Canyon Road and Jamboree Road to help serve
     future development in east Orange. The City will continue to work with AT&T and other
     telephone service providers to ensure high quality telephone and data services are provided
     to current and future residents.
     A variety of wireless service providers offer telephone and internet service within the City,
     and operate an established and growing network of wireless facilities. The City will continue
     to work with wireless providers to ensure provision of a high quality system while minimizing
     impacts of wireless facilities on the character of established areas.
     Cable Services
     The Orange planning area is within the service area of Time Warner Cable and Cox
     Communications Orange County (Cox). Time Warner is the major cable provider in the City.
     Cox serves portions of east Orange. Both Time Warner Cable and Cox are full-service
     providers of telecommunication products, including digital television programming, local and
     long-distance telephone services, high-speed Internet, and commercial voice and data
     services. The City will continue to work with Time Warner, Cox, and other service providers to
     ensure that high quality television and data services are provided to current and future
     residents.
Lifeline Infrastructure
     Roadway systems and water, gas, electrical, and telecommunications services, make up the
     City’s system of lifeline infrastructure. These utilities provide critical services to the
     community, and disruption or loss of service can create delays for police and fire agencies in
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              INF-14

                                                                                   INFRASTRUCTURE
    responding to emergencies, place residents at risk of harm, and hurt the regional economy.
    Seismic activity, flooding, and wildland fire are particular risks for the City’s lifeline
    infrastructure. Ground shaking, amplification, landslides, and liquefaction from seismic
    activity can cause water and gas pipes to break, dams to fail, and power lines to come down.
    Disruption of telephone and radio service impedes communication and dissemination of
    critical information, and road closures can create delays in providing supplies or services after
    an emergency. A detailed discussion of the City’s risk for natural hazards and plans for
    emergency response is presented in the Public Safety Element.
    As part of its efforts to prevent, mitigate, and plan for hazards, Orange works with regional
    agencies to prepare infrastructure mitigation plans. In accordance with the Disaster
    Mitigation Act of 2000, which establishes state and local government infrastructure
    mitigation planning requirements for federal damage assistance, Orange coordinates with
    regional public agencies and private utility service providers to prepare hazard mitigation
    plans and ensure proper maintenance and retrofitting of lifeline infrastructures. The City
    participates in the Orange County Hazard Mitigation Task Force, which is responsible for
    preparing a countywide Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP). The HMP identifies and profiles
    hazard risks, assesses vulnerabilities in countywide infrastructure, and analyzes development
    trends to identify future maintenance needs of critical infrastructure and services. The City
    also works with MWDOC in its planning and implementation of the Regional Water and
    Wastewater Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan, which formulates mitigation plans for regional
    water facilities in the County, including those found within the City.
    In addition to preparing for and implementing rapid repair plans to go into effect after an
    emergency, the City addresses non-emergency threats to lifeline infrastructure. Changes
    over time can cause vulnerabilities to lifelines. The City of Orange prepares a municipal
    Emergency Operations Plan in coordination with the City’s infrastructure master plans to
    establish service standards, prioritize future system improvements, and secure financing for
    needed improvements for infrastructure. DPW provides maintenance and repairs for
    roadway facilities, sewer and storm drain systems, and water systems including wells,
    pumps, water lines and reservoirs. Private dry utility service providers are responsible for
    following state and federal safety guidelines and for maintaining and repairing dry utilities
    during an emergency. The City will continue to work with regional planning agencies and
    private utility service providers to ensure that lifeline infrastructure systems meet the highest
    public health and safety standards for hazard prevention and mitigation.
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPLEMENTATION
    The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of
    City plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing
    collaboration with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation
    measures for this Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                             INF-15

                                              PUBLIC SAFETY
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
     Maintaining a safe living environment is one of the most important challenges cities face. Orange
     prides itself on being a safe community with high quality emergency services and a high level of
     emergency preparedness. The Public Safety Element offers possible solutions for proactively
     addressing threats including natural and human-caused hazards, crime, and homeland security.
     Future land use decisions must be considered in the context of natural hazards, such as
     earthquakes and floods. These decisions must also consider provision of public services, such as
     police, fire, and emergency medical services.
     Orange’s Vision for the Future, presented in the General Plan Introduction, introduces a variety of
     objectives describing the desired quality of life of Orange residents in the future, including the
     following:
         Orange recognizes the importance of managing development in a manner that ensures
          adequate and timely public services and infrastructure and limits impacts on the natural
          environment.
         The City will work to improve the quality of life for all residents by providing residential,
          commercial, industrial, and public uses that exist in harmony with the surrounding urban and
          natural environments.
     Sustaining and continuing to improve community safety is one of the City’s most important
     challenges. By implementing the Public Safety Element, the City will provide timely emergency
     service delivery and focus on expanding such services throughout the community. Through
     implementation of these policies, the City can also continue to prepare residents and businesses
     for disasters and plan for development of a safer community while likely increases in traffic
     congestion, population growth, and ever-changing needs within the community continue to
     stretch the use of limited resources.
Purpose of the Public Safety Element
     The State General Plan Guidelines direct cities to incorporate a number of required elements into
     their general plans, including Safety. Orange’s Public Safety Element addresses such issues as
     geologic and seismic activity, flood hazards, fire, hazardous materials, and aircraft operations.
     Other public safety issues include interjurisdictional cooperation, homeland security, urban design
     as a crime prevention tool, and issues related to Orange’s hillsides and waterways.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 PS-1

PUBLIC SAFETY
Scope and Content of the Public Safety Element
      The Public Safety Element is comprised of three sections:
      (1) Introduction;
      (2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and
      (3) Public Safety Plan.
      The Introduction defines the purpose, scope, and content of the Public Safety element, and its
      relationship to other General Plan Elements. The Issues, Goals, and Policies section describes the
      community’s desire to address the most relevant public safety issues affecting the City. The Public
      Safety Plan provides hazard maps, and establishes standards and requirements to achieve goals
      and implement policies. Detailed implementation programs for the Public Safety Element are listed
      in an Appendix to the General Plan.
Public Safety Considerations
      State law requires that the General Plan address the following public safety concerns.
      Natural Environmental Hazards
          Earthquakes and their related effects (surface rupture, liquefaction, ground shaking)
          Landslides, mudslides, rock falls, and soil creep
          Flooding due to excessive storm runoff or dam failure
          Wildland fires
      Human-Caused Hazards Affecting Land Use Policy
          Hazardous materials
          Urban fires
          Crime
          Homeland Security
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
      Accomplishing the goals and policies of the Public Safety Element requires coordination with other
      related components of the City’s General Plan. Other topics that are affected by the Public Safety
      Element include the Land Use, Circulation & Mobility, Infrastructure, Urban Design, Housing, and
      Natural Resources Elements.
      Impacts of Public Safety policies and programs on the Land Use Element arise during identification
      of areas prone to natural hazards. For example, proposed land uses must comply with the land use
      compatibility standards contained in this element. Recommendations for evacuation and
      emergency access routes in the Public Safety Element affect the Circulation & Mobility Element. In
      turn, traffic calming goals and policies within the Circulation & Mobility Element have implications
      for emergency response. The Infrastructure Element addresses the maintenance of lifeline utility
      infrastructures, such as flood control facilities, that ensure protection from natural disasters.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   PS-2

                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
      Streetscape improvements recommended in the Urban Design Element, including the addition of
      landscaped medians at some locations, may also affect emergency response, but could reduce the
      number of accidents along certain arterials. The Public Safety Element provides policies to support
      housing and neighborhood safety, which contribute to the success of policies in the Housing
      Element to provide adequate housing. The Natural Resources Element is also linked to Public
      Safety, because open space zones and allowable uses are often affected by the location of the
      boundaries of hazard prone zones. For example, areas prone to liquefaction hazards are often
      coincident with riparian streams and surrounding areas preserved as open space.
ISSUES, GOALS AND POLICIES
      The goals, policies, and implementation programs of the Public Safety Element address nine issues
      identified as important to the City: (1) protecting citizens from seismic hazards and other geologic
      constraints; (2) protecting the City from flood-related risks and hazards; (3) protecting the lives
      and property of Orange residents and businesses from urban and wildland fire hazards; (4)
      minimizing risks to life, property, and the environment associated with producing, using, storing,
      or transporting hazardous materials; (5) reducing safety hazards associated with civilian, military,
      and medical air traffic; (6) providing public safety services of the highest quality; (7) improving
      community safety and reducing opportunities for criminal activity; (8) emphasizing emergency
      preparedness both within City Hall and throughout the community; and (9) providing safe
      pedestrian and bicycle environments.
Geologic and Seismic Hazards
      The most significant environmental hazards that may affect land use in Orange are seismic and
      geologic hazards. Earthquakes and their related effects have the greatest potential to affect a large
      portion of the population. Other geologic hazards such as landslides and ground subsidence could
      have more localized effects. The combination of sound planning practices and continued public
      education will minimize risks to the community from seismic and geologic hazards, and will
      protect the health, safety, and welfare of Orange residents.
      GOAL 1.0:        Protect residents and businesses from seismic hazards and other geologic
                       constraints.
      Policy 1.1:      Minimize the potential loss of life and damage to structures that may result from
                       an earthquake.
      Policy 1.2:      Educate and train individuals and neighborhoods how to respond to emergency
                       situations.
      Policy 1.3:      Participate in federal, state, and local earthquake preparedness and emergency
                       response programs.
Flood Hazards
      Portions of Orange are susceptible to flood events from either a major storm or a dam failure
      resulting from a significant earthquake. Dams are present along Santiago Creek at two locations:
      Villa Park Dam and Santiago Dam (Irvine Lake). Both are located in the foothills of east Orange.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  PS-3
PUBLIC SAFETY
      Peters Canyon Dam is located within Peters Canyon about two miles west of Irvine Lake. Unlike
      Santiago Creek, which flows generally northwest, Peters Canyon drains to the south in this area.
      Prado Dam is located approximately seven miles northeast of the eastern portions of the planning
      area in Corona. Areas below (downstream from) these dams, including large areas within the City
      of Orange, have high potential for inundation in the unlikely event of catastrophic dam failure
      (maps showing dam inundation areas are available for public review at the Community
      Development Department). These dams and their reservoirs prevent periodic flooding that would
      be expected to occur in a natural setting. Recognizing and preparing for floods allows the
      community to avoid associated dangers.
      GOAL 2.0:         Protect the City from flood-related risks and hazards.
      Policy 2.1:       Cooperate and work with the Orange County Flood Control District to ensure
                        District flood control facilities are well maintained and capable of accommodating,
                        at a minimum, 100-year storm flows.
      Policy 2.2:       Protect critical public and private facilities located within areas subject to flooding
                        and dam inundation.
      Policy 2.3:       Evaluate and monitor water storage facilities to determine which facilities might
                        pose an inundation hazard to downstream properties.
      Policy 2.4:       Employ strategies and design features that will reduce the amount of impervious
                        surface (i.e. paved area) within new development projects.
Fire Hazards
      Fire and its destructive potential are safety concerns within both the urban areas of the City and
      the undeveloped hillsides. Wildland fires are most problematic along the developed residential
      fringes of the hillsides, known as the wildland-urban interface. On a seasonal basis, dry
      vegetation, little seasonal rain, and Santa Ana wind conditions combine to increase wildfire
      potential. New development, particularly in the eastern portion of Orange, will result in increased
      fire hazards due to higher levels of interface between residential development and open grassland
      and vegetation along hillsides. Keeping neighborhoods buffered from both urban and wildland fire
      hazards reduces incidents requiring response, and minimizes damage to property when fires do
      occur. In addition, urban fire hazards are a continuing concern in the City’s industrial areas.
      GOAL 3.0:         Protect lives and property of Orange residents and businesses from urban and
                        wildland fire hazards.
      Policy 3.1:       Continue to identify and evaluate new potential fire hazards and fire hazard areas.
      Policy 3.2:       Consider non-traditional methods of controlling vegetation in undeveloped areas.
      Policy 3.3:       Require planting and maintenance of fire-resistant slope cover to reduce the risk
                        of brush fires within the wildland-urban interface areas located in the northern
                        and eastern portions of the City and in areas adjacent to canyons, and develop
                        and implement stringent site design and maintenance standards for all areas with
                        high wild land fire potential. To the extent possible, native, non-invasive plant
                        materials are encouraged.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                     PS-4

                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
      Policy 3.4:      Provide adequate fire equipment access and fire suppression resources to all
                       developed and open space areas.
      Policy 3.5:      Establish and maintain optimal emergency response times for fire safety. Require
                       new development to ensure that City response times and service standards are
                       maintained.
      Policy 3.6:      Educate the public regarding fire safety.
      Policy 3.7:      Continue to adopt and honor agreements with adjacent communities for mutual
                       aid assistance.
      Policy 3.8:      Ensure that the Fire Department has sufficient capacity, stations, personnel, and
                       equipment to meet growth needs in the City for fire protection and related
                       emergency services.
Hazardous Materials and Human-Caused Hazards
      Manufacturing, transporting, and storing hazardous materials in the urban environment threaten
      the safety of persons working with such materials, as well as businesses and residences located
      near the hazards. The City recognizes the importance of identifying users and producers of these
      materials, and making land use decisions that minimize the risks associated with exposing people
      to hazardous materials.
      GOAL 4.0:        Minimize risks to life, property, and the environment associated with producing,
                       using, storing, or transporting hazardous materials.
      Policy 4.1:      Assess potential risks of disposing, transporting, manufacturing and storing
                       existing hazardous materials, and develop appropriate mitigation measures in case
                       of accidents.
      Policy 4.2:      Prohibit new disposal, transport, manufacture, and storage of hazardous materials
                       within the City without a mitigation plan in case of accidents. Hospitals meeting
                       current state and federal standards are exempt.
      Policy 4.3:      Identify hazardous materials dumpsites, and ensure that the sites are cleaned in
                       conformance with applicable federal and state laws prior to the establishment of
                       new uses.
      Policy 4.4:      Ensure that the public is protected from fires, noxious fumes, and other hazards
                       within the City’s industrial area.
Aircraft Operations
      The John Wayne Airport in Santa Ana, U.S. Army Airfield operations based in Los Alamitos, and
      helicopters serving various medical institutions in Orange generate high volumes of commercial
      and military aircraft traffic above the City. Potential hazards related to aircraft traffic include
      excessive noise and aircraft accidents.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  PS-5

PUBLIC SAFETY
     GOAL 5.0:         Reduce safety hazards associated with civilian, military, and medical air traffic.
     Policy 5.1:       Work with the Federal Aviation Administration, the Orange County Airport Land
                       Use Commission, California Department of Transportation, and other agencies to
                       establish aircraft corridors which minimize the exposure of Orange residents to air
                       traffic hazards.
     Policy 5.2:       Work with major medical institutions to minimize the impact of helicopter and
                       airplane traffic on Orange residents.
Emergency Services and Safety
     The safety and well being of Orange’s neighborhoods and businesses is a valued, fundamental
     component of quality of life in the community. Orange will continue to sustain and improve its
     commitment to safety through a comprehensive approach to police and fire services, including
     public outreach and education, proactive preparedness planning, community awareness, and
     partnerships with public agencies and private businesses. Education will also be provided relative
     to homeland security issues. Foresight and planning regarding land use decisions represent
     proactive approaches to enhance safety in the community, especially in areas where future
     development may be more intense than current conditions. Potential rail hazards must also be
     recognized and prepared for. Industrial hazards such as noxious fumes, underground fuel lines,
     and other potential hazards must be evaluated and mitigated. Special attention must be given to
     industrial projects sited near residential areas to ensure appropriate buffers and screening of
     industrial sites.
     GOAL 6.0:         Provide public safety services of the highest quality.
     Policy 6.1:       Provide the Police Department with adequate personnel, equipment and state-of-
                       the-art technology to effectively combat crime, meet existing and projected
                       service demands, and provide crime prevention programs. These resources should
                       be provided prior to anticipated needs.
     Policy 6.2:       Provide resources for additional police services as needed to maintain average
                       response times.
     Policy 6.3:       Provide and use up-to-date technology to improve crime prevention, fire
                       suppression, and emergency services.
     Policy 6.4:       Continue to support, develop, and implement programs which improve the City’s
                       approach to fighting crime.
     Policy 6.5:       Provide ongoing public information and education regarding the City’s Emergency
                       Preparedness Program, homeland security, and other similar programs.
     Policy 6.6:       Establish designated evacuation routes throughout the City.
     Policy 6.7:       Maintain and update the City’s Emergency Operations Plan as needed, and ensure
                       ongoing consistency between the General Plan and the Emergency Operations
                       Plan and Fire Department Strategic Deployment Plan.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   PS-6

                                                                                           PUBLIC SAFETY
Crime Prevention
      Preventing crime through public outreach and education and designing new spaces to promote
      secure streets and public places can both improve the quality of life enjoyed by Orange residents.
      The Police Department works with the community to promote safety by increasing awareness of
      personal and property crime risks. Crime prevention also involves educating the public about
      personal safety, business and neighborhood watch programs, and residential and business
      security.
      Defensible space planning is another crime prevention method. Defensible space planning uses
      design techniques, building orientation, and features of the built environment to deter criminal
      activity and positively influence human behavior. Defensible space planning is also a key element
      in a local comprehensive crime prevention and safety plan. Crime Prevention through
      Environmental Design (CPTED) techniques incorporate four key considerations into site planning
      and architectural design: territoriality, natural surveillance, activity support, and access control.
      GOAL 7:0:        Improve community safety and reduce opportunities for criminal activity.
      Policy 7.1:      Provide crime prevention, community service, and education programs designed
                       to prevent crime.
      Policy 7.2:      Promote and integrate crime-preventive characteristics and design features into all
                       phases of the planning and development process.
      Policy 7.3:      Maximize natural surveillance through physical design features, including, but not
                       limited to, visible entryways from surrounding structures and businesses; well-
                       defined and visible walkways and gates; well-lighted driveways, walkways, and
                       exteriors; and landscaping that preserves or enhances visibility.
      Policy 7.4:      Ensure that community areas and amenities such as transit stops, sidewalks,
                       plazas, parks, trails, and bike paths are appropriately lighted, free of hiding places,
                       and frequently patrolled.
      Policy 7.5:      Maximize security of public spaces, recreation facilities, and new development by
                       encouraging complementary uses that support a safe environment.
      Policy 7.6:      Continue to involve the Orange Police Department in the project design and
                       review process.
Disaster/Emergency Preparedness
      The City recognizes that emergency preparedness planning can reduce the impact of hazards
      resulting from a natural or human-caused disaster.
      GOAL 8.0:        Emphasize emergency preparedness both within City Hall and throughout the
                       community.
      Policy 8.1:      Sponsor and support public education programs for emergency preparedness and
                       disaster response.
      Policy 8.2:      Coordinate disaster preparedness with other public and private agencies.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                    PS-7
PUBLIC SAFETY
     Policy 8.3:     Coordinate emergency response and preparedness planning with other cities and
                     public agencies in the region.
     Policy 8.4:     Develop and maintain a fully functioning Emergency Operations Center, and
                     adequate and up-to-date emergency preparedness resources and plans.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety
     A walkable city is achieved by creating safe streets and travelways. Establishing a feeling of safety
     is key to encouraging the use of trails, pedestrian paths, sidewalks, and bikeways to move about
     the community.
     GOAL 9.0:       Provide safe pedestrian and bicycle environments.
     Policy 9.1:     Enhance and maintain safe pedestrian and bicycle movement through the
                     integration of traffic control devices, crosswalks, and pedestrian-oriented lighting,
                     into the design of streets, sidewalks, trails, and school routes throughout Orange.
     Policy 9.2:     Support creation of safe routes that encourage children to walk or bike to schools
                     and recreational facilities.
     Policy 9.3:     Identify and attempt to remove impediments to pedestrian and bicycle access
                     including those associated with rail, street, freeway, and waterway crossings and
                     poorly marked or maintained pathways and sidewalks.
PUBLIC SAFETY PLAN
     As in all communities, human activities and natural conditions occurring in Orange have an effect
     on residents’ quality of life. It is essential not only to provide an environment where businesses
     and residents can prosper and feel safe, but also to be prepared for emergency situations. The City
     can minimize hazards and protect public health and private property through a combination of
     appropriate land use planning and development review, and emergency preparedness planning.
     Figure PS-1 presents graphically the City’s safety policies and plan related to environmental and
     natural hazards. The Environmental and Natural Hazard Policy Map presents the locations of
     known seismic, geologic, flood, landfill, and wildland fire hazards. As applicable, the Public Safety
     Plan refers to this map for identification of significant locations, conditions, or development
     requirements.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   PS-8

Note: Large format map available at the Community Development Department / Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency 2000, Source: California Department of Conservation 2007, California Integrated Waste Management and California Energy Commission 2003
                                                                                                                                                      PS-9                                                            Figure PS-1. Environmental and Natural Hazard Policy Map

                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY
Geologic and Seismic Hazards
     Like many cities in Southern California, Orange faces geologic and seismic hazards, specifically
     earthquakes, earthquake-induced landslides, and liquefaction. The planning area encompasses two
     general types of terrain: an alluvial plain that underlies the central and western parts of the City,
     and a series of low hills (foothills of the Santa Ana Mountains) characteristic of the east side of
     the City and the Sphere of Influence. Generally, the alluvial plain is underlain by many thousand
     feet of fluvial and floodplain sediments, and certain areas of the plain adjacent to major
     watercourses (the Santa Ana River and Santiago Creek) are susceptible to flooding and seismically-
     induced liquefaction. However, the potential for landslides is low due to the limited relief of the
     alluvial plain. Conversely, the hilly section is underlain by bedrock (mostly late Tertiary marine and
     non-marine sediments); this area is generally less susceptible to liquefaction but certain areas may
     be prone to earthquake-induced landslides, depending upon the character of the underlying
     bedrock.
     Earthquakes
     An earthquake is a manifestation of the constant movement and shifting of the earth’s surface.
     Movement occurs along fractures or faults, which represent the contact point between two or
     more geologic formations. Earth movement, known as seismic activity, causes pressure to build up
     along a fault, and the release of pressure results in the ground-shaking effects we call an
     earthquake.
     Earthquake magnitude generally is measured on a logarithmic scale known as the Richter Scale.
     This scale describes a seismic event in terms of the amount of energy released by fault movement.
     Because the Richter Scale expresses earthquake magnitude in scientific terms, it is not readily
     understood by the general public. The Modified Mercalli Scale, on the other hand, describes the
     magnitude of an earthquake in terms of actual physical effects. Table PS-1 compares Modified
     Mercalli Scale intensities to Richter Magnitude intensities.
     Fault Rupture
     The potential for fault rupture would exist along the traces of active faults. No known Alquist-
     Priolo fault zone is located in the Orange planning area. However, as shown on Figure PS-1,
     portions of the planning area are traversed by two faults: the Peralta Hills Fault and the El Modena
     Fault. The Peralta Hills Fault runs from the crossing of Lincoln Avenue over the Santa Ana River on
     the northwest, easterly along the base of the Peralta Hills and into the City of Villa Park, then
     southerly into the hills west of Peters Canyon Reservoir. The El Modena Fault runs from its
     intersection with the Peralta Hills Fault at the base of the Peralta Hills, southeasterly to Chapman
     Avenue. Both the Peralta Hills Fault and the El Modena Fault are classified as possibly active by the
     Southern California Earthquake Data Center. Displacements along these two faults are smaller
     than those along the more prominent regional faults, and the maximum probable earthquake
     magnitudes would be much less than those along the regional faults. The City will continually
     update development standards and adopt the latest building construction codes to minimize
     seismic and related geologic hazards associated with these faults.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  PS-11

PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                Table PS-1
                                        Earthquake Magnitude and Intensity Comparison
                     Richter
 Descriptor                                               Modified Mercalli Index Intensity - Description
                  Magnitude
Not felt         Lower than 3.0 I.         Not felt except by very few persons under especially favorable conditions.
Weak                 3.0 - 3.9      II.    Felt only by a few persons at rest, especially on upper floors of high-rise buildings.
                                           Delicately suspended objects may swing.
                                    III.   Felt quite noticeably indoors, especially on upper floors of buildings, but many people do
                                           not recognize it as an earthquake. Standing automobiles may rock slightly. Vibrations like
                                           passing of a truck.
Light                4.0 - 4.9      IV.    During the day felt indoors by many, outdoors by few. At night, some awakened. Dishes,
                                           windows, doors disturbed; walls make creaking sound. Sensation like heavy truck striking
                                           building. Standing motor cars rocked noticeably.
Moderate                            V.     Felt by nearly everyone; many awakened. Some dishes and windows broken; cracked
                                           plaster in a few places; unstable objects overturned. Disturbances of trees, poles, and
                                           other tall objects sometimes noticed. Pendulum clocks may stop.
Strong               5.0 - 5.9      VI.    Felt by all, many frightened and run outdoors. Some heavy furniture moved, few instances
                                           of fallen plaster and damaged chimneys. Damage slight.
Very strong                         VII.   Everybody runs outdoors. Damage negligible in buildings of good design and
                                           construction; slight to moderate in well-built ordinary structures; considerable damage in
                                           poorly built or badly designed structures; some chimneys broken. Noticed by persons
                                           driving cars.
Severe               6.0 - 6.9      VIII. Damage slight in specially designed structures; considerable in ordinary substantial
                                           buildings with partial collapse; great in poorly built structures. Panel walls thrown out of
                                           frame structures. Fall of chimneys, factory stacks, columns, monuments, walls. Heavy
                                           furniture overturned. Sand and mud ejected in small amounts. Changes in well water.
                                           Persons driving cars disturbed.
Violent                             IX.    Damage considerable in specially designed structures; well-designed frame structures
                                           thrown out of plumb; great in substantial buildings with partial collapse. Buildings shifted
                                           off foundations. Ground cracked conspicuously. Underground pipes broken.
Extreme              7.0 -7.9       X.     Some well-built wooden structures destroyed; most masonry and frame structures
                                           destroyed; ground badly cracked. Rails bent. Landslides considerable from river banks and
                                           steep slopes. Shifted sand and mud. Water splashed, slopped over banks.
                 8.0 and higher XI.        Few, if any (masonry) structures remain standing. Bridges destroyed. Broad fissures in
                                           ground. Underground pipelines completely out of service. Earth slumps and land slips in
                                           soft ground. Rails bent greatly.
                                    XII.   Damage total. Waves seen on ground surface. Lines of sight and level are distorted.
                                           Objects thrown into the air.
Source: United States Geological Survey National Earthquake Information Center, October 2002.
          Ground Shaking
          Orange is vulnerable to ground shaking caused by seismic events along large regional faults in the
          area. These faults include the Newport-Inglewood Fault (located approximately 15 miles
          southwest of Orange along the coast near Newport Beach), the Elsinore Fault (which crosses the
                                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  PS-12
                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
      Santa Ana River Canyon about five miles northeast of Orange), and the San Andreas Fault (which
      is parallel to the Elsinore, located approximately 40 miles northeast of Orange). Each of these
      faults has numerous branches and associated faults and, therefore, has associated fault zones.
      Movement along any of these fault zones has the potential to cause widespread upset in Orange.
      The potential for ground shaking within the City depends on the distance to the fault and the
      intensity of a specific seismic event along the fault. Also, areas underlain by bedrock at shallow
      depths (as in the eastern part of the planning area) would tend to be less affected than areas
      underlain by thick sequences of unconsolidated alluvium.
      Figures PS-2 and PS-3 show the effects of two maximum probable events, a magnitude 8.3
      earthquake along the San Andreas Fault and a magnitude 7.5 earthquake along the Newport-
      Inglewood Fault. The ground-shaking effects on areas within Orange are shown in terms of the
      Modified Mercalli scale (See Table PS-1). The maximum Mercalli intensity, IX, at the southwest
      corner of the city under a 7.5 magnitude Newport-Inglewood fault scenario, indicates potential for
      great damage to substantial buildings and damage to underground pipes even in specially
      designed structures.
      Landslides and Liquefaction
      Landslides can occur when strong ground movement such as an earthquake shakes loose soil and
      causes land and debris to lose stability and slide. Liquefaction occurs when moisture-saturated
      soils lose stability during seismic conditions. Structures built on such soils may collapse and
      result in damage and loss.
      Portions of the planning area most susceptible to liquefaction and landslides are identified on the
      Environmental and Natural Hazards Policy Map (Figure PS-1). Earthquake-induced landslides are
      most probable in poorly consolidated or semi-consolidated sedimentary rock, characteristic of the
      low hills of the northern and eastern parts of the planning area. Portions of the planning area
      susceptible to seismically-induced liquefaction include areas near the Santa Ana River and
      Santiago Creek. A smaller area of high liquefaction potential is present in the areas east of
      Panorama Heights, in Crawford Canyon. These alluvial plains are characterized by fluvial and
      loose, floodplain sediments.
      To further protect the City from injury and structural damage due to geologic and seismic hazards,
      all new development will be required to abide by the most recently adopted City and state seismic
      and geotechnical requirements. All older buildings, particularly unreinforced masonry buildings,
      and buildings located near the Peralta Hills and El Modena Faults should be reinforced and
      strengthened to prevent damage to structures and loss of life in the event of an earthquake. The
      City will provide public education programs regarding geologic and seismic hazards and continue
      to cooperate with surrounding cities, regional, state, and federal government in programs
      designed to implement the most strategic and efficient actions to mitigate such hazards.
Flood Hazards
      In Orange, flooding may result from either the overflow of watercourses due to excessive and
      unusual storm run-off, or from failure of dams and/or water storage reservoirs.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 PS-13
PUBLIC SAFETY
     Natural Flood Hazards
     Flood hazards related to storm events generally are described in terms of the “100-year flood.” As
     its name implies, the 100-year flood is the largest flood event which may be expected to occur
     within a 100-year period. This flood is considered a severe flood but one which can be reasonably
     predicted and therefore reasonably mitigated. As shown in Figure PS-1, the 100-year flood plains
     shown in Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps indicate that the stream drainage
     areas along the Santa Ana River and Santiago Creek are subject to flooding by the largest storm
     event in 100 years or within 100 to 500 years. The 100 year flood areas also include the western
     portion of the planning area, bounded by the Santa Ana River and the city boundary, including
     The Block at Orange. The floodplain may be subject to modification by manmade facilities such as
     flood control basins, levees, and concrete-lined stream channels.
     Additionally, according to FEMA maps, a flood area determined for the 100-year storm event
     (Zone A) is a reservoir water surface elevation of approximately 800 feet mean sea level (msl) as
     shown. Backwater into Santiago Creek, Limestone Creek, and immediately adjacent to Santiago
     Reservoir tributary drainage also reaches this elevation. As development in the hillside and basin
     areas progresses, runoff and absorption rates will be altered. Adequate infrastructure will be
     needed to ensure that the increased runoff can be handled without increasing the risk of flooding.
     Appropriate flood control measures will be implemented along Santiago Creek and throughout the
     planning area, where necessary, to reduce the risks from localized flooding.
     The National Flood Insurance Program, in which Orange participates, covers at a minimum all
     properties affected by the 100-year flood. To receive insurance benefits in the event of a flood,
     participating agencies must recognize these official flood boundaries and establish appropriate
     land use policy for the flood zones.
     Additional flood prevention methods such as provision of detention basins and on-site
     stormwater drainage will be required of developers to reduce runoff into the City’s drainage
     facilities and to provide adequate drainage for new developments. To minimize runoff, the City will
     promote developments that incorporate permeable surfaces within site design.
     The City will direct development of critical public and private facilities such as medical,
     educational, and civic facilities to be located outside of flood zones. To mitigate flood hazards to
     existing structures within flood zones, the City will offer educational programs for the public and
     City staff regarding flood hazards.
     Dam Inundation Hazards
     Failure of the Prado Dam in Corona (in Riverside County) could result in extensive flooding along
     the Santa Ana River. However, ongoing efforts by the Army Corps of Engineers to improve the
     Prado facility reduce the risk of dam failure to a very low level.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  PS-14

PS-15 Figure PS-2. Potential Groundshaking Zones – 8.3 San Andreas Earthquake

PS-17 Figure PS-3. Potential Groundshaking Zones – 7.5 Newport-Inglewood Earthquake

                                                                                      PUBLIC SAFETY
      Two dams are present along Santiago Creek: Villa Park Dam and Santiago Dam (Irvine Lake). Both
      are located in the foothills section of east Orange. Peters Canyon Dam is located along Peters
      Canyon about two miles west of Irvine Lake. Like Santiago Creek, which flows generally
      northwest, Peters Canyon drains in a similar direction, along Handy Creek and ultimately into
      Santiago Creek. The areas below (downstream from) the dams are areas of potential flood hazard
      in case of catastrophic dam failure, which presumably could result from a major earthquake. Maps
      depicting the extent of potential dam inundation within the planning area are available for public
      review at the Community Development Department. The areas below the dams are also zoned for
      flood hazard on the FEMA maps, and the areas of potential flooding are similar in width to other
      areas along Santiago Creek and Peters Canyon (see Figure PS-1). Should one of these facilities fail,
      properties along Santiago Creek and a large section of Old Towne could be flooded. Flood flows
      would move at rates which would allow persons to be evacuated, but significant property damage
      could result. However, as is the case for Prado Dam, these facilities are maintained and safety-
      inspected to ensure that risks are minimized.
      Olive Hills Reservoir is a water tank which sits on a hilltop in Anaheim above residential
      development in Orange. Reservoir failure would result in the flooding of canyons and residential
      tracts below the reservoir.
      The City will minimize flood-related risks and hazards in the event of dam or reservoir failure,
      protecting residences and businesses by encouraging the County’s Flood Control District to
      continue proper inspection of storm drains, ensure maintenance of the flood control facilities, and
      prevent earthquake damage. The City will also monitor water storage facilities to determine
      potential inundation hazards to surrounding properties.
Fire Hazards
      As part of its efforts to prevent injury and loss due to fire hazards in undeveloped hillside and
      urban areas, the City will continue to educate the public, and provide up-to-date maps delineating
      areas that could face fire hazards. The City will ensure minimum road widths, clearance areas, and
      access to adequate fire protection services by enforcing Municipal Code provisions and City
      specifications, and conducting development review.
      Wildfires
      The Natural and Environmental Hazard Policy Map (Figure PS-1) shows that wildland fire hazard
      areas are located generally east of Jamboree Road within the planning area. Risks associated with
      fire hazards are generally reduced through compliance with municipal codes.
      Development located within or adjacent to the identified wildland fire area in Figure PS-1 must
      prepare and implement a comprehensive fuel modification program in accordance with City
      regulations. The City will review new developments and fire services to ensure adequate
      emergency services and facilities to residents and businesses. Coordinating with adjacent local
      cities, and participating in regional, state, and federal programs will better prepare the City for
      wildfire emergencies and will reduce fire-related risks.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  PS-19

PUBLIC SAFETY
     Urban Fires
     Although updated fire code requirements reduce urban fire risks in Orange, structures in older
     parts of the City, especially in Old Towne, were constructed prior to adoption of modern
     standards. Structures used for the transport, production, and handling of combustible equipment
     in the industrial areas (shown in Figure PS-1) also pose a credible urban fire threat. The Fire
     Department will participate in environmental review procedures to reduce urban fire risks in these
     areas, and will help educate the public regarding fire prevention.
Hazardous Materials and Human-Caused Hazards
     Hazardous materials are often found in solid, liquid, and gas forms that pose potential threats or
     actual harm to humans and the environment. Mishandled hazardous materials can leak into soils
     and water sources.
     Hazardous Materials
     The City follows the County’s Hazardous Materials Inspection and Enforcement Plan. To prevent
     accidents, and ensure proper handling, routine inspections are conducted at businesses within the
     City that store, use, or handle hazardous materials. The City concentrates production of
     hazardous materials within its industrial area, separated from residential areas, educational uses,
     and institutional facilities (see Figure PS-1). The City also identifies businesses transporting,
     manufacturing, using, and storing hazardous chemicals, and requires such businesses to exercise
     caution and to mitigate potential negative effects on surrounding land uses prior to obtaining
     businesses licenses. Periodic assessment and analysis of potential threats related to hazardous
     materials will result in proper response to hazardous substance emergencies. In addition, plans for
     residential or for mixed-use projects on industrial or commercial lands will be required to undergo
     proper site assessment and remediation prior to development.
     Residents may dispose of hazardous materials at the Household Hazardous Waste Collection
     Center in the City of Anaheim. Since the three landfill sites serving Orange (located in Irvine, Brea,
     and San Juan Capistrano) do not accept hazardous wastes, commercial hazardous wastes must be
     collected and disposed by private waste disposal companies.
     Former Landfills
     Areas formerly used as landfills contain wastes that can release toxins into the air or contaminate
     groundwater. As indicated in Figure PS-1, the planning area includes several abandoned and
     closed landfills. Three locations show abandoned landfills: Chapman Avenue and Yorba Street (the
     current site of Yorba Park), Lincoln and Glassell Avenue, and near Cannon and Serrano Avenue to
     the east of the City of Villa Park. Two locations show closed landfills: Santiago Canyon Road to
     the east of the City of Villa Park (the former Santiago Canyon Landfill) and in the hillside area west
     of Irvine Lake. The City will require appropriate site assessment and mitigation of hazardous toxins
     prior to development. If areas pose hazards that cannot be adequately mitigated, they will be
     designated as open space.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 PS-20

                                                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
      Pipelines
      Several high pressure pipelines pass through Orange, delivering natural gas, liquid petroleum, and
      other products to Orange and cities beyond. Hazards associated with the pipelines include gas
      leaks, fire, and seepage of materials into the ground. The City Fire Department maintains maps
      indicating the location of these facilities, and uses these maps for safety planning, incident
      response, and development review purposes.
      Underground Storage Tanks
      The City’s Fire Department has primary responsibility for managing risks associated with the
      presence of underground storage tanks (USTs). In addition to following the County’s Inspection
      and Enforcement Plan, the Fire Department is also a participating agency in the local Certified
      Unified Program Agency (CUPA) established by the California State Water Resources Control
      Board. The City’s Fire Department implements state requirements for USTs. The overall purpose of
      the UST Program is to protect public health and safety and the environment from releases of
      petroleum and other hazardous substances from tanks. The Hazardous Materials Specialists Leak
      Prevention Program element includes requirements for tank installation, construction, testing, leak
      detection, spill containment, and overfill protection. CUPAs are the implementing agencies for the
      Leak Prevention program element.
      Cleanup of leaking tanks often involves a soil and groundwater investigation and remediation,
      under the direction of a regulatory agency. Responsible parties who believe cleanup at their site is
      complete and are denied case closure by the regulatory agency may consider filing a closure
      petition.
Aircraft Operations
      The planning area is not located within any airport crash zones. However, because aircraft paths
      cross air space between the Costa Mesa Freeway (SR 55) and Newport Boulevard, the City is
      vulnerable to mid-air collisions of aircraft headed for John Wayne Airport or the U.S. Army Airfield
      in Los Alamitos, and of helicopters flying to medical centers. Such accidents could result in injury
      and structural damage to residents, homes, employees and businesses in Orange. To minimize the
      chance of such aircraft collisions, the City will work with the Federal Aviation Administration, the
      Orange County Airport Land Use Commission, California Department of Transportation
      (Caltrans), major medical institutions, and other agencies to ensure aircraft use flight paths that
      minimize the City’s exposure to potential accidents.
      The City will comply with the Airport Land Use Commission for Orange County’s Heliports and
      Airport Environs Land Use Plan to ensure that future land uses located near helipads remain
      compatible. This plan requires that the construction of a new heliport or helistop complies with
      FAA and Caltrans permit procedures, as well as all applicable requirements of the City of Orange.
      Additionally, the plan requires that construction or alteration of structure in excess of 200 fee it
      height complies with federal and state law (FAR Part 77 and PUC 21676(b), respectively) and with
      the requirements of the Airport Land Use commission for Orange County, as well as all applicable
      requirements of the City of Orange.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   PS-21

PUBLIC SAFETY
     The City will ensure that development proposals including the construction or alteration of a
     structure more than 200 feet above ground level must fully comply with procedures provided by
     federal and State law, with the referral requirements of the ALUC, and with all conditions of
     approval imposed or recommended by the FAA and ALUC including filing a Notice of Landing Area
     Proposal (Form 7480-1). This requirement will be in addition to all other City development
     requirements.
Emergency Services and Safety
     Achieving ideal law enforcement and emergency services requires coordination between the
     services provided by the City and the demands of the community. The City will first work with the
     community to identify the level of services desired. Then, the City will assess existing and future
     police and fire services, facilities, equipment, and personnel to determine its ability to meet current
     and future demands. The City’s Police and Fire Departments will continue to use public outreach
     and education to increase community awareness regarding hazards, the City’s Emergency
     Preparedness Program, and homeland security in Orange. In addition, the City will support
     programs that address crime and fire prevention activities. The Police and Fire Departments will
     continue proactive training and planning programs, and utilize state-of-the-art technology to
     improve response and increase public safety.
     Fire Services
     The main goals of the Fire Department are to prevent and minimize death and injury,
     environmental damage, and property loss. In addition to fighting fires, the Fire Department works
     to achieve these goals through public education, fire prevention, hazardous materials
     management, and fire investigations. Orange’s Fire Department provides fire, paramedic, and
     ambulance services. Paramedic teams are located at eight stations, of which three also provide
     ambulance service with an average response time of 4 minutes, 47 seconds; and average transport
     unit response times of 5 minutes, 29 seconds. The Fire Department employs fire fighters who are
     also trained in paramedic techniques.
     Members of the Fire Department are also trained in Urban Search and Rescue (US&R). As part of
     the Orange County Task Force 5 US&R Team, one of 28 operational FEMA US&R teams in the
     United States, US&R team members provide trained urban rescue teams for regional and national
     emergencies. The Department also has a Swift Water Rescue Team that deploys rescue equipment
     during flood hazards. In addition to training for more common hazards, firefighters also train to
     handle incidents involving weapons of mass destruction, learning procedures for identification,
     decontamination, evacuation, and shelter-in-place.
     Public Education
     Public education provides members of the community with tools to increase the level of safety in
     their homes and workplaces by preventing fire and other emergencies. It also equips them to
     minimize injury and property loss in the event that an emergency does occur. The Fire Department
     provides public education by request, using personnel as available.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  PS-22

                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
New Construction
The Fire Department is actively involved with new development in the City. The Fire Plans
Coordinator meets with developers early on in the project planning phase, attends internal project
review meetings, and coordinates plan review with a contract plan reviewer. The New
Construction Inspector witnesses on-site testing and installation of fire protection systems, and
confirms that construction conforms to approved plans.
Annual Inspections
All businesses with fire permits receive annual inspections. Low-hazard, non-permitted
businesses must fill out self-inspection worksheets and receive field inspections once every three
years. The Office of the State Fire Marshal requires annual inspections for apartments and high-rise
buildings. Many of the Fire Department’s occupancy inspections are conducted by the Operations
Division (firefighting personnel). However, the Prevention Division conducts inspections in
institutional and hazardous occupancies, as well as other locations selected for their complexity.
State Fire Clearances
The State of California licenses various educational, institutional, and residential facilities, such as
family day care homes, nursing homes, and residential care facilities for the elderly. As part of the
licensing requirements, the Fire Department is responsible for issuing fire clearances after all state
fire and life safety requirements have been met.
Fuel Modification and Weed Abatement
Wildfire is an ever-present threat in the eastern and northern portions of the planning area. This
threat is managed by proactive fuel modification and weed abatement. Fuel modification is the
progressive thinning and irrigation of selected vegetation to form increasingly fire resistant
vegetation as brush fires approach buildings. It is required for all developments bordering the
wildland-urban interface. Compliance with weed abatement standards provides defensible space
between structures and dead brush, grasses, and other vegetation. Weed abatement inspections
for required clearance are performed twice a year for all vacant City-owned and private lots. Private
property owners and homeowners’ associations are responsible for the continual maintenance of
fuel modification installations and biannual weed abatement.
Police Services
The Orange Police Department responds to emergency situations and patrols neighborhoods and
commercial areas within the City to promote a safe environment. The staff maintains official
criminal records, investigates crime, and, in an emergency, assesses situations and quickly
dispatches appropriate emergency responses. The Police Department also directs proactive crime
prevention programs. The Department’s headquarters is located on North Batavia Street. The
Department operates several substations, including substations located in Santiago Canyon, at
the Block of Orange.
To maintain the City’s ability to serve current residents and businesses, applicants will be required
to provide for adequate services and equipment to serve residents and businesses of new
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            PS-23

PUBLIC SAFETY
     developments. Land uses will be evaluated and modified, if necessary, to facilitate access to
     emergency services, meet service standards, and ensure land use compatibility.
     Orange’s partnerships with other public agencies and businesses will also improve its emergency
     services. For example, the City receives fire and emergency medical dispatch services from the
     Metro Cities Fire Authority Communications Center that serves six other cities in the County. The
     City participates in the Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) for mutual aid and
     communication with other agencies during regional emergencies. Coordination with other cities
     and regions, and with state and federal agencies, will help address hazards both within and
     beyond the City’s jurisdiction.
     Crime Prevention
     Reducing crime in the City enhances the living and business environment. A low crime rate
     attracts new businesses and gives residents a greater sense of security and community pride.
     Public Outreach and Education
     The Police Department works with the community to promote safety by increasing awareness of
     personal and property crime risks. Crime prevention also involves educating the public about
     personal safety, business and neighborhood watch programs, and residential and business
     security.
     The Police Department’s Crime Prevention Bureau coordinates Neighborhood Watch programs
     that emphasize the importance and effectiveness of crime reporting by neighbors. Neighborhood
     Watch allows neighbors to report suspicious behavior or incidents to the Police Department. The
     program encourages neighbors to get to know one another and keep an eye on their community,
     enabling the City to increase security for its residents. The program also provides public awareness
     and prevention seminars.
     The City’s crime prevention efforts include the i-Watch Program, a free Internet-based system that
     connects the City of Orange Police Department with residents, churches, schools, and businesses
     in Orange. This service allows the Police Department to e-mail subscribers crime alerts. The
     system also will let the police e-mail neighborhood-specific messages that alert the public to
     suspicious activity, and provide information about current crime trends and crime prevention
     techniques.
     The Crime Prevention Bureau also offers several additional free crime prevention programs to the
     community, including security inspections of homes and businesses within the City, and
     electronic engraving for personal items and vehicles through the Operation Identification program.
     Educational presentations to community, business, and neighborhood groups are also available on
     such topics as child safety, identity theft prevention, personal safety, burglary prevention, and
     senior safety.
     The City strongly supports these outreach and education activities, and the Police Department will
     continue to support community programs and neighborhood-level efforts toward crime prevention
     and education.
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 PS-24

                                                                                     PUBLIC SAFETY
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
Orange values environmental design as a tool to help prevent crime. The concepts of CPTED offer
non-invasive and permanent measures to prevent crime in the City. CPTED includes the following
five concepts: territoriality, natural surveillance, activity support, access control, and maintenance.
    Territoriality: Demarcating the boundary of a property or an area through walls and fences can
     discourage intrusion. People tend to protect territory that they feel is their own and to respect
     the territory of others. Low decorative fences, artistic pavement treatments, well-designed
     signs, good property maintenance, and high quality landscaping express pride in ownership
     and identify personal space.
    Natural Surveillance: Arranging populated functions or rooms in homes and businesses to face
     the street allows easy surveillance by residents and employees. Crime is discouraged through
     the design and orientation of buildings and public spaces, along with placement of physical
     features, activity centers, and people in ways that maximize the ability of others to see what’s
     going on. Conversely, barriers such as bushes, sheds, or shadows make it difficult to observe
     activity. Windows or doors oriented to streets and public areas, in conjunction with
     landscaping and lighting that promote natural surveillance from inside a home or building and
     from the outside by neighbors are effective means of passive crime prevention.
    Access Control: Circulation and site and building access can be controlled through
     designating paths and placing bollards or fences to limit access.
    Activity Support: Supporting activities on the street attracts people and encourages natural
     surveillance. Encouraging legitimate activity in public spaces assists in discouraging crime.
     Improvements such as a basketball court in a public park and community activities such as a
     clean-up day, block party, or civic or cultural event bring people out, get them involved, and
     help discourage vagrancy and potential illegal acts. Providing a mix of land uses, types of
     residential development, and public or quasi-public spaces encourages diverse households and
     patterns of activity, increasing security due to round-the-clock activity and more eyes on the
     street.
    Maintenance: Maintenance of sidewalks, street trees, lighting, and private property
     discourages negative behavior such as littering and vandalism.
CPTED concepts enable developers and designers to incorporate crime prevention measures into
building design. Territoriality can be achieved by demarcating boundaries with various surface
treatments and careful design to make intrusion and suspicious activities easy to identify. Building
orientations that face the street, window placements and size, and provision of lighting allow
neighbors to survey their neighborhood and discourage intrusion. Pathways and obstructions
such as walls and gates allow property owners and the City to control access.
Crime prevention also requires public participation. The City’s Neighborhood Watch Program
relies on Orange neighbors as its most effective crime prevention tool. The program provides
training to volunteers who maintain neighborhood safety by being watchful and reporting
suspicious behavior in their area.
                                   ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               PS-25

PUBLIC SAFETY
      Crime prevention relies upon programs implemented by government agencies. To reduce crime,
      the City will emphasize the need for well-lighted community areas and the use of extra
      surveillance in areas susceptible to high crime rates, such as parking lots. Complementary uses
      within mixed-use areas will be encouraged to reduce crime. Activity support is strengthened by
      intentionally placing programs and activities in areas that improve the perception of safety and
      discourage potential offenders.
      The success of CPTED depends on maintenance of all these programs. Maintaining streets,
      lighting, and landscaping facilitate natural surveillance and access control. Maintaining private and
      public properties requires participation from property owners and City departments. Continuation
      and monitoring of CPTED programs will promote safety in Orange neighborhoods.
Disaster and Emergency Preparedness
      Being prepared and knowing what courses of action to take in case of emergencies reduces the
      chance of injury and damage. Educating staff and the public regarding hazards prepares them
      mentally and physically, leading to quick and appropriate response. The City will initiate and
      support practices of emergency evacuation measures at home, at work and in schools to reduce
      the effects of emergencies on everyday life.
      Emergency Operations Plan
      In case of emergencies within Orange or originating from areas outside the municipal boundary,
      including foreign and domestic terrorist acts, the City will correspond with other jurisdictions,
      regions, and agencies to take appropriate actions. The City has an emergency plan which
      establishes emergency preparedness and emergency response procedures for both peacetime and
      wartime disasters. The plan is termed an “Emergency Operations Plan,” prepared in accordance
      with the State Office of Emergency Services guidelines for multi-hazard functional planning.
      The plan consists of three parts: 1) a basic plan; 2) annexes which address specific functions and
      duties of response agencies; and 3) a directory of emergency response resources. Rather than
      focusing on specific responses for specific hazards, as contingency plans have done in the past,
      the City’s plan concentrates on specific agency response for any type of disaster. For example, in
      the event of an earthquake, flood, or industrial accident, the Orange Fire Department is
      responsible for fire suppression, emergency medical care, and rescue operations.
      The various annexes in the City’s Emergency Operations Plan outline emergency responsibilities
      by type of operation, such as “Fire and Rescue” or “Care and Shelter.” Table PS-2 summarizes
      emergency operation responsibilities of various City departments.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  PS-26

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                                        Table PS-2
                                                                            Emergency Operations Responsibilities
                             Alerting and Warning                                                                           Radiological Protection                                                                                                                                   Const. and Engineering   Supply/Procurement
                                                    Communications   Situation Analysis                Public Information                             Fire and Rescue   Assess Control   Law Enforcement                                       Care and Shelter                                                                                 Transportation
                                                                                          Management                                                                                                                 Public Health                                Movement                                                          Personnel
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Medical                   Coroner                                 Rescue                                                                              Utilities
   City Departments
Police
Fire
Public Works
Community Services
Community Development
Finance
Personnel
Library
City Attorney
City Clerk
City Manager
Outside Agencies
County Health
Red Cross
Notes:         Supporting Agency/Organization                                                                         Principal Agency/Organization
             Emergency Access and Evacuation
             All City arterials are recognized as primary emergency response routes. In addition, non-arterials
             can be secondary emergency response routes. The City’s Residential Neighborhood Traffic
             Management Program, which identifies traffic management and traffic calming tools, specifies that
             emergency vehicle access should be accommodated consistent with response standards with
             implementation of appropriate traffic management measures. Additionally, if current emergency
             vehicle access does not meet existing response standards, traffic calming efforts should not further
             degrade response times.
             The City’s Emergency Operations Plan does not indicate evacuation routes for emergency
             situations. The routes of escape from disaster-stricken areas will depend on the scale and scope of
             the disaster. For example, a flood occurring along the Santa Ana River would require evacuation of
             the City’s industrial area east toward the Costa Mesa (SR 55) Freeway. However, if a large fire
             occurred in the eastern portion of the industrial district, employees would evacuate to the west,
             toward the Santa Ana River.
                                                                                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                              PS-27

PUBLIC SAFETY
           Figure PS-4 provides a generalized version of the City’s evacuation corridors. Although emergency
           egress may vary depending on the type and scale of emergencies, it will most often take place on
           Chapman Avenue, Katella Avenue, Glassell Street, Lincoln Avenue, Orangewood Avenue, and
           Hewes Street. Most of these streets are wide, arterial roads with capacity to efficiently move
           residents in and out of the City. The City will continue to evaluate the viability of each of these
           routes to serve as evacuation corridors.
           Emergency Shelters
           In the event of either a natural or human-caused disaster, homes may be destroyed or be
           inaccessible for extended periods of time. Orange residents will require some form of temporary
           shelter. As Table PS-2 indicates, the Red Cross bears primary responsibility for providing
           emergency shelter to displaced residents. The Red Cross maintains a list of emergency shelters
           within and immediately adjacent to the planning area. Most of these emergency shelters, listed in
           Table PS-3, are public or private schools.
                                                    Table PS-3
                                       Emergency Shelters/Assembly Points
                                                   Primary Sites
El Modena High School                                     3920 Spring, Orange
Orange High School                                        525 N. Shaffer, Orange
Villa Park High School                                    10842 Taft, Villa Park
McPherson Middle School                                   333 S. Prospect, Orange
Peralta Middle School                                     2190 Canal, Orange
Santiago Middle School                                    515 N. Rancho Santiago, Orange
Yorba Middle School                                       935 N. Cambridge, Orange
Cerro Villa Middle School                                 17852 Serrano, Villa Park
The Block at Orange Shopping Center                       One City Boulevard
                                                 Secondary Sites
All Elementary Schools                                    City-wide
           Homeland Security
           In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the City of Orange’s emergency
           preparedness and response services have become an even more critical function. Since the events
           of 9/11, a considerable amount of information has been generated on potential vulnerabilities,
           protective measures, and anti-terrorism and security technologies. The Police and Fire
           Departments recognize the need not only to learn from the lessons of 9/11, but also to collectively
           address the anti-terrorism planning and policy issues that most affect Orange residents. The goals,
           policies, and implementation programs associated with emergency preparedness also apply to
           readiness and response to terrorist acts.
                                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                      PS-28

PS-29 Figure PS-4. Generalized Evacuation Corridor

                                                                                     PUBLIC SAFETY
Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety
     Providing a safe environment for pedestrians and bicyclists means designing streets that can carry
     vehicles, but that are also scaled for walkers and bikers. Furnishing streets with bike racks,
     benches, lighting, and landscaping; repairing missing or dangerous sidewalks; and designating bike
     paths are all techniques the City can employ to reduce pedestrian and bicycle accidents. A
     desirable pedestrian and bicycle environment also requires circulation improvements such as
     placing clear signs for bikers and pedestrians, and providing buffers and traffic calming to tame
     automobile traffic around pedestrians and cyclists.
     Implementation of the City’s goals and policies for pedestrian and bicycle safety will require an
     assessment of existing streets and of the City’s ability to expand or add improvements to
     accommodate the needs of pedestrians and bicyclists in addition to automobiles. These policies
     are closely related to Circulation & Mobility Element policies that encourage vehicle safety. The
     City will also pay special attention to high-risk areas such as parking lots and areas surrounding
     schools and recreational facilities.
PUBLIC SAFETY IMPLEMENTATION
     The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of City
     plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing collaboration
     with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation measures for this
     Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 PS-31


                                             URBAN DESIGN
INTRODUCTION AND VISION FOR THE FUTURE
                                               Urban design is concerned with the arrangement,
                                               appearance, and functionality of the community. It
                                               focuses on the shaping and uses of urban public spaces—
                                               the public realm—and the way these public places are
                                               experienced and used. Architecture and urban form have
                                               played a significant role in defining Orange’s sense of
                                               place within its downtown core and neighborhoods.
                                               Sense of place is a feeling or perception held by people
                                               about a particular location. It includes those
                                               characteristics that make a place special or unique, as well
                                               as those attributes that foster a sense of human
                                               attachment and belonging. Places that are said to have a
                                               strong "sense of place" are those that society has given
    meanings or names that strongly define it as important or even sacred.
    When this sense of place is lacking, a place can be referred to as placeless or inauthentic. Placeless
    environments have no special relationship to the people or context in which they are located—
    they could be anywhere. Strip malls, gas stations, and convenience stores are a few examples of
    placeless environments, having no special connection to any specific community.
    Orange desires to be characterized by a strong identity and a sense of place that is deeply felt by
    both residents and visitors. This character will be derived from the built and natural environment,
    from Orange’s unique history and cultural heritage, and from the needs and activities of its
    residents. It will be embodied in its buildings, streets, and landscapes—in its physical design.
    A key objective for the Urban Design Element is to enhance Orange’s sense of place in a manner
    that reflects the community’s values and its deep connection to the history and traditions that
    distinguish Orange from other cities in the region. Strong community support and interest exist
    for preserving and enhancing the City’s historic character while accommodating new growth and
    change. The preservation of Old Towne has provided a potential model for improving other
    commercial areas throughout the City. In the future, the care and attention to detail that has been
    used in the preservation of Old Towne will be expanded and applied to commercial corridors
    throughout the City.
    The Urban Design Element focuses on place making and on those physical features which shape
    the setting for life in the community. It addresses the design of buildings, groups of buildings,
    spaces and landscapes, and open space between buildings, and establishes the processes that
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 UD-1

URBAN DESIGN
     make places successful and aesthetically appealing. The focus of policies and programs in this
     Element is on the image and character of the City’s streets, commercial and mixed-use corridors,
     districts and neighborhoods, the Old Towne core, and appropriate infill development. Attention is
     also given to residential areas and their interface with commercial areas. The Element identifies the
     physical features and spaces desired by the community, and establishes the goals, policies, and
     programs that reflect those desires.
     Shaping the built environment through high quality urban design requires resources and
     community consensus. Policies and programs within the Urban Design Element seek to enhance
     Orange’s commercial resources and provide guidance for new growth and redevelopment, by
     strengthening the public realm and the image of the community, and by supporting the goals of
     the other General Plan elements.
     Orange’s Vision for the Future, described in the General Plan Introduction, recognizes the
     importance of the design and visual appeal of the City and its public realm. In the future, the
     distinct neighborhoods and special places that contribute to the City will be enhanced and
     Orange’s retail districts will be characterized by visually attractive development, active public
     areas, high quality streetscapes, and innovative design that complements Orange’s heritage. To
     accomplish this, the Vision includes the following objectives:
         The City will continue efforts to protect and enhance its historic core. This same type of care
          and attention will be applied throughout the City.
         The City will work to improve the quality of life for all residents by providing residential,
          commercial, industrial and public uses that exist in harmony with the surrounding urban and
          natural environments.
         The appearance and variety of commercial, retail, industrial, and employment centers will
          reflect the pride that residents have in Orange and will be supported by the long-term
          investments the City has made in its infrastructure.
Purpose of the Urban Design Element
     The Urban Design Element is a framework for shaping the future form and character of Orange and
     is driven by input from the public and local businesses. Carefully planned urban spaces affect the
     quality of the physical environment, and the perception, economic investment, and success of the
     City. Pedestrian-friendly areas should be designed to provide a sense of security and safety for
     people who use them. The quality of the built environment is a key factor that affects the local
     image of Orange and sets the stage for economic activity. The City’s cultural identity is an
     important factor determining why people choose to visit, invest in or relocate here. Well-
     proportioned public spaces and streets contribute to business visibility, accessibility, and viability.
     The use of design features such as appropriately-scaled lighting, street furniture, street trees, and
     other amenities can help to define places. An authentic, well-designed urban environment uplifts
     the community spirit, becomes the stage on which the community conducts its daily life, and
     helps give identity and meaning to the special places that comprise Orange.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 UD-2

                                                                                         URBAN DESIGN
Scope and Content of the Urban Design Element
      This Element encompasses the built and shaped environments that are experienced by the public,
      including streets, buildings, landscapes, spaces between buildings, and other physical features;
      placing special emphasis on the City’s commercial and mixed-use corridors. Issues addressed
      within the Element include the City’s physical organization, appearance, and function, and
      recognition of Orange’s heritage and the cultural aspects of the environment.
      The Urban Design Element is not a required General Plan element under state law; however,
      because of the importance of urban design in Orange, the City has chosen to include it as an
      additional element in the General Plan. This Element plays a critical role in maintaining and
      improving the physical quality of the environments that define the City’s identity and give
      character to its commercial districts and neighborhoods.
      The Urban Design Element is organized in three sections:
      (1)      Introduction
      (2)      Issues, Goals, and Policies
      (3)      The Urban Design Plan
      This Introduction describes the Element’s intent, organization, and relationships to other elements
      and programs. The Issues section describes the basic design factors that contribute to the
      character of the community. The Goals discussion describes ideal outcomes regarding the urban
      character of the City of Orange as expressed by private and public interests. The Policies
      discussion provides recommendations to achieve the stated goals. The Urban Design Plan explains
      the programs to be implemented according to the urban design policies. Descriptions of the
      various implementation programs recommended within this Element can be found in the Appendix
      to the General Plan.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
      The issues raised in the Urban Design Element primarily affect the contents of the Land Use,
      Natural Resources, Circulation & Mobility, Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation,
      Infrastructure, and Economic Development Elements. The contents of these elements are related
      and must be integrated to provide for comprehensive and consistent guidelines throughout the
      General Plan.
      The Land Use Element establishes development guidelines that affect the built environment, such
      as density and intensity requirements of land uses. As these directly influence land uses and
      associated building and site design quality, the contents of the Land Use and Urban Design
      Elements are highly correlated.
      Urban design involves modifying elements of the natural environment as well as the built
      environment. It influences not only how structures are built, but also the quality of spaces
      between buildings, and open spaces within the developed areas of the city. Open spaces,
      addressed within the Natural Resources Element, provide visual relief from urban settings, and
      also serve as spaces for passive and active leisure activities. Additionally, good quality landscaping
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 UD-3

URBAN DESIGN
     leads to reduced impervious surfaces, more trees, and improved air quality, all supporting a more
     sustainable community.
     A strong desire has been expressed within the community regarding the need for accessible open
     spaces. Recognizing that most infill development opportunities in Orange lie within the City’s
     commercial and mixed-use corridors, policies in the Natural Resources and Urban Design Elements
     focus upon strategies to incorporate additional green space within these corridors, using design
     concepts such as urban green linkages and green zones (e.g., plazas, pocket parks, courtyards, and
     paseos). Other supporting strategies include creek restoration projects, urban courtyards, plazas,
     and gathering places, and “viewshed” protection and enhancement.
     The provisions of the Circulation & Mobility Element affect the quality of the urban setting by
     establishing the organization, arrangement and appearance of streets, paths, and transit systems.
     Street classifications, widths, level of service standards, and right-of-way limitations affect
     accessibility, function, visibility, safety, and appearance. The ultimate width of streets determines
     the amount of space available for streetscape improvements within the public realm. Furthermore,
     access to certain modes of transportation affects visual quality, noise levels, and the walkability of
     commercial districts and public spaces.
     The Cultural Resources & Historic Preservation Element addresses areas containing historic
     resources. As many of the Urban Design Element’s proposals draw upon the history and cultural
     heritage of the City, the recommendations of these two elements are related.
     The Infrastructure Element directs the location, distribution, and maintenance of utilities and
     public facilities, including overhead electrical and communication lines, utility corridors, and
     service yards. These facilities also affect the visual character of the built environment, and in this
     way are related to the goals and objectives of the Urban Design Element.
     The Economic Development Element presents revitalization strategies for many of the City’s key
     commercial corridors. One such strategy is to upgrade the image and appearance of these areas in
     order to distinguish them from each other and from commercial districts in adjacent cities. To the
     extent that those strategies depend on the design or re-design of public spaces within the
     corridors, the two elements are related.
ISSUES, GOALS AND POLICIES
     The goals and policies of the Urban Design Element address the following major design issues:
        Transforming Streets—how to create accessible streets that provide ease, safety, and choice
         when moving to and through places.
        Reinventing Commercial Corridors—how to redesign commercial corridors with respect for
         the local heritage and support for contemporary needs.
        Enhancing Community Image and Character—how to manage the form and physical
         appearance of the City to create a distinct design character or image.
        Defining Districts and Neighborhoods—how to recognize and value the differences between
         places, and affirm the meaning of those places for people.
                                         ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                    UD-4

                                                                                        URBAN DESIGN
        Strengthening the Old Towne Historic District—how to manage the form and physical
         appearance of the Old Towne Historic District to preserve and improve its unique historic
         design character.
        Encouraging Appropriate Infill and Renovations—how to balance consistency and variety in
         the urban environment when locating activities and designing new, infill places to allow
         constructive interaction between the new and the old.
Transforming Streets
     City streets are a major physical component of urban structure and organization. They organize
     movement from one place to another, providing people with ease, safety, and choice when moving
     to and through places. City streets also structure how places and uses relate to one other. Major
     streets serve as gateways to the City and play a key role in expressing the image and character of
     the City, and of the areas they traverse. Coordinated street landscaping and improvements
     enhance the character of districts, soften the transition between commercial and residential areas,
     and create impressions and experiences for Orange residents and visitors.
     GOAL 1.0:        Promote streetscapes that enhance the economic vitality and overall visual
                      quality of commercial corridors, support the circulation network, and support
                      pedestrian-scale streets and patterns of activity.
     Policy 1.1:      Enhance the streetscape along the City’s major commercial corridors and other
                      major streets through coordinated public and private improvements to convey a
                      positive image of the district, contribute to its economic vitality and perception of
                      the City, and improve visual and physical transitions into adjacent
                      neighborhoods. Streetscape designs should include wide sidewalks to
                      accommodate unified landscaping, trees, lighting, paving, street furniture, and
                      other public improvements appropriate to the scale of the streets.
     Policy 1.2:      Provide streetscape improvements on Tustin Street and Chapman Avenue that
                      convey their role as major boulevards in the City and County.
     Policy 1.3:      Ensure that streetscape improvements provide for an environment that offers a
                      pleasant experience for motorists, pedestrians, and transit riders.
     Policy 1.4:      Coordinate with local utility providers to identify priority areas for
                      undergrounding or relocation of overhead electrical and telephone/cable wires to
                      remove visual clutter of existing infrastructure.
     Policy 1.5:      Emphasize street-oriented development, with parking located behind or next to
                      buildings rather than in front. Encourage commercial activities such as sidewalk
                      and outdoor dining.
Reinventing Commercial Corridors
     The Land Use Element designates several corridors within Orange as locations where more intense
     commercial development and future mixed-use development may be appropriate. The design of
     these corridors determines how well they will function as activity centers for social, commercial
     and entertainment purposes. The following goal and policies demonstrate the City’s commitment
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 UD-5

URBAN DESIGN
     to ensuring that commercial and mixed-use activity centers enhance the community’s quality of
     life.
     GOAL 2.0:        Create commercial and mixed-use areas of varying scale and function that are
                      visually distinct and complement the City’s identity.
     Policy 2.1:      Transform corridors such as Chapman Avenue, Main Street, The City Drive, and
                      Katella Avenue into active, pedestrian-friendly streets that balance auto, transit,
                      and pedestrian mobility. These streets should accommodate compact
                      development that is oriented to the sidewalks to promote active street life.
     Policy 2.2:      Provide convenient pedestrian and transit access throughout commercial and
                      mixed-use corridors, including an interconnected network of high-amenity
                      streetscapes, attractive and comfortable transit stops, and multiple walkways that
                      connect activities and uses.
     Policy 2.3:      Improve the appearance of arterials and corridors that pass through commercial
                      and mixed-use areas. Use street trees and other landscape and hardscape
                      improvements to improve the visual and spatial experience of drivers, transit
                      riders, and pedestrians using City streets.
     Policy 2.4:      Design future infill mixed-use projects in a manner that reduces or eliminates
                      adverse effects on adjacent single-family residences.
     Policy 2.5:      Develop design standards that ensure the integration of urban parks and open
                      spaces within mixed-use corridors by providing safe and comfortable pedestrian
                      paths, paseos, and high-amenity streetscapes.
Enhancing Community Image and Character
     At a citywide level, programs and improvements will be pursued to improve the visual character of
     business districts throughout Orange in order to enhance the economic vitality and overall visual
     quality of the community. The following goal and policies address this desired enhancement of
     character and identity.
     GOAL 3.0:        Express the City’s distinct community identity and sense of place through
                      improvements to the appearance of new development and commercial and mixed-
                      use corridors.
     Policy 3.1:      Promote community identity through streetscape enhancements, building
                      designs, and treatments marking the primary entrances to the City.
     Policy 3.2:      Encourage contemporary interpretations of historic building types and features to
                      promote architectural continuity throughout the community that reflects the
                      City’s historic and cultural characteristics and emphasizes the history of Orange.
     Policy 3.3:      Strengthen the urban form of the City’s commercial, industrial, institutional, and
                      mixed-use districts by working within the character of the existing historical and
                      architectural fabric of the community, while allowing for the addition of
                      complementary new development and urban design elements.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 UD-6

                                                                                       URBAN DESIGN
      Policy 3.4:      Provide better visual continuity between The Block at Orange shopping center and
                       the rest of the City through consistent streetscape treatments linking The City
                       Drive to West Chapman Avenue.
Defining District and Neighborhood Identity
      Old Towne’s prominent identity distinguishes Orange from many other Orange County cities.
      However, numerous distinctive commercial districts and residential neighborhoods contribute to
      the City’s identity. Additionally, the interface between residential and commercial areas in Orange
      presents special challenges. The following goal and policies describe the City’s strategies to
      enhance district and neighborhood identity and the interface between commercial and residential
      areas through urban design.
      GOAL 4.0:        Establish and reinforce district and neighborhood characteristics recognized both
                       within the community and throughout the region.
      Policy 4.1:      Establish appropriate transitions between commercial, industrial, higher density
                       residential, mixed-use development, and lower density residential areas.
      Policy 4.2:      Encourage the use of creative landscape designs to visually define districts and
                       reduce conflicts between residential and commercial land uses.
      Policy 4.3:      Create an attractive, walkable pedestrian environment within and between
                       commercial districts and neighborhoods through careful site planning,
                       architectural design, and provision of pedestrian amenities such as sidewalks,
                       benches, plaza areas, information kiosks, and other street furniture.
      Policy 4.4:      Provide pedestrian linkages between government buildings and around the Civic
                       Center complex.
      Policy 4.5:      Provide incentives to create neighborhood parks, green spaces, or other public
                       open spaces throughout the City, particularly within commercial and mixed-use
                       corridors.
Old Towne Orange Historic District
      As the heart of Orange, the Old Towne Orange Historic District is a dynamic combination of
      commercial and residential areas blended together in a compact, walkable space. The District
      contains the largest concentration of historic buildings in California. Commercial buildings date
      from the 1880s through the 1920s and exhibit a rich variety of styles and architectural detail.
      The Old Towne District consists of four distinct component areas: the Plaza Historic District, the
      Downtown Core, the Spoke Streets, and the Residential Quadrants. The District is regulated by the
      City’s Historic Preservation Design Standards for Old Towne. These standards establish special
      processing requirements and detailed architectural standards to ensure the long-term enhancement
      and preservation of the District’s architectural resources and context. The Standards also emphasize
      context and compatibility in design of building additions, rehabilitation, and new infill structures.
      The following goal and policies are intended to enable and support the Old Towne Design
      Standards and associated review procedures.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   UD-7

URBAN DESIGN
     GOAL 5.0:         Maintain Old Towne’s identity as the only authentic and intact historic downtown
                       in Orange County.
     Policy 5.1:       Encourage diverse commercial, housing, employment and cultural opportunities
                       throughout Old Towne, placing emphasis on context-sensitive mixed-use and
                       pedestrian-oriented development patterns and adaptive re-use.
     Policy 5.2:       Protect the single-family character and enhance the quality of Old Towne Orange’s
                       residential areas while accommodating change in the commercial core.
     Policy 5.3:       Require infill development to be compatible with the scale and appearance of
                       neighboring historic structures and to comply with all applicable historic
                       preservation design and development standards and Secretary of the Interior
                       standards.
     Policy 5.4:       Support preservation and rehabilitation of commercial and residential buildings in
                       Old Towne, ensuring consistency with the historical context of the District.
Encouraging Appropriate Infill Development and Renovations
     Many of Orange’s older residential and commercial areas are experiencing infill development. At the
     same time, aging structures in these areas require exterior renovations. The following goal and
     policies outline the City’s preferred strategy to address infill development and exterior renovations
     in a manner that is sensitive to the context established by surrounding development.
     GOAL 6.0:         Encourage contextually appropriate infill development projects and property
                       renovations.
     Policy 6.1:       Encourage consistent high quality design of development projects, and provide
                       development standards that ensure building and site design that is well integrated
                       with infrastructure and circulation systems.
     Policy 6.2:       Ensure that new infill development contributes positively to the quality of the
                       surrounding corridor or neighborhood, including the potential to provide
                       additional park space, and minimize the visibility of on-site parking.
     Policy 6.3:       Encourage development of public spaces and plazas within commercial, mixed-use,
                       and residential projects that can accommodate civic events and function as
                       community gathering areas.
     Policy 6.4:       Promote the renovation and upgrading of older commercial developments to create
                       more attractive and functional retail environments.
     Policy 6.5:       Provide logical transitions between higher intensity development within the City’s
                       established commercial, office, and institutional corridors and nearby single-family
                       neighborhoods. Scale, massing, and the location of services within these corridors
                       should respond sensitively to adjacent residential uses.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  UD-8

                                                                                         URBAN DESIGN
Urban Design Plan
     Orange seeks to pursue programs and improvements that enhance and beautify many of its key
     commercial corridors and build upon the City’s distinct identity. The following Urban Design Plan
     provides a framework for Orange’s visual character, defining an urban form that is functional,
     conveys a sense of place, is aesthetically pleasing, and complements both the urbanized and
     natural character of the area. Primary community design concepts include:
         Developing and enhancing the form and appearance of Tustin Street, Chapman Avenue, Main
          Street, The City Drive, Katella Avenue, and Lincoln Avenue in a way that expresses a positive
          image and emphasizes their importance as major commercial corridors in the City and County.
         Improving the overall visual character and image of the City through streetscape enhancement,
          special architectural treatments, prominent landmarks, design quality, and integration of
          natural features.
         Reinforcing the relationship between the urban form of commercial corridors with their
          function as vehicular and transit corridors and links between different commercial districts,
          neighborhoods, open spaces, and activity nodes.
         Recognizing the role that visual appearance of commercial corridors plays in defining the image
          of the City.
         Continuing to enhance Old Towne Orange as the historic heart of the community, with an
          emphasis on promoting walkability, and encouraging adaptive re-use of industrial buildings.
         Developing design strategies for the City’s commercial corridors that describe desired street-
          and pedestrian-oriented architecture, that encourage larger massing that complements and
          helps to define the street edge, and that highlight the distinct character of each corridor.
         Establishing a sense of identity and character for business districts throughout the City.
     These concepts comprise the Urban Design Plan, illustrated in Figure UD-1. Together, they will
     provide the improved visual character and design cohesiveness that Orange desires.
Transforming Streets
     The City recognizes that making streets
     inviting and pleasant for people is an
     important first step toward creating
     identity for its business districts.
     Streetscape aesthetics cover a wide
     variety of features, all of which help to
     create an attractive street scene.
     Streetscape features include lighting,
     signage, street trees, landscaping, street
     and road median plantings, and gateways
     that help mark entry into the City from
     major streets. Streetscapes also include
     amenities such as bus shelters, bike stands, benches, and trash receptacles. All of these features
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  UD-9

URBAN DESIGN
     benefit pedestrians, transit riders, and motorists alike, and are important components of Orange’s
     memorable character.
     However, many City streets lack a sense of character and distinction. Within the commercial
     corridors, the focus has historically been on providing easy access by automobile and establishing
     signage meant for drivers. The buildings tend to be set back from the street with numerous curb
     cuts, creating incongruous appearance and an inhospitable pedestrian experience. In many cases,
     walkways from the street to retail areas do not exist, and bus stops along transit corridors lack
     rider amenities such as shelters, trash receptacles and lighting. Street design standards are not
     evenly implemented throughout the community. As a result, a number of streets lack trees,
     medians, and sidewalks. Many utility poles remain, and some sidewalks along Tustin Street and
     Chapman Avenue have been damaged by tree roots.
     Through land use policy, the City has actively reserved portions of arterial streets such as
     Chapman Avenue, South Main Street, and East Katella Avenue to be transformed into vibrant and
     compact commercial and mixed-use activity centers that cater to both pedestrian- and auto-
     oriented consumer needs. Several of these activity centers are oriented around major arterial
     corridors. Establishing a “boulevard” image and character, transforming the existing streetscape,
     and changing the relationship between buildings, cars, people, and streets are key objectives for
     these locations.
     Street plantings (including street trees and median plantings), sidewalk improvements, and
     lighting are among the streetscape features the City will encourage along these highly-visible
     corridors. These improvements will help better convey the City’s image as a desirable commercial
     and mixed-use destination. In addition, the City will continue to encourage streetscape
     improvements along other commercial corridors. The City will help coordinate public and private
     improvements that promote streetscape enhancement to advance business districts, create
     desirable residential neighborhoods, and buffer the transition between commercial and residential
     areas.
     Future streetscape improvements will provide an attractive commercial environment, as well as a
     safe and pleasant experience for motorists, pedestrians, and transit riders. These improvements
     will include providing adequate bus shelters, transit signage, and sidewalk improvements along
     major transit thoroughfares such as Katella Avenue, Chapman Avenue, Main Street, The City
     Drive, and Tustin Street. The City will work with the Orange County Transportation Authority
     (OCTA), the Orange Redevelopment Agency (Redevelopment Agency), and individual property
     owners to achieve these streetscape improvements.
Reinventing Commercial Corridors
     A diverse variety of retail, office, and industrial areas have been developed within Orange,
     reflecting the diversity of Orange businesses and the strength of its commercial and industrial
     areas. Despite the variety and stability of non-residential areas, many of these retail areas have
     taken on a cluttered, nondescript appearance dominated by their adjacent roadway environment.
     Enhancing and improving these areas will incrementally improve the quality of life in Orange, both
     aesthetically and economically. Successful reinvention of the City’s commercial areas will provide
     an attractive shopping and business environment, an improved street environment, and a vibrant
     public realm for motorists, pedestrians, and transit riders.
                                       ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                UD-10

UD-11 Figure UD-1 Urban Design Pla

                                                                                  URBAN DESIGN
Maintaining an urban design focus on Orange’s commercial corridors is not a new concept. To
improve and enhance retail areas, the City developed the Tustin Street Design Standards (1986) and
the Design Standards for the Southwest Project Area (1986). The purpose of these standards was to
“coordinate individual buildings or projects, which were often constructed at different times, into
a harmonious whole and to improve the aesthetic environment.” Nearly twenty years after
implementation of these measures, results have been mixed. Many retailers have retained their
corporate identity through the use of programmatic architecture that is not intended to blend well
with surrounding structures and settings. Furthermore, much of the corporate architecture in
Orange represents standard building and site design that is replicated across Southern California
and the nation. Little of the commercial strip architecture reflects a distinctive sense of character
or place. The 1986 standards attempted to guide development into thematic areas that would
create districts with distinct identities. For example, the State College Thematic District targeted
office development with a corporate contemporary look. The South Main/La Veta Thematic District
adds to the financial, medical, and business office inventory while presenting an urban
contemporary look that is less bold and monumental than that of the State College District. The
Tustin Street standards were designed to encourage redevelopment that would focus on “good
design rather than on ever-larger, more eye-catching signs or advertising.” This Element seeks to
unify these ideas and provide a better foundation for the City’s goals for commercial corridors.
Even though Orange already has many examples of mixed-use development, it will require new
and innovative design standards and guidelines to implement mixed-use development on
automobile-dominated roads.
Tustin Street
To improve retail areas on major six-lane arterials such as Tustin Street, the City will revise and
enforce the Tustin Street Design Standards and the Design Standards for the Southwest Project Area.
Each of these documents is geared to harmonizing buildings that were constructed at various
times, and to creating an aesthetically pleasing corridor. New implementation measures to be
included in these documents will address the contextual integration of building styles and site
design on adjacent parcels to create better harmony among buildings along Tustin Street.
Chapman Avenue and Main Street
On other arterial roads such as Chapman Avenue and Main Street, the City will encourage
structured parking wrapped or disguised with commercial or residential uses, and placement of
parking behind or next to buildings to create street-oriented pedestrian entrances. Street façades
can be improved by varying the massing and height of buildings, and by using a wider spectrum of
plants and trees in landscaping.
Katella Avenue
On Katella Avenue, the City will promote the use of more consistent signage legible to both
drivers and pedestrians, as well as improved landscaping to create a consistent and coherent
streetscape. Transit amenities will be particularly important along Katella Avenue, which leads to
the proposed Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center (ARTIC) in Anaheim. Creation
of a consistent streetscape will be a challenge, because land uses along Katella Avenue between
Batavia Street and Glassell Street will remain, for the most part, automobile-oriented retail and
                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            UD-13

URBAN DESIGN
     service uses. The westernmost portion of Katella Avenue will host a mix of high-density
     recreational and retail along with residential uses. Many of the City’s valued automobile sales
     outlets are located along the central portion of Katella Avenue, and will be maintained and
     enhanced for the long term. Approaching Tustin Street, Katella Avenue will be targeted for infill
     commercial and residential mixed-use projects consistent with surrounding neighborhood
     character. The City will work with OCTA, other transit service providers, the Redevelopment
     Agency, and individual property owners to ensure that both transit and automobile features are
     provided within the streetscape of Katella Avenue, that visibility and access are maintained to
     auto dealers and other commercial uses along the street, and that the City’s sign requirements are
     met.
     Lincoln Avenue
     Lincoln Avenue, located at the northern end of the City, currently functions as a pass-through
     traffic corridor between State Route 91, Anaheim Hills, and the City of Anaheim. In its current
     form, the streetscape lacks visual appeal, cohesion, and civic identity. The City seeks to improve
     the future commercial environment of Lincoln Avenue, to reclaim the street and redefine the
     corridor as distinctly Orange, and to transform the wide street into a more pedestrian-friendly
     environment. Such techniques as improved landscaping, median treatments, and street-sensitive
     building orientation will be used to introduce pedestrian scale features to the streetscape.
     Humanizing the scale of Lincoln Avenue and improving the pedestrian environment will be
     critically important to the success of the planned land use strategy at this location, which seeks to
     encourage both commercial activity and mixed-density residential development. The City will be
     sensitive to the concerns of neighbors at this location, and seeks to recognize and promote the
     eclectic nature of the live-work environment that already exists on Lincoln Avenue. Retaining and
     reinforcing design elements of the current larger lot, unconventional environment of the corridor
     will be a key requirement for future development.
Enhancing Community Image and Character
     Orange will refine its visual character and community image through gateway enhancements,
     spatial definition and landmarks, design quality, activity nodes, urban linkages, street trees, urban
     green zones, viewsheds, and mixed-use activity centers. Each of these design tools is described
     below.
     Gateway Enhancements
     Commercial corridors play an important role in the City’s economy, providing shopping, dining,
     and entertainment options for residents and visitors alike. The entrances or gateways to these
     corridors from other communities should raise awareness of the City, orient visitors and residents
     to the place, and strengthen community identity. Gateway enhancement is a design technique
     that can be used to introduce a distinctly Orange look and feel to the streetscapes that connect
     the City to surrounding communities. Gateway signs are currently present at primary
     intersections near the municipal boundary. However, designing good gateways extends beyond
     entry markers to consideration of the surrounding buildings, landscaping, plazas, and streets.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                UD-14

                                                                                                URBAN DESIGN
         To improve gateway streets, the City will prepare, adopt and implement a streetscape master plan
         for key commercial corridors, including the gateway corridors of Tustin Street, Chapman Avenue,
         South Main Street, Lincoln Avenue, Katella Avenue, and The City Drive. The master plan will
         integrate concepts discussed for these corridors throughout the General Plan and will provide
         guidelines related to façade improvements, pedestrian amenities, streetscapes, and urban green
         zones. Specifically, the master plan will focus upon the role of these streets as entryways to the
         City, and will determine the desired design techniques to improve them.
         Spatial Definition and Landmarks
         Much like the rest of the County, Orange is a fully
         developed urban area, with the exception of the east
         Orange hillsides and portions of the Santiago Creek
         corridor. Park and open space opportunities within the
         urban fabric are rare. However, Orange has been
         successful in retaining large areas of open space along
         the fringes of the community, and these help to
         spatially define the City. These areas include the
         County’s 477-acre Irvine Regional Park, which A sign for Grijalva Community Park marks the
         contains a zoo, a scale railroad, a nature center, and site of the historic Grijalva Adobe.
         other amenities. Irvine Lake provides a chance to fish and hike. The City also boasts a number of
         wilderness areas, including Peters Canyon Regional Park, Santiago Oaks Regional Park and Nature
         Center, and the Tucker Wildlife Sanctuary within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
         Many landmarks serve as reminders of the City’s cultural history. The 1928 American Legion Hall
         and the 1922 Sunkist Fruit Exchange Building are located near the Plaza in downtown Orange. The
         community’s roots as part of the Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana are marked by the Grijalva Adobe
                                            site, original site of the region’s first ranchero, home to the builder
                                            and colonizer of Orange. Pitcher Park is home to the Honey House
                                            and the Orange Fire Museum. The area’s agricultural heritage is
                                            best revisited at the Villa Park Orchards Association, which is
                                            owned by Chapman University. This is one of only two packing
                                            houses remaining in Orange County, and the last in the City.
                                            During discussions with community members as part of the
                                            development of this General Plan, a number of key visual focal
                                            points were highlighted. The protection of these resources is an
                                            important part of maintaining the City’s links to the past as it
                                            moves forward. For many, the Norfolk pine tree at Plaza Park is an
                                            immediate icon for motorists traveling east and west on Chapman
                                            Avenue. The hills in the eastern portion of the City, near the
                                            Orange Hill Restaurant, are a reminder of the City’s rural past.
                                            Church spires, such as the one at St. John’s Lutheran Church, help
                                            establish neighborhood identity and a sense of place. Even icons
                                            such as the Selman Chevrolet neon sign and the flag pole in the
                                            median of Town and Country Road are important landmarks that
Historic icons include the church spires of
                                            residents associate with the community.
St. John’s Lutheran Church.
                                             ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                        UD-15

URBAN DESIGN
    Landmarks serve as identification points and markers that guide people to destinations. Landmarks
    also provide historical points of reference that convey how the City’s current design evokes its
    history. The City will continue to recognize landmarks such as Plaza Park, at the intersection of
    Chapman Avenue and Glassell Street, which is surrounded by a commercial square and serves as
    the centerpiece of the original one-square mile city. The City will continue to work through
    established processes to identify additional landmarks and icons.
    Design Quality
    Consistent streetscape design and urban form hierarchy will be encouraged to strengthen district
    and neighborhood identities within both residential and non-residential areas. Preservation of the
    historic portion of the community will be achieved through renovation and adaptive reuse of
    buildings. New developments will complement the existing urban fabric by emphasizing a
    harmonious building and site interface and using streetscape treatments as transitional elements
    between commercial and residential areas. This aim of ensuring proper visual and land use
    transitions from one district to another will also be pursued regarding renovation and infill
    development. The City will preserve neighborhood character through applying standards such as
    the Infill Residential Design Guidelines and the Old Towne Design Standards. These guidelines
    require and guide the design of new development projects so they adhere to the existing
    neighborhood character.
    Even though the intent of the land use designations is to place complementary uses and features
    adjacent to one another, the nature and sequence of development will sometimes allow conflicting
    or inconsistent uses to abut each other. To address such situations, the City will revise existing
    design and development guidelines to improve the relationship of buildings to one another, to
    open spaces, and to the public realm. Because the City’s most effective current guidelines focus
    solely on new development in residential neighborhoods or the Old Towne Historic District,
    revisions to the guidelines for commercial districts are needed to address design and scale issues
    apparent in transitional areas where commercial corridors abut residential uses. By requiring buffer
    zones or encouraging thoughtful, quality design at these thresholds, the City will harmonize
    visually incompatible land uses.
    Activity Nodes
    Key activity nodes in Orange include Old Towne Orange
    and major commercial, civic, entertainment, or
    employment centers such as The Village at Orange, The
    Block at Orange, South Main, Town and Country, and El
    Modena. To enhance urban form, the City will assess
    and identify design elements that distinguish activity
    nodes from one another, and will improve and maintain
    architectural and landscape details, site layout, and land
    uses. The City will also identify elements that hinder
    activity in less vibrant commercial areas, and will
    improve the visual appeal and access of these locations.
    To minimize any unsightly view of utility lines, the City
                                                                The Block at Orange serves as an activity
    will encourage utility lines to be placed underground or    center with commercial and retail features that
    relocated away from the arterial street frontage for new    attract regional and local residents.
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               UD-16

                                                                                      URBAN DESIGN
infill developments, and will work with local utility providers to identify and move unsightly
overhead utility lines underground.
Urban Linkages
Residents of Orange will use streets, sidewalks, bike
paths, and trails to connect from various destinations
throughout the City. Orange will be well-connected
through aesthetically pleasing and safe multi-modal
routes on which to walk, bike, and drive. The City
recognizes Old Towne as the center of public and civic
life in Orange. The City will use the network of
connections in Old Towne as a model for developing
connections between commercial, recreational, and
                                                               Santiago Creek Trail provides bike paths and
residential areas in other parts of Orange. Street
                                                               pedestrian linkages to other green spaces
amenities such as landscaping and street lighting will         such as Hart Park.
guide pedestrians and drivers.
Commercial and retail developments will enhance street life through people-oriented architectural
features and quality building design. The City will update the Zoning Code to encourage features
that buffer street activity and pedestrians from automobile traffic by providing both distance and
substantial landscaping. Within mixed-use areas and other commercial districts, the City will
employ pedestrian-friendly amenities such as enhanced crosswalk areas, lighting, benches, and
trash receptacles to create a safer, more inviting, and more walkable environment.
Street Trees
                                            Trees are an important component of Orange’s urban
                                            landscape. They can create a pleasant environment in
                                            which to drive and walk, and they can buffer sounds and
                                            obscure unsightly blank walls. To harmonize and
                                            beautify streets with community-approved trees and
                                            tree layouts, the City of Orange implements its Street
                                            Tree Master Plan. The master plan quantifies existing
                                            trees and points out those determined undesirable by
                                            the community.
                                            Unorganized and neglected street trees can detract from
                                            the streetscape. Additionally, not all trees are ideal for
                                            street use. Some trees can create hazards when their
                                            roots cause damage to underground water or
Orange’s Street Tree Master Plan provides a wastewater pipes, or uplift pavements and sidewalks.
community-approved plant palette and        The Street Tree Master Plan takes these and other
planting details.
                                            precautions into consideration to recommend reliable
and attractive trees. The master plan includes a municipal ordinance and a street tree inventory,
which lists and describes acceptable trees and planting areas within the City’s road right-of-way.
Approximately 80 different species have been approved to be planted in Orange. The ordinance
                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            UD-17

URBAN DESIGN
    and inventory recommend trees for various areas and arterials within the City in order to preserve
    and enhance Orange’s unique commercial corridors and neighborhoods.
    Urban Green Zones
    Urban green zones are constructed green spaces within the urban boundaries of the City, and may
    consist of such varied features as parkways along sidewalks and trails, neighborhood or pocket
    parks, plazas and public spaces, landscaped medians, and street trees and smaller plantings along
    local roads and abandoned railroad corridors. Such green spaces are often provided in activity
    zones to give shade, beautify streets with abundant vegetation, or function as plazas and valued
    public spaces, such as the Plaza in Old Towne. Urban green zones serve as destination points
    where pedestrians rest, residents gather, and visitors orient themselves within the City. Public
    plazas also provide space for cultural and social events. With attractive fountains, street furniture,
    and other amenities, public spaces can attract activity and enhance community vitality.
     The Plaza Fountain in Old Towne Orange is an historical element that provides public open space for resting, water and
     “softscape” features that beautify, and serves as a destination point for visitors.
    The built-out, urban character of Orange makes the creation and preservation of urban green
    zones a priority. The City will incorporate natural resources into the urban fabric through the
    designation of urban green zones, as shown on the Urban Design Plan (Figure UD-1).
                                            ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                        UD-18

                                                                                  URBAN DESIGN
New mixed-use centers and major commercial and office centers can incorporate public spaces
where Orange residents, from youths to seniors, can relax and recreate. These green zones will
complement the built-out City while providing respite and relief from the urban fabric through
landscaping and vegetation. The City will provide incentives to developers who incorporate user-
friendly, publicly-accessible urban green space into mixed-use, residential, and commercial
developments. These green spaces should be easily accessible and inviting, both physically and
visually. They should be well-integrated with street activity and designed to prevent dead or
isolated spaces. Specially designed layouts of plants and trees will provide visual and sound
buffers from the built environment, while providing smooth transitions between land uses. Urban
green zones will also be encouraged along abandoned rail corridors and along waterways (rivers,
creeks, and channels) to link trails and to integrate linear parks within urban settings.
Sidewalk improvements such as multiple walkways, landscape and hardscape embellishments,
provision of adequate bicycle and pedestrian linkages between activity nodes, and establishment
of design standards that recognize the role of buildings and the built environment in promoting
street life are important steps to achieving these objectives. Improving pedestrian comfort will also
require addressing needs of transit riders by embellishing transit stops with shelters and benches,
signs, route maps, and schedules.
Viewsheds
A viewshed is the space that is readily visible from the public areas of a city. Obviously, it is
desirable that the views provided be inviting, meaningful, or even scenic. Orange contains both
built and natural environments that convey identity and that should be easily seen by residents
and visitors.
Within the built environment, the City addresses viewshed issues by trying to reduce unsightly
features and introduce or enhance features that make views more meaningful and inviting.
Accordingly, the City will encourage coherent, well-designed signs within commercial corridors,
employing design elements that tie into the history of the City, or character or function of the
particular district where possible. These physical alterations will, in turn, enhance local
community identity and sense of distinctiveness. Banners mounted on street lights will
communicate ongoing City-sponsored activities and encourage public involvement. Appropriately
scaled signs, designated walkways for pedestrians, and continuous façades will also enhance the
image of the City.
The City requires that utilities for new development be placed underground, hiding unsightly
overhead utility lines. The City will also consider adopting an ordinance requiring that existing
overhead utility lines be placed underground in accordance with the City’s Utility Undergrounding
Master Plan. Benefits would include a safer and more attractive pedestrian environment once
utility poles are removed from sidewalks. Business improvement programs will provide funding for
maintenance and renovations, and redevelopment plans for the Orange Merged and Amended
Redevelopment Project Area will be consistent with approved design standards for the area.
Preserving public access to views of the natural environment is a topic discussed at length in the
Natural Resources Element. The eastern portion of Orange’s planning area is rich with natural
aesthetic resources, including canyons, a lake, creeks, ridgelines, and expanses of public green
space. Both City trails and privately-maintained community trails link neighborhoods and provide
                                  ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                            UD-19

URBAN DESIGN
      east-to-west connections within the City. Trails and viewsheds provide visual and psychological
      respite and spaces for recreation. Preserving valued physical features of open spaces within the
      City requires adherence to hillside development requirements and conservation laws. For more
      detailed discussion on landscape and viewshed corridors, please refer to the Natural Resources
      Element.
Defining District and Neighborhood Identity
      Orange consists of many distinct commercial, office, mixed-use, industrial, and residential
      neighborhoods that all contribute to the City’s identity. Establishing or fostering neighborhood-
      based district identity requires making sure that each of the City’s commercial and mixed-use
      districts are distinctive, but contribute to a cohesive community environment.
      Commercial and Office Districts
      Connectivity is a challenge within commercial areas. The two connectivity issues are: (1) easy
      access from one commercial building to another; and (2) connections from commercial buildings
      to the adjacent residential areas. As each parcel along the commercial strips was developed,
      automobile access was resolved one parcel at a time. As a result, today one is unable to easily
      walk from one building to another, or to drive one’s car from one building to another without
      having to exit the property and use the street. Most of the commercial strips abut residential
      areas. However, connecting residential areas with retail centers was not a community priority at
      the time the centers were developed.
      The office areas throughout Orange, especially the South Main Street district, the areas adjacent to
      the hospitals, and the Town and Country area, are areas in transition. Currently, many of the
      facilities aim to meet the needs of those approaching by automobile, with little regard for the
      pedestrian, despite the convenient mix of uses and services within easy walking distance of major
      facilities. For example, the area near Children’s Hospital of Orange County contains very large
      institutional buildings on a campus that has expanded many times over the years. The result is
      very large buildings that come right up to the property line and sidewalk with virtually no
      pedestrian amenities. Other office towers are set back from the street to provide limited parking in
      front of the building, with no consideration for human scale design.
      The interface between residential and commercial and office areas in Orange presents special
      challenges. Potential conflicts exist between redevelopment of the City’s commercial and office
      corridors by encouraging higher-intensity infill projects, and maintenance of the privacy and
      seclusion offered by many of the City’s residential neighborhoods. This interface issue is
      particularly apparent in the Katella Avenue corridor and the South Main Street corridor, where
      land use policy recommends both intensification of commercial land use and integration of mixed-
      use residential and commercial uses. Through updates to the City’s various design guidelines to
      specifically address this issue, the City will encourage pedestrian and visual connections to
      adjacent neighborhoods and context-sensitive design of new commercial projects.
                                        ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  UD-20

                                                                                  URBAN DESIGN
Mixed-Use Activity Centers
Mixed-use is a planning concept that recognizes the
value of mixing complementary land uses within
proximity of each other. Blending various types of land
uses either vertically or horizontally, and co-housing
diverse uses in the same building or adjacent buildings
creates vitality, encourages around-the-clock activity, Visioning games helped youth participants
                                                        visualize and convey urban design ideas for the
and brings residents to retail shops and amenities
                                                        City.
located within walking distance of their homes or
offices.
Mixed-use is not a modern phenomenon, but a tested
and accepted concept commonly found in older
downtowns and urban cores. Though our current
reliance on automobiles has resulted in heavy
emphasis on drivers and the car, mixed-use design
allows the City to create places for people,
accommodating both the driver and the pedestrian.        Example of a mixed use center incorporating
                                                         parking within the site to maintain a
Mixed-use offers distinct physical characteristics that  pedestrian oriented street environment
result in vibrant, pedestrian-friendly environments.
Street-oriented stores and compact site designs attract
activities and encourage walking, especially when
these design features are accompanied by an enhanced
environment characterized by pronounced entryways,
textured exterior materials, display windows, and
outdoor eating areas. Building designs often employ
both horizontal and vertical components that break up
the building mass. Street amenities, such as benches,
street trees and landscaping, trash receptacles,
human-scaled lighting, surface treatments, and public
art often accompany mixed-use environments. Public
                                                        Neighborhood mixed-use mixes residential and
or civic uses are desirable as a component, if not the  commercial uses that cater to local clientele.
centerpiece, of larger mixed-use projects or districts.
These uses emphasize civic responsibility and recall a
former time when the post office, city hall, or library
was the center of public life.
Mixed-use emphasizes the need to blend parking
structures seamlessly into the built fabric. To achieve
this, parking entrances should be designed to match
the architectural scale and style of surrounding
building façades. Surface parking should be abundantly
                                                        Lower-density neighborhood mixed-use and
landscaped and pedestrian paths should be well
                                                        well-designed streetscapes and street furniture
defined from building entrances to parking spaces.      will provide human-scaled developments.
                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                          UD-21

URBAN DESIGN
    On a grander scale, mixed-use corridors aim to connect activity nodes. They orient pedestrians
    and drivers by communicating place-specific information through clear signage that informs,
    through promenades of trees that guide, and through landmarks that steer people to their
    destinations.
    Potential desirable results of developing mixed-use activity centers include context-sensitive
    building scale and design, a higher intensity of use, and increased pedestrian facilities. These
    results are not automatic, however. They will be more likely where designs include architectural
    references to local history and local culture, and where public programs and specific uses arise as a
    result of input from residents of all ages and backgrounds.
    Mixed-Use Districts
    Mixed-use areas need not appear either
    “generic” or radically different from Orange’s
    existing built environment. Orange will provide a
    range of mixed-use areas, including lower scale
    projects that complement historic areas or
    residential neighborhoods, projects with
    contemporary style, eclectic projects, and
    projects that are quintessentially “urban.”
    The Land Use Element identifies several types of
    mixed-use. Four neighborhood scale mixed-use
    categories are established, including two
    categories to be used exclusively in Old Towne
    Orange. Lower densities are encouraged where Old Towne areas previously designated for light
                                                         industrial use will be rehabilitated to house mixed-use
    mixed-use development abuts established or residential development while preserving the exterior
    single-family residential areas, such as along historic character of the building.
    portions of West Katella Avenue. Higher
    densities are encouraged within established, higher-intensity commercial and institutional
    corridors, such as South Main Street, and within planned, transit-oriented development districts,
    such as the Santa Fe Depot area. An urban mixed-use category is also introduced for portions of
    Uptown Orange, The Block at Orange, the Promenade on West Katella, and the Town and
    Country Road corridor. The neighborhood-serving mixed-use areas will include a mix of residential
    and commercial uses that will provide amenities for local residents and workers. Urban mixed-use
    zones will serve as regional centers for entertainment, office, and commercial uses, as well as
    providing needed housing for the area.
    Each location will require different architectural styles, densities, and approaches to mixed-use.
    However, all will gradually incorporate a mix of residential and commercial uses with street-
    oriented buildings and will emphasize streetscape improvements. Residents will benefit from
    proximity to retail and commercial stores, and businesses will gain more customers because of
    improved visibility, better accessibility, and more welcoming designs.
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 UD-22

                                                                                              URBAN DESIGN
                                   Neighborhood Mixed-Use Districts
                                   Neighborhood mixed-use areas include East Katella Avenue between
                                   Glassell Street and California Street, and South Main Street between
                                   Almond Avenue and La Veta Avenue.
                                   These areas will accommodate commercial uses with residential units on
                                   the upper floors, featuring vertical setbacks and improved store recognition.
                                   The City will consider undertaking a streetscape program to improve the
                                   appearance of East Katella Avenue and South Main Street, which will form
                                   the spines of the City’s mixed-use neighborhoods. User-friendly bus stops
                                   will accompany other pedestrian-scaled street furnishing.
                                   For East Katella Avenue, the City will encourage more compact, intensely
                                   developed designs at these locations, and may require a decrease in height
                                   and/or massing as these developments abut single-family residential areas.
                                   Strip malls located along East Katella Avenue will gradually incorporate
A mix of commercial and mixed-use elements. Public safety will be improved with streetscape
residential uses in compact
                                   improvements and landscaping. Residential neighborhoods will be buffered
development creates a walkable
and vibrant environment.           from traffic through use of landscaping, attractive walls, and fences.
                                   Old Towne Mixed-Use Districts
                                    Old Towne, including the Santa Fe Depot area, will continue to function as
                                    a lower density mixed-use and residential area. Future emphasis will be
                                    placed upon adaptive reuse of industrial structures surrounding the Santa
                                    Fe Depot and rail corridor as potential Transit Oriented Development
                                    projects, consistent with recommendations of the Santa Fe Depot Specific
                                    Plan. Adaptive reuse is a preservation concept that allows older buildings
                                    to be adapted to new uses while preserving the exterior historic character
                                    of the building. Old Towne areas previously designated for light industrial
                                    use will be rehabilitated to house mixed-use or residential development,
                                    and they will be designed to minimize impacts from adjacent industrial
                                    uses and rail activity. Continued application of the Old Towne Design
                                    Standards and use of cultural and historical design cues will preserve Old
                                    Towne’s unique character.
                                    Urban Mixed-Use Districts
                                    The City’s most intense future residential and commercial uses will occur in
                                    the areas located west of the Santa Ana River in Uptown Orange, including
                                    The Block at Orange, County Facilities, University of California Irvine
                                    Medical Center, and West Chapman Avenue, as well as the Town and
Urban mixed-use areas within the    Country Road and Katella Avenue corridors. Streets within these areas will
City will provide a dynamic mix of  be lined with streetlights and banners announcing civic events held in the
open plazas for al fresco dining,
shopping, and entertainment         City, and will be bustling with outdoor seating at restaurants and stores.
along with residential uses.
                                              ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                       UD-23

URBAN DESIGN
    Most of the West Chapman/Uptown Orange district, west of SR- 57 and Interstate 5 (I-5), will
    accommodate high-density, high-rise apartments or condominiums near or mixed with
    commercial retail uses and institutions. New mixed-use designations established in the Land Use
    Element will provide needed housing at intensities appropriate to the area.
    The West Katella district will accommodate a
    mixture of commercial, entertainment, and
    residential uses. This vibrant area will include a
    variety of public spaces for outdoor eating and
    events. These spaces will be surrounded by shops
    and entertainment. The entire West Katella
    Avenue gateway corridor will be better
    connected visually to other major arterial roads
    by a promenade of street trees and by consistent,
    attractive signage. Dynamic developments will
    locate parking behind or away from the street front, further enhancing the gateway corridor. The
    City will also work to improve bus stop amenities along the street.
    Industrial Districts
    Industrial areas in Orange add to the diverse economic base of the City. In the future, Orange’s
    industrial area will be exclusively clustered within the central western portion of the City, as
    industrial uses located in Old Towne transition to more exclusively residential, commercial, and
    office uses.
    The City’s industrial areas combine a mix of heavy industrial, light industrial, commercial, and
    office uses, and serve as buffer zones between intense commercial developments and residential
    neighborhoods. Industrial and office buildings are often boxy and nondescript, but their
    appearance can be improved by clear signage and
    landscaped street fronts, as advocated by the
    City to improve the image of local businesses.
    Building designs should integrate public spaces
    for employees, should incorporate parking away
    from the main access street, and should improve
    public safety through lighting, landscaping, and
    other amenities and features that promote
    actively used spaces and natural surveillance.
    Aside from traditional industrial uses, the
    industrial areas also provide an opportunity to
    expand and connect open spaces for buffering
    and for recreational purposes along rail corridors   Clear signage provides information to drivers.
    and the Santa Ana River trail.                       Landscaped parkways soften the appearance of
                                                         industrial areas.
                                    ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                              UD-24

                                                                                                  URBAN DESIGN
Old Towne Orange Historic District
                                                   The City’s most recognized and best documented
                                                   neighborhood is the Old Towne Orange Historic District. The
                                                   District is the largest concentration of historic buildings in
                                                   California. The commercial buildings date from the 1880s
                                                   through the 1920s and exhibit a rich variety of styles and
                                                   architectural detail. At one point in 1928, the City of Orange
                                                   Planning Commission proposed that the entire commercial area
                                                   be remodeled in the then-popular Mission Revival style. Only
                                                   the first block of East Chapman was completed with red tile
                                                   roofs and stucco arches.
                                                   The District consists of four distinct component areas: the
                                                   Plaza Historic District, the Downtown Core, the Spoke Streets,
  Harmonized, yet varied architecture and and the Residential Quadrants. Each of these components will
  intricate details result in the charming and
                                                   be preserved to maintain Old Towne’s identity as a unique
  interesting environment of Old Towne Orange.
                                                   historic downtown for the City as well as the County of
                                                   Orange. The entire area is regulated by the Historic Preservation
           Design Standards for Old Towne, last updated in 1995. The Standards set forth special processing
           requirements and detailed architectural standards to better ensure the long-term enhancement
           and preservation of the District’s architectural resources and context. City development approval
           processes allow for the careful evaluation of projects, including their relationship to the rest of the
           District, the rhythm and pattern of buildings on the street, and the height, scale, massing,
           textures, materials, and colors of buildings. Other design criteria include landscaping, signage, and
           overall design quality.
           To maintain the vibrant, dynamic central core, the City will apply the design guidelines to
           renovations and maintain the existing design character of commercial buildings with brick facades,
           ornamental cornices, decorative awnings, and enhanced fenestration. Additionally, development
                                                  up to the lot lines will be encouraged to preserve this area’s
                                                  small-town downtown character. In areas where land uses of
                                                  differing intensity meet, buffers, landscaping, and building height
                                                  step-backs will be employed to ensure optimal conditions for
                                                  both commercial and residential activities.
                                                  Several streets serve as transitional areas between Old Towne
                                                  and surrounding residential or commercial neighborhoods. The
                                                  main design goal for Old Towne streets is to improve the
                                                  aesthetic value of properties that front these streets: North
                                                  Glassell Street from Maple Avenue to Walnut Avenue, South
                                                  Glassell Street from Almond Avenue to the Garden Grove
                                                  Freeway (SR-22), East Chapman Avenue from Grand Street to
Awnings at street fronts, pavers on sidewalks,
and brick facades create a colorful and           Cambridge Street, and West Chapman Avenue from Lemon
interesting street elevation, and outdoor dining  Street to Batavia Street. To create a gradual transition on these
provides opportunities for people-watching.       streets from Old Towne’s historic small-scale development to
                                                  the more contemporary, and in some cases more intense,
                                                 ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                           UD-25

URBAN DESIGN
    development in surrounding areas will generally require less intense land uses and strict adherence
    to historical references.
    In residential portions of Old Towne, the City will protect the predominantly single-family
    character of neighborhoods, enhance the quality of Old Towne Orange’s residential areas, and
    ensure that infill developments are compatible with existing neighborhood scale and appearance.
    In addition, as detailed in the Land Use Element, residential densities permitted throughout Old
    Towne are generally low, in order to maintain historic integrity, and to reduce the likelihood of
    higher density infill projects that are incompatible with neighborhood character.
ENCOURAGING APPROPRIATE INFILL DEVELOPMENT AND
RENOVATIONS
    Orange developed over many decades, as indicated
    in the City’s wide variety of distinctive
    neighborhoods, each of which reflects the thinking
    about urban form and neighborhood structure that
    was current at the time of their creation. These
    design values range from the tight cohesiveness of
    the Old Towne residential neighborhood to the
    equestrian estates found in the Orange Park Acres
    community. This variety is also evident in a large
    number of the City’s suburban residential tracts.
    Like    the      commercial      areas,     residential
    neighborhoods offer a diverse range of eclectic Preserving neighborhood character and property
    styles and densities that cater to a full range of values are key objectives of the City’s Infill
                                                              Residential Design Guidelines.
    residential needs. Successful maintenance of the
    City’s varied residential areas allows the Urban Design Element to focus on enhancement of the
    City’s commercial corridors. Ultimately, successful integration of the residential areas with the
    commercial corridors will be a critical factor for the quality of life in Orange.
                                                          Orange’s Infill Residential Guidelines encourage infill
                                                          development to:
                                                                   Follow the existing scale and pattern of the
                                                                    neighborhood.
                                                                   Match or complement the existing
                                                                    architectural fabric.
                                                                   Preserve existing topography.
                                                                   Preserve privacy of neighbors.
                                                                   Minimize prominence of accessory features
                                                                    from street elevation.
    Orange’s Infill Residential Design Guidelines aim to preserve neighborhood character and property
    values, maintain streetscape integrity, continue existing urban form, and encourage sensitivity to
    topography. Small-scale subdivisions, single-family units, accessory units, additions, and
                                      ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                                 UD-26

                                                                                     URBAN DESIGN
    transitions between single-family to multi-family residential units are subject to the requirements
    established in the Guidelines. Design elements addressed in the Guidelines include site planning,
    building scale, architectural considerations, topography and natural features, and accessory
    features that achieve gradual transition between new and existing development.
    The City will continue to support new developments and renovations that promote preservation
    or are well-integrated into existing architectural styles and the prevalent character of each
    neighborhood.
URBAN DESIGN IMPLEMENTATION
    The goals, policies, and plans identified in this Element are implemented through a variety of City
    plans, ordinances, development requirements, capital improvements, and ongoing collaboration
    with regional agencies and neighboring jurisdictions. Specific implementation measures for this
    Element are contained in the General Plan Appendix.
                                     ORANGE GENERAL PLAN
                                               UD-27

