            Air Quality Element
            INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE ELEMENT
            California Government Codes Sections 65300 and 65302 mandate that every city
            and county within the state prepare a General Plan containing the following
            elements: Land Use, Circulation, Housing, Conservation, Open Space, Noise and
            Safety. The purpose of General Plans is to provide and guide a community with
            long-term development plans and goals. The elements may be adopted individually
            or in various combinations (State of California, Office of Planning and Research,
            1990). California Government Codes Section 65302 states that cities or counties
            may prepare additional elements that may meet the unique needs of the
            community. Air quality is not always suggested as an individual element, but is
            often addressed in Conservation, Resource Management, Health and Safety and/or
            Circulation Elements. However, the addition of air quality elements to California
            General Plans has been recommended by the Southern California Association of
            Governments (SCAG), the regional planning agency for six Southern California
            counties including Ventura, and local air pollution control districts (Ventura County
            Air Pollution Control District [VCAPCD]) as the most effective process for
            identifying and integrating local actions into a comprehensive air quality strategy
            (SCAG,1990).
            Although air quality elements are not required, they are particularly important in
            California communities where air quality is a dominant issue with respect to its
            attainment and maintenance of state and federal standards. The main intent of air
            quality elements is to address the following:
            o    Problems with maximum air pollution levels that are higher than the national
                 and state clean air standards
            o    Reduction of the health and economic impacts of air pollution
            o    Compliance with the requirements of the Ventura County Air Quality
                 Management Plan
            o    Increase awareness of local responsibility for air quality and the vital role of
                 local government in meeting the emission reduction goals of the air quality
                 management plan
            o    Coordination of local projects that impact air quality both locally and
                 regionally (SCAG, 1990)
            OJM GENERAL PLAN                            1                             1I£iY,1993

         Air Quality Element
         As Ventura County grows, attainment, maintenance, and preservation of the clean
         air standards will be significantly affected by local land use decisions made at the
         city and county level (VCAPCD, 1991). Ifland use decisions are made proposing
         growth, air quality improvement could be compromised. Population growth would
         initiate greater auto use and, in tum, emissions. Therefore, an important
         consideration in land use planning decisions will be the reduction of vehicle trips
         generated by new development.
         The contents of this document are intended to provide the City of Ojai with
         background technical infonnation so as to make infonned decisions with respect
         to adoption of policies and the development of ordinances.
         HISTORY
OVERVIEW
         The City of Ojai is located within the South Central Coast Air Basin. The Ventura
         County Air Pollution Control District (VCAPCD) monitors air quality and provides
         regulatory guidance for the region. This air basin is separated into two distinct
         areas, northern and southern, because of differing meteorology. The northern half
         comprises the rural portions of Ventura County and encompasses the entire area
         of the Los Padres National Forest. The southern half comprises the urbanized
         portion of the County which is divided into two airsheds: the Ojai Valley Airshed
         and the Oxnard Plain Airshed. Figure AQE-1 illustrates the County's two airsheds.
         Ventura County is a nonattainment area for the federal and state ozone standards
         and the state standard for ftne particulate matter (pM-tO) (VCAPCD, 1991).
         Although air quality has improved in recent years, the County is not close to
         reaching attainment offederal and state air quality standards. During the years 1987
         through 1989, Ventura County exceeded the federal ozone standard an average of
         44 days per year, while exceeding the more stringent state ozone standard an
         average of125 days per year (VCAPCD, 1991). An analysis of monitoring data for
         the years 1980 through 1989 indicates that maximum ozone concentrations and the
         number of days exceeding the standards are declining. Data collected since 1973
         shows dramatic decreases in the number of days having ozone concentrations
         greater than the federal standard. Because of these improvements, population
         exposure to unhealthful air is decreasing. In addition, lower maximum
         concentrations occur in the coastal areas with concentrations increasing inland; and
         coastal areas have fewer days exceeding the standards with the frequency increasing
         in inland areas (VCAPCD, 1991). Historically, Simi Valley has the worst ozone
         problem in the County; however, in 1991 and 1992, the highest ozone
         OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           2                            MAY, 1993
            Air Quality Element
            concentration was recorded in the Ojai Valley. More details concerning ambient
            air quality are included in the Technical Appendix.
mSTORlCAL PERSPECTIVE
            Ventura County Air Quality Management Plans.
            The first study of air pollution in Ventura County occurred in 1966 and publicized
            the serious nature of the air quality problem in the County, citing over 70 adversely
            smoggy days per year (VCAPCD, 1991). As a result of the study, the Ventura
            County Air Pollution Control District (VCAPCD) was formed in 1968. The
            VCAPCD's mission was to regulate sources of air pollution and develop plans for
            cleaning the air.
            In 1979, the VCAPCD prepared an Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP), the
            first comprehensive air quality planning effort in Ventura County. This document
            predicted attainment of the federal ozone standard countywide by 1987, which
            soon became obvious that the prediction was optimistic and attainment by 1987
            would not occur.
            The 1982 AQMP was a refinement ofthe 1979 Plan and contained a more accurate
            emissions inventory and additional emission control measures. This AQMP was
            the first plan to separate the County into two airsheds, the Ojai Valley Airshed and
            the Oxnard Plain Airshed. The 1982 Plan was more realistic, recognizing that
            sufficient emission reductions would not occur to attain the federal ozone standard
            by 1987.
            In early 1985, the VCAPCD began a voluntary comprehensive effort to update and
            improve the 1982 AQMP. The improvement of the 1982 AQMP was initiated due
            to a lawsuit filed against the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) by the
            Citizens to Preserve the Ojai. The lawsuit was filed because attainment of the
            standards did not occur. The lawsuit requested the EPA to disapprove the AQMP,
            impose a moratorium on the construction ofnew major sources and modifications
            of reactive organic gases (ROG), and prepare a Federal Implementation Plan (FIP)
            to plan attainment of the federal ozone standard in the County (Ventura County,
            Resource Management Agency, 1979). In March 1989, the Citizens to Preserve the
            Ojai and the EPA reached a settlement agreement which established a schedule for
            the development of a federal clean air plan. However, after passage of the federal
            Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 on November 15, 1990, EPA requested court
            relief from development of a FIP for several air districts in California, including
            Ventura County. Relief was granted by the U.S. District Court on January 9, 1991.
            OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           3                             MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
That ruling was appealed by the plaintiffs. In July of 1992, the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals ordered EPA to develop and implement federal air pollution control
plans for various air districts in California. The EPA appealed that ruling to the
U.S. Supreme Court. In February of 1993, the U.S. Supreme Court rejected the
EPA's appeal. Therefore, the EPA is now required to develop a FIP to bring
Ventura County and other California air districts into attainment of the federal
ambient air quality standard for ozone.
The 1987 AQMP provided a more accurate emissions inventory, proposed new
control measures for adoption, and proposed use of a new air quality model that
more accurately simulated conditions in the County. Although the 1987 AQMP
provided for additional emission reductions, attainment of the federal ozone
standard was not predicted to occur without further controls. The 1987 AQMP
was adopted in July 1988 and has led to the implementation of 25 new control
measures since that time.
Shortly after the AQMP was adopted, the California Legislature passed the
California Clean Air Act (CCAA). The CCAA required all nonattainment areas in
the state to develop new plans to meet federal and state air quality standards at the
earliest practicable date. To meet this requirement, VCAPCD prepared the 1991
AQMP, which was adopted by the California Air Resources Board on August 13,
1992. The 1991 AQMP is meant to meet the initial requirements of the CCAA and
continue the trend toward clean air.
Despite having put many strict controls into place, sizable reductions in emissions
must still occur to meet all clean air standards. The 1991 AQMP proposes a
control strategy representing the full implementation of known technology to
reduce ozone-forming emissions. This strategy concentrates on concurrent
reductions of ROG and nitrogen oxides (NO.), the two precursors to ozone.
Reductions of these pollutants could be via implementation of trip reduction
programs. For these programs to be effective, an average commuter ridership of
1.5 by 1999 would be necessary to achieve, as would no net increase in vehicle
emissions after 1997.
City of Ojai Plannjnlr
The City of Ojai initially prepared a General Plan in 1963. However, a new version
was prepared in 1978, adopted in 1979, and amended in 1987, 1988, and 1992. The
Land Use and Circulation Elements are scheduled to be updated in 1993.
Additional City goals were incorporated in the updated Plan and included
recommendations relating to the attainment of state and federal standards and
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                            4                           MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element                                                                              0    v
maintenance of those standards.
                                                                                          u
                                                                                           11
                                                                                           -
                                                                                           . '
                                                                                           "'"
                                                                                              ('1:09,
                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                      ....
                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                           .
         ''A level ofair quality which protects thepublic health, safety and welfare, and
        meets orsurpasses State and Federalprimary and serondary standards shaU be
        promoted. "
The City of Ojai's Residential Growth Management Plan (Ojai Municipal Code
10-6.101-10-6.201) and Commercial Growth Management Plan (Ordinance #686)
were prepared in 1979 and 1991, respectively, pursuant to the goals discussed in the
City's General Plan. The Residential Growth Management Plan limits residential
development to 12 single-family and 4 multifamily dwelling units through 1995 and
from 1995 into the future, development is more restrictive to 11 single-family and
3 multifamily dwelling units. Affordable housing is exempt from these restrictions.
The Commercial Growth Management Plan is similar in intent to the Residential
Growth Management Plan. In order to maintain a balance between residential and
commercial uses, the development of commercial uses is required to be the same
ratio as residential development. Commercial and office limits are expressed in
square footage. Allowable limits are based on the population of Ojai in 1988.
Commercial development allowed under this ordinance includes BP-Business
Professional Commercial Use Zone, the C-l Neighborhood Commercial Use Zone
and the C-R Commercial Recreation Zone.
In 1982, Ventura County adopted a Clean Air Ordinance as part of their Growth
Management Plan for unincorporated areas of the Ojai Valley. The ordinance's
goal is to limit residential building permits to a fixed annual maximum. The
maximum building permit allowances are 46 single lot and 140 multiple lot permits.
This ordinance attempts to limit emissions in the community through regulating
growth.
In 1988, transportation control measures and an implementation schedule were
adopted by the City of Ojai (Resolution No. 88-32). The City has made substantial
progress in implementing most ofthe transportation control measures indicated in
Resolution No. 88-32. Transportation control measures for the City include the
following:
o    Adopt a Circulation Element
o    Traffic flow improvements, including a couplet study, street extensions,
     intersection improvements, pedestrian improvements and a transportation
     system management ordinance
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                                 5                                  MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
o    Parking and traffic management ordinances, including additional down town
     parking, parking meters, and visitor signage
o    Ridesharing measures, including park and ride lot development, preferential
      parking for vanpools/carpools, and a commuter computer ridesharing
     program
o Public transit measures, including an annual contribution to South Coast Area
   Transit (SCA1), improve public transit, shuttle services within the City of Ojai,
    discretionary development to provide incentives for transit use, contribute to
   citizens/senior transportation services, and require new development to
    provide bus stops and other appropriate transit infrastructure
o Bicycle facilities programs, including bikeway plan/implementation, require
    discretionary development to provide bicycle parking facilities
o   Land use strategies program development, including encouragement of inftll
    development, an economically healthy downtown through redevelopment,
    study mixed-use overlay zoning, and growth management
o Air quality program development, air quality impacts analysis for new projects,
   revise guidelines for preparation of air quality analysis, implementation of air
   quality element for incorporation into City's General Plan and consistency
   with the County General Plan
Growth control affects the status of attainment of federal and state air quality
standards. The City initiated these regulations so as to mitigate traffic congestion
and to alleviate auto use through the limitation of growth and through commonly
used alternative transportation modes such as shuttles, bicycles, pedestrian access,
and carpooling and vanpooling.
Recent Events Causinf Air Quality Concern in the Ojai Valley Airshed
On July 28,1991, a train derailment occurred along Highway 101, north ofVentura,
along the coastal strip. The train derailment caused the release of hazardous
materials which shut down Highway 101 and rerouted traffic to Highways 33 and
150 (Casitas Pass) for several days. The rerouting substantially increased traffic
volumes passing through the Ojai area. With the increased traffic volumes, it could
be expected that local pollution levels would increase. However, pollutant levels
measured at the VCAPCD's monitoring station on Highway 33, approximately
53 meters northeast of the traffic route, indicated normal ozone and oxides of
OJAr GENERAL PLAN                           6                             MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
nitrogen levels. These pollutants are measured at that station and are related to
mobile sources, although ozone is a secondary pollutant. Secondary pollutants are
those which form in the atmosphere from exposure to sunlight and chemical
reactions with other pollutants. The levels of pollutant data collected at this station
triggered questions from the public, the media, and the City of Ojai regarding the
location of the monitoring station, as well as the adequacy of the number of
monitoring sites in the Ojai Valley. The Technical Appendix contains a review of
the data and some of the issues related to this event.
Traffic control has been addressed by the City of Ojai. In 1992, the Ojai
Downtown Couplet Study was prepared by an independent consultant. The
purpose of the study was to address the feasibility of a downtown couplet. The
existing east/west routes into and out of the City are limited. This has led to poor
traffic operations at some of the intersections along Ojai Avenue. The couplet
comprises OjaiAvenue (Route 150) and MatilijaStreet. OjaiAvenue is assumed to
be for eastbound traffic and Matilija Street would serve westbound traffic. The
study considered the existing conditions and an improved existing conditions
scenario. In addition, the impacts of seven couplet alternatives were analyzed. The
results of this study indicated that implementation of a couplet would induce
greater traffic volumes on Matilija Street, thus creating potential socioeconomic
disruption to commercial land uses in the downtown area. Rather than
implementation of a couplet, the study recommended restriping and signalization
of the existing route to improve the road conditions.
In terms of air quality, a couplet would likely improve ambient air quality due to a
lessening of traffic jams and stop signals which allow for greater carbon monoxide
emissions. However, signalization and restripingwould provide virtually the same
benefits. Further assessmentwould require air quality modeling to determine actual
air quality emissions variances from each proposed scenario.
Health Effects
Clean outdoor air or ambient air is a mixture of gases: approximately 78 percent
nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen, less than one percent carbon dioxide, less than one
percent argon (an inert gas), traces of other inert gases, and varying amounts of
water vapor. About 95 percent of the total air mass is concentrated in a layer about
12 miles high around the earth's surface. Into this finite air mass are poured all of
the products of combustion, vaporization, attrition (wearing or grinding down by
friction), the air-contaminating activities of civilization as well as the by-products
of natural occurrences such as volcanic eruptions, forest fires, and decaying
vegetation.
OJM GENERAL PLAN                            7                               MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
Air pollution is part of everyday life for millions of Californians. Thousands of
residents ofVentura County are regularly exposed to levels of air pollution that can
cause nausea, headaches, eye irritation, and dizziness even in healthy adults.
Geography, climate and population are key elements in Ventura's smog problem.
The area is surrounded by mountains that trap pollution in stagnant air. Persistent
stagnant weather conditions during much of the year not only prevent pollution
from dispersing in the atmosphere, but also increase the amount of time pollutant
gases are exposed to sunlight, thus prompting the chemical reactions that create
smog.
While air pollution affects everyone to a degree, some people are extremely
susceptible to severe health damage, particularly the 2.5 million Californians who
suffer from heart and lung diseases. Air pollution may be a contributing factor in
the 80,000 deaths from these diseases in California each year. In addition to people
with heart and lung diseases, children under the age of 14, whose lungs are still
developing, and the elderly, whose immune systems have been weakened with age,
are especially vulnerable to the damaging effects of smog. It should be noted that
Ojai has twice the percentage of persons in the population over 65 years of age
than is true for the County of Ventura as a whole.
High smog levels occur more than 100 times a year in Southern California, enough
to cause outdoor exercise and sporting events to be canceled or rescheduled to
protect the health of school children. The ill and the elderly are also advised to stay
indoors during these times. Peak summertime concentrations of ozone, the state's
worst pollution problem, are sometimes 3.5 times greater than the standard set by
the California Air Resources Board (ARB) to protect human health. During these
"smog alerts," even healthy adults are advised to refrain from jogging and other
outdoor exercises. Research sponsored by the ARB indicates that endurance
athletes may risk more health damage from exposure to smog than others because
they breathe more air and draw more pollutants deep into the lungs.
The results of research and many epidemiologic studies lead the National Academy
of Sciences and the American Medical Association to believe that air pollution can
cause long-tenn, irreversible damage to lung tissue leading to chronic lung disease.
While most diseases have been brought under control during the past 50 years,
deaths from emphysema, chronic bronchitis and lung cancer have increased
dramatically. Even when the statistics are corrected for smoking habits, there
remains a significant correlation between exposure to air pollutants and these
crippling lung diseases.
Ozone, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, sulfates, carbon monoxide, reactive organic
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           8                              A«.Y,1993

Air Quality Element
gases (hydrocarbons), and particulates can affect human health. All of the
following effects have been documented at various animal toxicological and human
clinical studies and are frequently experienced in Southern California.
o    irritation of mucous membranes
o    increase mucous gland secretions
o    paralysis of the ciliary mechanism that is necessary for the lungs to cleanse their
     surfaces of intruding dusts and infectious biological materials
o    reduces the immune capacity of cells that prevent inflammation
o    lead to changes in the gas transfer surfaces of the lungs
o    decrease the ability of a body to breath efficiently
o    interference with oxygen delivery to body tissues
Children living in heavily polluted areas exhibit a much greater incidence of lower
respiratory disease than do children living in areas with relatively clean air. Air
pollution is known to trigger asthmatic attacks in susceptible children, and there is
evidence to suggest that some forms of asthma are caused by air pollution. The
best available evidence indicates that children are especially vulnerable to tissue
damage from air contaminants. Children are possibly the most sensitive group in
the population because their lungs are developing. They have more than twice the
air exchange volume based on body weight; they have a fusterventilation rate than
adults.
After exposure to air pollution, minor symptoms, such as wheezing and sore
throats, begin to subside and eventually disappear. This occurrence has been
viewed by some as an indication that the effects of exposure to air pollution are
reversible and hannless. Recent laboratory studies with animals, however, show
that minor responses to air pollution may indicate tissue injury that develops over
a lifetime of repeated exposures. These findings may apply to humans as well as
animals, as indicated by a reduced ability to breathe normally.
An epidemiological study supported in part by the ARB examined the effects of
prolonged exposure to air pollution on individuals who live in the Los Angeles area.
Symptoms such as coughing, chest tightness, eye irritation, and the loss of
breathing ability were measured in more than 12,000 people who reside in four
DJAl GENERAL PLAN                            9                              MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element                                                                                   ° °....
                                                                                              -
                                                                                              .
                                                                                               11
                                                                                              u-
                                                                                              ('
                                                                                                :<1
                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                       oo,~·
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                             "f.
cllles: Lancaster, a city characterized by low levels of air pollution; Burbank and
Long Beach, characterized by intermediate levels of air pollution; and Glendora,
where the concentration of air pollutants is high. The inhaling and exhaling
capacity of individuals who lived in the smoggiest city, Glendora, was considerably
less than expected. One of the most pertinent preliminary findings is that
individuals who never smoked but lived in the city of Glendora exhibited a more
limited ability to breathe than smokers who lived in the city of Lancaster. This
study demonstrates the detrimental effects of prolonged breathing of smog that
individuals living in Los Angeles County sometimes experience.
There are no easy solutions to the air pollution problems in Southern California.
At the present time, California requires much more stringent emission standards
for vehicles sold in the State than are required by federal law. Yet the tremendous
number of automobiles on the road continues to contribute to the contaminants
that react in the air to become smog (VCAPCD, AQMP, 1991). Because
automobiles contribute so much to smog levels, the VCAPCD has developed
strategies to reduce the amount of automobiles on the road, such as reducing
automobile use and vehicles miles traveled through such tactics as car pooling and
encouraging alternative modes of transportation. In addition, the California Air
Resources Board has adopted strategies and regulations for alternate fuel vehicles
and has implemented more stringent motor vehicle emission standards. However,
the emission forecasts in the 1991 Ventura County Air Quality Management Plan
(AQMP) show that, even with continued growth in the county, emissions of both
reactive organic compounds and nitrogen oxides will continue to decrease well past
1995. The emission forecasts in the 1991 AQMP were based on more current
estimates of population and economic growth in the county, and on new and
enhanced emission control tactics. Furthermore, the District is developing the
1994 AQMP to comply with the mandates of the federal Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990, which require that Ventura County artain the federal ozone
standard by 2005.
An additional artainment problem could be the proposed Weldon Canyon Landfill.
The estimated NOx and ROG emissions will exceed the five pounds per day
threshold of significance by over 100 times. Impacts would be equivalent to nearly
3000 new dwelling units in the Ojai Valley Airshed. This proposed landfill would
also be potentially inconsistent with a policy contained in Ventura County's Draft
Overall Community Goals for the Ojai Area Plan. This policy states, "Oil
development, landfills, and other industrial development shaD he controlled and conditions imposed
in IJf"fier to move toward attainment ofState and Federal!J mandated air quality standards. "
 OJAI GENERAL PLAN                                 10                                  MA.Y,1993

Air Quality Element
REGULATORY SETTING
In response to air pollution within the State of California, federal, state, and
regional authorities have adopted air pollution reduction measures. At the national
level, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is involved in local air
quality planning through the federal Clean Air Act (CAA), as recently amended by
the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. At the state level, under the provisions
of Lewis Air Quality Act of 1976 and more recently the California Clean Air Act
of 1988 (CCAA), the ARB is charged with the responsibility of coordinating efforts
to attain and maintain ambient air quality standards and to conduct research into
the causes of, and solutions to, air pollution problems. At the regional level the
VCAPCD addresses air pollution which affects the respective county airsheds
through the Ventura County AQMP.
Regulatory AJ:encies
At the national level, the EPA has the ultimate responsibility for improving air
quality throughout the nation. The EPA reviews and approves the State
Implementation Plans (SIP) that incorporate air pollution control strategies
necessary to meet the requirements of the CAA. In Ventura County, the
VCAPCD is responsible for formulating and implementing the AQMPs whose
purpose is to set forth a comprehensive program that will lead Ventura County into
compliance with federal and state air quality standards. Designated portions of the
AQMP, those necessary to comply with federal standards, are submitted by the
VCAPCD to the ARB to be incorporated into the SIP alongwith AQMPs of other
air pollution control districts. Because the AQMP is also intended to contain
measures to comply with California air quality standards set forth in the CCAA, the
AQMP may be broader, in certain respects, than the federal requirements.
At the state level, the ARB was formed in 1967 by the California Legislature to
control air contaminant emissions and to improve air quality throughout the state.
The ARB has primary statutory authority to establish and enforce standards which
limit pollutant emissions from motor vehicles. The ARB also is responsible for
assisting the VCAPCD in the development and coordination of their local AQMP.
Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the ARB to review the AQMP, and other
proposed air quality-related rules and regulations for incorporation into the SIP
prior to submission to the EPA.
At the regional leve~ the SCAG was created in 1965 by the counties of Los
Angeles, Ventura, Impe~ Riverside, Orange, and San Bernardino to oversee
planning on a regional basis. SCAG's primary responsibility, with respect to air
DJM GENERAL PLAN                            n                             MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
quality planning, is in the development of transportation, land use, and energy
conservation measures. In 1988, the SCAG recommended that cities in six
Southern California counties, Los Angeles, Ventura, Riverside, Orange, San
Bernardino, and Imperial incorporate air quality elements into their General Plans
(SCAG, 1990). To date, the City of Simi Valley is the only jurisdiction within
Ventura County to have done so. Additionally, the South Coast Air Quality
Management District, which does not have jurisdiction over Ventura County, has
made this a mandatory part of its 1991 AQMP. The VCAPCD's AQMP includes
recommendations that encourage further air quality planning in the region, but no
specific reference to air quality elements. However, the VCAPCD has been working
closely with several cities in the County for the last few years to implement this
goal. They have held a number of transportation and informational workshops to
provide cities with background and implementing tools (VCAPCD, Chuck Thomas,
personal communication, 1992).
AIR QUALITY PLANNING PROGRAMS
Federal PJannjn~ Programs. Early federal legislative response to air quality
concerns consisted of the Air Pollution Control Act of 1955, the Clean Air Act of
1963, the Air Quality Act of 1967, and the Clean Air Act of 1970. The goal of the
Clean Air Act of 1970, as stated by Congress in its 1977 amendments, was "to
protect and enhance the quality of the nation's air resources."
The most recent Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 are much broader in scope.
The major titles of the 1990 Amendments address nonattainment of air quality
standards, mobile sources emissions, air toxics, acid rain, a new federal permit
program, enforcement, and the protection of stratospheric ozone. Title I
(nonattainment provisions) is directly related to the goals of the air quality element.
The goal ofTitle I is to attain air quality standards for six criteria pollutants: ozone
(0,), nitrogen oxides (NO,), sulfur oxides (SO,), particulates (pM-10 and TSP),
carbon monoxide (CO), and lead (Pb). California and National air quality standards
are included on Table AQE-l. All nonattainment areas are designated or classified
based on the severity of their nonattainment problem. Classifications include
extreme, severe, serious, moderate, and marginal and determine the extent of
remedial actions. The entire southern portion of Ventura County is in
nonattainment for ozone and has been designated as a severe area under both the
federal Clean Air Act and the California Clean Air Act.
The actions required to be undertaken under the severe classification the following:
OJM GENERAL PLAN                               12                              MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
o   Attainment is required within 15 years after enactment of the Clean Air Act
     Amendments of 1990.
o    Vehicle miles traveled provISIons require identification and adoption. of
     enforceable transportation control strategies and transportation control
     measures to offset any growth in emissions from increased vehicle miles
     traveled or numbers of vehicle trips and to attain reduction in motor vehicle
     emissions. This measure also requires provision of adequate access to
     downtown, other commercial, and residential areas and should avoid measures
     that increase emissions and congestion.
o    Offset requirements such that the ratio of total emission reductions of volatile
     organic compounds (VOCs), or reactive organic gases (ROGs), to total
     increased emissions of such air pollutant shall be at least 1.3 to 1, except that
     if the state plan requires all existing major sources in the nonattainment area to
     use best available control technology for the control ofVOCs, the ratio shall
     be at least 1.2 to 1.
In general, under Title I, the attainment date for a nonattainment area is the most
expeditious date attainment can be achieved, but no later than five years from the
date the area was designated nonattainment. The EPA may extend the period for
compliance up to 10 years. Separate compliance timetables pertain to ozone
attainment and include three years for marginal areas, six years for moderate areas,
nine years for serious areas, 15 years for severe areas, and 20 years for extreme
areas. These timetable adjustments are dependent upon the administrators
discretion based on the following issues: the number ofaccedences of the national
primary ambient air quality standard for ozone in the area, the level of pollution
transport between the area and other affected areas, including both intrastate and
interstate transport, and the mix of sources and air pollutants in the area.
Title I also requires each nonattainment area to submit a comprehensive inventory
of actual emissions as part of the State Implementation Plans (SIP). Areas must
achieve a 15 percent reduction from their 1990 actual emissions inventory within
six years. Thereafter, each area must achieve a three percent annual reduction.
State Planning Programs
The CCAA was signed into law on September 30, 1988 and took effect on
January 1, 1989. The CCAA established a legal mandate to achieve health-based
state air qualiry standards at the earliest practicable date. Through its many
requirements, the CCAA serves as the centerpiece of the local air pollution control
 OJAf GENERAL PLAN                             13                           MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
district's attainment planning efforts since it is generally more stringent than the
federal CAA.
The CCAA was recently amended on September 26, 1992 by the California
Legislature. The primary purpose of these amendments was to eliminate
differences between the CAA and the CCAA For example, the nonattainment
area designation schemes, the timing of the planning cycle, and the emission
reductions required were addressed in this legislation. The ARB is currently in the
process of updating CCAA implementation guidance for the air pollution control
districts .
Based on pollutant levels, the CCAA divides nonattainment areas into four
categories--moderate, serious, severe, and extreme--to which progressively more
stringent requirements apply. The Ventura County portion of the South Central
Coast fur Basin has been classified as a severe nonattainment area for ozone.
Ventura County is also not in attainment for PM-10. However, it is in attainment
for nitrogen dioxide (NO,), sulfur dioxide (SO,), and CO.
Severe nonattainment areas are required to meet the most stringent requirements
of the CCAA and are required to revise their AQMP to include specified emissions
reduction strategies to meet milestones in implementing emission controls and
achieving more healthful air quality. The new control requirements include the
following:
o    A pennitting program designed to mitigate all emission increases from new or
     modified pennitted source
o   The application of best available retrofit control technology (BAReT) for
     existing sources
o   Provisions to develop area and indirect source control programs
o   Transportation control measures to substantially reduce the rate of increase in
     passenger vehicle trips and miles traveled per trip
o   Transportation control measures to achieve an average commuter ridership of
     1.5 persons per vehicle by 1999, and no net increase in motor vehicle emissions
     after1997
o    Measures to achieve the use of a significant number oflow-emission vehicles
     by operators of motor vehicle fleets
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                          14                             MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
o    Reducing population exposure to unhealthful levels of air pollution according
     to a prescribed schedule
o    Submission of an AQMP to the ARB by July 1, 1991 and triennial updates
     thereafter
The CCAA also includes the following additional requirements that can significantly
affect the selection of strategies to reduce pollutant emissions:
(1) reducing regional emissions for each nonattainment pollutant by five percent
     or more per year
(2) achieving an average commuter ridership of 1.5 persons per vehicle by 1999
(3) achieving no net increase in mobile source emissions after 1997
(4) achieving a substantial decrease in the growth of vehicle miles traveled and
     vehicle trips
(5) instituting public education programs
(6) reducing population exposure to severe nonattainment pollutants according to
     a prescribed schedule
(7) ranking control measures by cost effectiveness and implementation priority
According to the CCAA, air quality management districts must design their AQMP
to achieve a reduction in emissions of five percent or more per year (or 15 percent
or more in a three-year period) for pollutants causing Severe nonattainment.
However, an air basin may achieve a reduction of less than five percent per year if
it can be demonstrated that either of the following applies:
o    The alternative emissions reduction strategy is equal to, or more effective than,
     the five percent per year control approach in improving air quality
o    That despite the inclusion of every feasible measure, and an expeditious
     adoption schedule, the air basin is unable to achieve the five percent per year
     reduction in emissions
For emission reduction accounting purposes, the ARB has established a seven-year
initial reporting period from January 1, 1988 to December31, 1994. The reporting
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           15                             MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
intervals after this initial period occur every three years (i.e., 1997,2000, etc.).
Reeional PJannin~ Pr0lmlIlls
The Ventura County 1991 AQMP will meet the initial planning requirements ofthe
CCAA and continue the trend toward clean air. The 1991 AQMP proposes a
control strategy representing the full implementation of known technology to
reduce ozone-forming emissions and is designed to achieve a reduction in district-
wide emissions of five percent or more per year for each nonattainment pollutant,
averaged every consecutive three-year period. A full five percent per year reduction
in emissions from all sources would equal zero emissions in 20 years. This strategy
concentrates on concurrent reductions of ROG and NO", the two precursors to
ozone.
Local Air Quality PIannin~ Prowams
Air quality planning has been performed in the Ojai Valley for a number of years.
The City ofOjai initiated the Residential Growth Management Plan in 1979 and the
Commercial Growth Management Plan in 1988 in order to comply with the federal
Clean Air Act of 1977. Although, the Commercial Growth Management Plan was
initiated in 1988, it was not adopted until 1991. By instituting the growth
management plans, building permits were issued with less frequency and population
levels have remained at manageable levels.
In 1982, Ventura County adopted a Clean Air Ordinance as part of their Growth
Management Plan for unincorporated areas of the Ojai Valley. The ordinance's
goal was to limit residential building permits to a fixed annual maximum. The
maximum building permit allotments are 46 single lot and 140 multiple lot permits.
This ordinance attempts to limit emissions in the community through regulating
growth.
In 1988, the City instituted transportation control measures and an implementation
schedule into their General Plan. These measures are included in the Introduction
of this Element and were incorporated into the General Plan to meet attainment
of state and federal air quality requirements.
In addition, in 1989, Ventura County adopted a five-pound threshold for the Ojai
Valley Airshed for assessing whether a proposed development project would have
a significant adverse impact on air quality, pursuant to the California Environmental
Quality Act. This restriction was implemented to comply with the CCAA's ozone
standards. Tables AQE-2 and AQE-3 illustrate the development allowances which
OJM GENERAL PLAN                              16                            MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
would exceed the five pound per day emissions threshold.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
As was stated in the Introduction, the air quality element is often incorporated into
other elements of a General Plan instead of standing as a separate document. In
addition, there is often overlap between policies that are included in the Circulation,
Land Use, and Housing Elements. This section includes all of the measures
contained in other elements that overlap and are consistent with air quality policies
contained in Section 10.
Land Use Element
Residential, industrial, and commercial infilling of vacant areas in the City, in
conformity with the surrounding character of development
Man-Made Environment Section of Land Use Element
    (The following recommendations relate specifically to air quality)
   Continued enforcement of air pollution control district rules and regulations to
    the 'fullest extent possible'
   Maintaining effective mobile vehicle exhaust controls and reducing mobile
   vehicle usage in the region through an integrated plan of transportation and
   land use controls
   A development moratorium for unincorporated areas is also needed.
   Rezoning of Ojai Valley lands should be initiated to substantially reduce
   development potential within the valley.
Other incentives included in the Man-Made Environment Section ofthe Land Use
Element are the following:
   Development of a ridesharing program
   Preferential parking for high occupancy auto use
   Increased transit services for work trips
OJM GENERAL PLAN                            17                              MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
    Construction of off-street bicycle routes and on-street bicycle lanes
    Speed enforcement
    Staggered work hours
    Improved communication
Transportation Section of the Land Use Element
    Shared ride programs to include:
    Promotion of the ride sharing advantages
    Employer vanpools
    Special parking privileges for high occupancy vehicles
    Preferential parking including:
          Long-term and short-term parking areas
          Parking restrictions to induce carpooling
          Improve transit service to increase work-related trips
          Bicycle route construction to encourage a mode shift from auto to bicycle
          use
          Staggered work hours to reduce peak hour congestion
          Improved signal timing using computer models
          Removal of on-street parking to allow more lanes
Circulation Element
To the maximum extent feasible, the City shall require a level of service "C" on all
roadways within the community, recognizing that Ojai Avenue will have less than
desired levels of service.
O]M GENERAL PLAN                           18                            MAY,I993
Air Quality Element
The City shall coordinate with the County in the monitoring and review of
development in the region and request that the County deny projects inconsistent
with the above policy.
The City shall support public mass transit
The City shall give priority to development that provides for increased transit
patronage, consistent with other general plan goals
All development in the City shall be linked by appropriate pedestrian circulation
that is sensitive to the unique environmental characteristics of the community
Housing Element
To develop housing plans and programs which are consistent with the existing
location and capacity of the local infrastructure network.
To maintain consistency with the provisions of the AQMP.
Conservation Element
General
    Identify, locate, and evaluate the status of the City's natural and cultural
    resources as they relate to natural and human needs.
    Identify and evaluate those entities currently responsible for the management
    of the City's resources as an initial step in the development of a total
    "conservation system. II
Geologic Resources Section of the Conservation Element
    Separate agriculture and urban uses so that efficient agricultural practice (crop
    dusting, fertilization, mechanical harvesting) can be accomplished without
    danger or nuisance to residential areas and without adverse effects on sensitive
    crops
Air Quality Section of the Conservation Element
    Respect the Ventura County Air Quality Management Program (AQMP) by
    incorporating the procedures, requirements, and standards of the AQMP into
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                          19                             .MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element                                                                  0
                                                                                         0
                                                                                 11
                                                                                ,          ....
                                                                                .               .
                                                                                ('
                                                                                 ~
                                                                                              ""
                                                                                            ...
                                                                                   (I"O~
    City policy
    The City will monitor and control growth and development that can inhibit air
    quality goals
    The City shall support any regional effort to improve air quality throughout
    Ventura County and the State of California
    Scenic Views/Aesthetics
    The City shall not support any activity associated with the degradation of the
    natural scenic character of the Ojai Valley and shall actively pursue the
    preservation of vistas and natural beauty of Ojai whenever possible.
    The City shall recognize local and regional efforts and programs regarding
    preservation of natural and scenic resources and shall utilize all available
    techniques to preserve these resources in the Ojai Valley.
    Safety Element/Hazardous Material and Waste
    The City shall coordinate with Ventura County to periodically establish days to
    collect household hazardous waste within the City of Ojai
    Recreation Element
    The City shall support and accommodate, where appropriate, the recreation
    related tourist industry in Ojai as consistent with environmental and quality of
    life standards in Ojai to the extent that tourism does not compromise other
    General Plan goals.
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Definitions of Air Quality Terms
Precursor: A primary criteria pollutant which has the ability to react with other
pollutants to form another pollutant. Examples of precursors include, oxides of
nitrogen (NO,), reactive organic gases (ROG)s, fine particulate matter (pM-tO), and
oxides of sulfur (SO,).
Secondary Pollutant: A pollutant that is not directly emitted from a specific
source, but is formed from reactions with other chemicals and influence of heat,
DJM GENERAL PLAN                            20                           .MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
specifically solar radiation. Ozone is an example of a secondary pollutant. Its
precursor5 are NO" ROGs, and PM-10.
Air Quality Management Pian: A planning document prepared to direct a region
into meeting state and federal air quality standards. In areas that are not in
attainment for specific types ofpollutants, an air quality management plan (AQMP)
contains control measures to direct the region towards meeting attainment goals.
Nonattainment: The status assigned to a region by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Air Resources Board (ARB) for a
region that does not meet the emissions standards assigned for each criteria
pollutant. Criteria pollutants for which standards are set include carbon monoxide
(CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO,), PM-10, sulfur dioxide (SO,), lead (Pb), and ozone.
A region having a nonattainment status indicates that its air quality is not healthful
for its population. Nonarrainment status is further defined by degree of
nonattainment. Under the federal govemmentdesignations, nonattainmentdegrees
include marginal, moderate, serious, severe, and extreme. Under the state
designations, nonattainment degrees include moderate, serious, and severe. These
definitions apply to each criteria pollutant listed in the paragraph above.
Air Quality Standards: Both California and the federal government have set air
quality standards for ozone, CO, NO.. SO.. PM-tO, and Pb. The California
standards are more stringent than the federal standards, and in the case ofPM-10
and S02, far more stringent. California has also set standards for sulfate, visibility,
hydrogen sulfide, and vinyl chloride (South Coast Air Quality Management District,
1991). The standards are based on human exposure to these pollutants. The
negative health effects resulting from exposure determine the level of allowable
regional emissions.
Glossary of Acronyms
APCD         Air Pollution Control District
AQMP         Air Quality Management Plan
ARB          California Environmental Quality Act
CO           Carbon Monoxide
EIR          Environmental Impact Report
EPA          Environmental Protection Agency
HOV          High Occupancy Vehicle
NO           Nitrogen Oxide
N0 2         Nitrogen Dioxide
No,          Nitrogen Oxides
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                          21                              AMY, 1993
Air Quality Element                                                         Of'O
                                                                                ...,
                                                                       .             .
                                                                        "(ff'O~~
                                                                       f'
                                                                         •
                                                                                   ""
                                                                                 ""-
PM-tO    Fine particulate matter less than to microns in diameter
ROG      Reactive Organic Gases
SCAG     Southern California Association of Governments
S02      Sulfur Dioxide
TCM      Transportation Conttol Measures
TDM      Transportation Demand Management
TSP      Total Suspended Particulates
VCAPCD Ventura County Air Pollution Control District
VCTC     Ventura County Transportation Commission
OJAf GENERAL PLAN                       22                        ALtY,1993

         Air Quality Element
         ISSUES AND NEEDS
OVERVlEW
         Ozone is a major problem in the southern portion of Ventura County due to
         growth and development. Growth contributes to greater automobile and stationary
         emissions which degrade air quality and facilitate accedences ofstate and federal air
         quality standards. In Ventura County, accedence of the state and federal ozone
         standard is considered to be caused by the large quantity of automobiles entering
         and leaving the County. Mobile emissions are most attributable to commuting to
         and from work sites located in neighboring counties, i.e., Los Angeles and Santa
         Barbara. Other factors contributing to ozone nonattainment include generation of
         electricity (the Ormond Beach Generating Station), offshore oil drilling operations,
         and other various stationary sources.
         PM-10 is considered a problem as exemplified by its state nonattainment status.
         However, the VCAPCD has implemented several control measures which have
         reduced PM-1 0 emissions. It is expected that attainment ofPM-1 0 will occur in the
         near future.
         Another issue of more recent concern is the location of the air monitoring station
         in the Ojai Valley. As was discussed earlier, the train derailment of July 1991
         required the rerouting of traffic through the Ojai Valley for five days. Greater
         traffic usually causes greater ozone levels in the atmosphere; however, in the Ojai
         Valley, ozone levels were elevated but were not at significant levels. According to
         VCAPCD, the meteorological conditions were not conducive to the formation of
         ozone. This explanation was disputed by the media and the public. Therefore,
         AeroVironment was asked to conduct a site and systems audit and analyze the data.
         This discussion is contained in the Technical Appendix. The results of our analysis
         concluded, that although the monitoring site location is not perfect, it meets all of
         the EPA's requirements for the site location. In addition, all of the equipment was
         and is in satisfactory working order. Our conclusion for the health and air quality
         complaints made by the public is that CO emissions were likely the cause of
         discomfort, not ozone. CO emissions are high when traffic slows down. Since CO
         levels are thought to be well within the standards in this area, it is not monitored
         at any monitoring station.
         OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           23                             MAY, 1993
            Air Quality Element
            GOAlS, OBJECTIVES,POUCIES,AND IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS
INTRODUcnON
            The air quality element defines objectives for future air quality. Goals, objectives,
            policies, and implementing programs contained in this Element are intended to
            improve local and regional air quality by reducing harmful emissions from both
            stationary and mobile sources. New goals and policies are intended to reduce
            pollutant emissions, alongwith those measures previously contained in the General
            Plan. This section is divided into differing sources of air pollution, i.e., attainment,
            transportation, etc. The sources are further broken down into goals, objectives,
            policies, and implementing programs.
SUMMARY OF GOALS
            1. A level of air quality which protects the public health, safety, and welfare and
                 meets or surpasses State and Federal primary and secondary standards
            2. Eliminate excessive vehicle trips and reduce vehicle miles traveled
            3. Traffic flow throughout the City limits is without periods of congestion
            4. Encourage the use of clean fuel, electric, and zero emission vehicles (ZEVs)
            5. Reduce the length of work trips, expand the supply of affordable housing, and
                 create an urban form that efficiently uses urban infrastructure and services, such
                 as mixed use development
            6. Utilize the discretionary review process as an opportunity to minimize adverse
                 air quality impacts associated with proposed developments
            7. Reduce energy consumption and promote energy efficiency programs
            8. Citizen awareness and participation in efforts to reduce air pollution
            9. Encourage transportation modes that minimize the use of single passenger
                 motor vehicles and the associated air emissions
            Attainment Provisions
            1. A level of air quality which protects the public health, safety, and welfare and
             O]M GENERAL PLAN                            24                               MAY, 1993
               Air Quality Element
                  meets or surpasses State and Federal primary and secondary standards.
               2. Reduce ozone and PM-10 emissions by at least five percent per year, aver-aged
                  every third year period.
               3. The City shall implement the policies and implementing strategies contained in
                  this Element intent upon reducing emissions from source categories.
               Implementin& Strate&ies
               1. Comply with the goals and objectives contained in this plan
               Transportation
Trip Reduction
               1. Eliminate excessive vehicle trips and reduce vehicle miles traveled
               2. Achieve an aver-age commuter ridership of 1.5 persons per vehicle by 1999, and
                  no net increase in motor vehicle emissions after 1997
               3. The City shall encour-age vehicle trip reduction and other transportation
                  demand management programs (roM)
               4. The City shall strive to balance jobs and housing so that commuter trip lengths
                  are minimized, and to actively encour-age participation in multinodal
                  transportation by providing safe, convenient transit stops, promotingpark-and-
                  ride facilities and telecommuting centers
               5. The City shall deny discretionary projects that do not mitigate their peak hour
                  trips on Highway 33 at the Edison Curve through Casitas Springs, except for
                  affordable housing projects
               6. The City shall promote transit improvements that will foster increased
                  ridership
               Implementi 0 2' Strate&ies
               1. Encourage discretionary development to provide bicycle parking facilities and
                  secured lockers as a percentage of auto parking spaces in new nonresidential
                  development
               OJM GENERAL PLAN                           25                            MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
2. Encourage shower facilities in new nonresidential development for persons
    bicycling or walking to work.
3. Encourage pedestrian walkways and bicycle lanes to connect each building in
    new nonresidential development with the local system of pedestrian/bicycle
    paths
4. Provide a bicycle route system connecting to other local or regional bicycle
    routes
5. Encourage special event organizers to provide electric or clean fuel shuttle
    services to the event location
6. Encourage designation of on-site parking areas that can be used as park-and-
    ride lots for area commuters
7. Encourage transit improvements such as bus pullouts, bus pads, and bus
    shelters for applicable new residential and nonresidential development
8. Encourage existing and new commercial and industrial development to support
    the use ofthe Ojai Trolley or other shuttle services to transit facilities (i.e., park-
    and-ride lot)
9. Encourage employers or new developers to contribute to a lunchtime or all day
    electric or clean fuel shuttle service that provides access to activity centers
10. Encourage a video conferencing facility in new office developments
11. Encourage new commercial retail and service centers to provide delivery
    services to residents and office complexes in the vicinity
12. Encourage new office developments to provide on-site child care facilities and
    ground-level outdoor play areas, or contribute to development of an off-site
    child care facility within walking distance
13. Reduce parking space requirements when studies demonstrate increase in ride
    sharing and an increase in the use of alternative modes of transportation
14. Encourage employers to provide incentives (financial, time off, etc.) for
    employee use of alternative methods of transportation from single occupancy
    vehicle use
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                            26                               .<l£4.Y, 1993

                Air Quality Element                                                                        0"0
                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                   ,...         v
                                                                                                 tv
                                                                                                  .                .
                                                                                                  "'"   ('1'00.
                                                                                                                "-
                15. The City should implement flexible work schedules, e.g., four-day work week,
                    to reduce employee generated trips especially at peak hour, and encourage other
                    employers to do so
TraJIic Flow Improvement
                1. Traffic flow throughout the City limits is without periods of congestion'
                2. Traffic flow throughout the City shall be maintained at an LOS of at least C
                3. The City shall pursue traffic flow improvements to enhance traffic flow on City
                    streets via signal improvements, and operational/intersection improvements,
                    as this is the most cost effective means of reducing congestion, conserving
                    energy, and improving air quality
                Imp1ementini Stratelries
                1. Investigate implementation of ATSAC (Automated Traffic Surveillance and
                    Contro~ or similar interconnected traffic signal control systems or appropriate
                    noninterconnected synchronization methods on all local streets where traffic
                    volume and delay time is significant
Clean Fuels in Fleet Vehicles
                1. Encourage the use of clean fuel, electric, and zero emission vehicles (ZEVs)
                2. The City shall require a 30 percent use of light-duty and 50 percent use ofheavy
                    duty (trucks) alternative fueled vehicles in public and private business by model
                    year 1998 to comply with the provisions contained in the federal Clean Air Act
                    Amendments of 1990
                3. The City shall encourage the use of alternative fueled vehicles via provision of
                    cash incentives to individuals, agencies, and/or corporations who volunteer to
                    participate in the program
                4. The City shall support legislation providing tax incentives for the use and
                    ownership of alternative fueled vehicles.
                5. The City shall participate in demonstration projects whereby alternative fueled
                    vehicles are used for the City's fleet vehicles
                0lAI GENERAL PLAN                            27                             MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
ImplementinJ:: Sttat~es
1. The City should encourage the use of low emission vehicles (LEV) for
   transport to schools and shopping centers.
2. The City should encourage LEV shuttle service for lunchtime errands for
   nonresidential business centers.
3. The City should consider an ordinance that would encourage the provision of
   local delivery service with use ofLEV by commercial/retail facilities within the
   City to housing areas. Delivery service would be from dry cleaners, carryout
   food centers, grocery stores, pharmacies, video rental, etc.
4. The City shall study ways to increase bike usage throughout the City in
   conjunction with the update of the Circulation Element.
Growth ManaJ::ement
1. Reduction in the length of work trips, expansion in the supply of affordable
   housing, and creation ofan urban fonn that efficiently uses urban infrastructure
   and services, such as mixed use development
2. Limit residential development to 12 single-family and 4 multifamily residential
   dwelling units through 1995 in the City, and from 1995 into the future,
   development is more restrictive to 11 single-family and 3 multifamily dwelling
   units. Development ofcommercial uses (BP-Business Professional Commercial
   Use Zone, the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Use Zone, and the C-R
   Commercial Recreation Zone) is required to be correlated with residential
   development pursuant to the Commercial Growth Management Ordinance
3. Achieve better job/housing balance in the different areas of the Valley by
   encouraging growth in local employment opportunities
4. To the extent possible, achieve a balance, of the type of jobs with the price of
   housing.
5. Encourage employment development through support oflabor force retraining
   programs and other economic development measures.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                        28                              MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
Implementing Strateeies
1. The City's existinggrowth management plans (residential and commercial) have
   been prepared to be consistent with one another so as to encourage a
   jobs/housing balance
Particulate and Building Emissions
1. Utilize the discretionary review process as an opportunity to minimize adverse
   air quality impacts associated with proposed construction projects
2  Construction related emission thresholds should be limited to 2.5 tons ofPM-
   10 per three-month period.
3. To the extent possible, the City shall enforce the following at construction sites
   to reduce fugitive dust emissions:
   o    require trucks hauling soil, dirt, sand, or other emissive materials to cover
         their loads
   o    require grading to occur only when wind conditions do not exceed 30
        miles per hour
   o    enclose, cover, water when necessary, or apply approved soil binders,
        according to manufacturers specifications, to exposed stock piles, i.e.,
        grave~ sand, dirt
   o    require the installation of truck wheel washers and other types of barriers
        at construction sites to prevent the transport of soil onto public
        rights-of-way
   o    encourage developers to maintain the natural topography to the extent
        possible to eliminate the need for extensive land clearing, blasting, ground
        excavation, grading, and cut and fill operations
4. Fugitive dust from agricultural areas shall be minimized through vegetative
   cover, windbreaks, and improved tillage practices
5. The use of building materials and methods that minimize the emission of
   reactive organic gases and particulates shall be encouraged
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           29                             MAY, 1993
              Air Quality Element
                  6.   The City shall encourage reduction in particulate emissions from paved and
                       unpaved roads, parking lots, and road and building construction.
              Implemenri0L' Schedule
              1.  All development proposals should be regulated via mitigation monitoring
                  programs whereby fugitive dust measures are implemented. The City should
                  request that the City and County of Ventura adopt the five pound/day
                  threshold ofsignificance for air quality impacts for that part oftheir jurisdiction
                  in the Ojai Valley Airshed.
Energy Conservation
              1. Reduce energy consumption and promote energy efficiency programs
              2. Reduce energy consumption by 20 percent to meet California Title 24
                  requirements
              3. Local government facilities and equipment that use energy shall incorporate the
                  most energy-efficient design consistentwith a reasonable rate of return and the
                  recognition of the environmental benefits from energy conservation
              4. Encourage the incorporation of energy conservation features in the design of
                  all new construction and the installation of conservation devices in existing
                  developments
              5. Encourage energy audits of existing structures, identifying levels of existing
                  energy use and potential conservation measures
              6. Promote the use of passive design concepts which make use of the natural
                  climate to increase energy efficiency
              7. Encourage that new construction not preclude the use of solar energy systems
                  by uses and buildings on adjacent properties and consider enactment of a
                  comprehensive solar access ordinance
              ImplementinL' StrateWes
              1. Whenever practical, implement planning and building regulations to take
                  advantage of solar heating and natural cooling
              OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           30                              MAY, 1993
Air Quality Element
2. The City should look into implementing building ordinances which would
   require residential and commercial buildings to be weatherized according to a
   California Public Utilities Commission 1987 survey. In addition, new residential
   and commercial buildings should meet the conservation standards set by the
   California Energy Commission.
Education
1. Citizen awareness and participation in efforts to reduce air pollution
2. The City shall post APCD newsletters on a monthly basis in City Hall to
   illustrate to the public the regions progress
3. The City shall provide information as made available from the APCD at City
   Hall regarding the air pollution problem in the region
Imp1ementine Strate!:ies
1. The City should make available current information on air quality
   nonattainment status, pollutant accedences, County programs, etc.
2. The City should request the Ventura County APCD to set up workshops, at
   least annually, at a convenient public place (e.g., City Hall) to review the County
   Air Pollution Management Plan goals, policies, objective programs, rulemaking
   and status of attainment
3. Encourage transportation modes that minimize the use of single passenger
   motor vehicles and the associated air emissions
DJAI GENERAL PLAN                          31                                .MAY,1!J93
City of Ojai General Plan
Circulation Element
           Final
Circulation Element
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                Page
INTRODUCTION                                                                             1
      BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT                                  1
      GOALANDOBJECTTVES                                                                  1
      LEGAL AUTHORITY ...........................•....•.........                         3
      ELEMENT ORGANIZATION AND FORMAT                                                    3
GENERAL PLAN APPROACH                                                                    5
      BALANCING COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND CIRCULATION NEEDS                                5
      CREATING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT FOR PEDESTRIANS
            AND BICYCLES ...............................•...•...                       10
      FACILITATING THE USE OF PUBLIC TRANSIT                                           18
      PUBLIC UTILITY CORRIDORS                                                         19
      VALLEYWIDE SOLUTIONS TO TRAFFIC CONGESTION                                       19
CIRCULATION ELEMENT POLICIES                                                          21
      BALANCING COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND CIRCULATION NEEDS ..                          21
      CREATING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT FOR PEDESTRIANS
            AND BICYCLES                                                              24
      FACILITATING USE OF PUBLIC TRANSIT                                              25
      PUBLIC UTILITY CORRIDORS ...........................•.....                      26
      VALLEY WIDE SOLUTIONS TO TRAFFIC CONGESTION                                     26
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING PROGRAM .......•.........•....                          27
      INTRODUCTION ..................................•...•....                        27
      DEVELOPMENT REVIEW ............................•........                        27
      SPECIAL STUDIES AND PROGRAMS                                                    32
      CIRCULATION ELEMENT REVIEW AND UPDATE ....•....•........                        34
      IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING ...............•.............                         35
                                               r: lcoj40 llproject\plan lfinallcirctoc.ele
O'Af GENERAL PLAN                 i                                 May 13,1997

Circulation Element
UST OF FIGURES
                                                                                                            PAGE
1-    Circulation Element Goal and Objectives                                                                         2
2-    Policy Directives . . : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
3-    Characteristics of a Livable Community                                                                          8
4-    Traffic Roundabout .........................••............... 9
5a -  Local Street Neck-Downs                                                                                       10
5b -  Local Street Neck-Downs                                                                                       10
6-    Lateral Trail Access from Ojai Avenue at Existing Culvert
              Parallel to Canada Street                                                                             11
7-    Trails Master Plan                                                                                            13
8-    Trail Classification System                                                                                   14
9-    Planned Circulation System                                                                                    28
UST OF TABLES
A-    Allowable Project-Related Traffic Increases Where Roadway
              Performance Standards are or Will be Exceeded                                                        22
B-    Existing Roadway Classification                                                                              29
C-    City of Ojai Planned Roadway Improvements                                                                    3I
D-    General Plan Implementation Monitoring Matrix                                                                35
                                                                            r: lcoj40 I!pro;ect!plan lfinallcirctoc.ele
a,AI GENERAL PIAN                               ii                                              May 13, 1997

           Circulation Element
           INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                  he Ojai Circulation Ele-
           T      ment addresses broad
                  issues of physical mobil-
           ity, how goods and people
           move about within the commu-
           nity, as well as how goods and
           people move between Ojai and
           the outside world. Circulation
           is one of the most pervasive
           issues of the General Plan, and
           is related to land use, commu-
           nity design, noise, air quality,
           and      energy    consumption.
           Transportation issues affect not
           only the local area, but also re-
           quire coordination with the
           County and regional and State
           agencies.
           Maintaining a high quality of life within a community is largely dependent upon
           careful coordination of land use and transportation planning. Highly desirable
           communities are those where residents are effectively linked with local social and
           cultural resources, as well as shopping and services by a transportation system that
           prOVides a high degree of mobility, supporting, but not dominating the visual
           character of the community. It is thus the purpose of the Ojai General Plan Circu-
           lation Element to establish a safe circulation system that is consistent with OJai's
           character and needs in terms of the desired quality of life, sense of place, cost of
           maintenance, use of lands adjacent to roadways, and desired quality of traffic
           operations.
GOAL AND OBJECTIVES
           Balancing the need to protect Ojai's unique character and natural environment
           with the desire to eliminate traffic congestion is the primary challenge of the Circu-
           lation Element. The follOWing goal and objectives outlined in the box on the next
           page discuss the priorities which Ojai will pursue in meeting this challenge.
                                                                          r: koj40 J Iprojectlplunl(illal\circ.ele
           D/AI GENERAL PLAN                          1                                    May 13, 1997
Circulation Element
          City of Ojai Circulation Element Goal and Objectives
                                                Goal
   It is the goal of the Ciry of Ojai to develop and maintain a transportation system that is
   protective of the communiry's unique character and living environment; maximizes freedom
   and safery of movementfor pedestrians, bi'iYcles, and automobiles; and that maintains a bal-
   ance between mobiliry and the cost-efficien'iY of maintenance.
                                             Objectives
   In implementing this goal, it is the objective of the Ciry to:
   •         strengthen the link between the communiry's transportation system and its planned
             land uses such that traffic flows can be improved while maintaining Ojai's unique
             communiry character and livabiliry;
   •         ensure that the area's roadway system is rejlective of the Ciry's commitment to
             environmental qualiry and preservation of its small town lifesryles;
   •         maintain a unified andjunctional street system;
   •         help reduce regional traffic growth;
   •         decrease dependence on single occupant automobile travel by providing a high level
             ofpedestrian, bi'iYcle, and public transit opportunities;
   •         preserve a sense of comfort and well-being throughout the communiry by reducing
             the intrusiveness ofcommercial, tourist, and regional traffic on residential neighbor-
             hoods;
   •        facilitate the efficient delivery of energy. water, and storm water, as well as the
             disposal of sewage in a manner consistent with protecting Ojai's environmental
             qualiry and small town character; and
   •         make efficient use ofexisting transportation facilities.
Figure 1 - Circulation Element Goal and Objectives
                                                                           r: \c0j40 l!projectlplanlfinallcirc.efe
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                                  2                                        May 13,1997

           Circulation Element
LEGAL AU7HORl1Y
           The State of California mandates that every city prepare a comprehensive General
           Plan for the long-term physical development of the City and any land outside its
           boundaries that is considered relevant to its planning. California Government
           Code Section 65302(b), pertaining to the required elements of the General Plan,
           states the general plan shall consist of a statement of development policies, and
           shall include:
                    "a circulation element consisting of the general location and ex-
                    tent ofexisting andproposed major thoroughfares, transportation
                    routes, terminals, and other local public utilities andfacilities, all
                    correlated with the land use element of tbe plan. "
           Table 1-2 Index to the Location of State Mandated General Plan Issues within the
           Ojai General Plan in the Introduction section of the General Plan provides an
           index reference of State General Plan requirements and under which section of the
           Ojai General Plan the State requirement is fulfilled.
ELEMENT ORGANIZATION AND FORMAT
           To assist the reader in using the General
           Plan, the Circulation Element is structured                       Policy Directives
           around three general themes, which repre-
                                                              Goal: A genual. overall, and ultimate pur·
           sent a summary of specific community char-
                                                              pose, aim, or end toward which the City will
           acteristics and concerns that provide the          direct effort.
           framework for the policies included in the
           Circulation Element. These themes include:         Objective: A specific statement of desired
           (1) balancing community character and cir-        future conditions toward which the City will
           culation needs, (2) creating a safe environ-       expend effort in the context of striving to a-
           ment for pedestrians and bicycles, and (3)        chieve a broader goal.
           providing valley wide solutions to traffic con-
           gestion. The Circulation Element is orga-          General Plan Approach: Discussion as to
           nized into the following sections.                how the Ciry will resolve relevant issues and
                                                              manage its future.
          Introduction: A brief overview of the back-
                                                             Strategies: Actions, activities, priorities,
           ground and purpose of the Element is pro-
                                                             and policy direction that, when incorporated
          vided. The Introduction also includes the with the General Plan approach. detail how
           Element's goals and objectives, which repre- goals and objectives will be accomplished.
          sent the first level of policy directives for the
           Circulation Element.                             Figure 2 - Poli9' Directives
                                                                               r: 1co;40 llproject!plan!jinal\cirr.ele
           0IAI GENERAL PIAN                           3                                        May 13,1997

Circulation Element
General Plan Approach and Strategies:              The General Plan Approach and
Strategies represent the directives that the City will use to manage its future, guide
new development, ensure mobility, and protect the natural environment and the
character of the community (see box at right, above).
Implementation and Monitoring Program: The Implementation and Monitor-
ing Program is the City's blueprint for action. The program includes a presentation
of a specific set of actions designed to implement Ojai's goals, objectives, and
strategies. The action program includes the full range of specific steps necessary to
translate the vision described in the Circulation Element into reality.
                                                              r:\coi40 llproject!planlfinal\circ.efe
OlAI GENERAL PLAN                          4                                   May 13,1997
           Circulation Element
           GENERAL PIAN APPROACH
BALANCING COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND CIRCULATION NEEDS
                    identified in the Land Use Element, Ojai's vision is to preserve its "small
           k      town" character by using the physical, environmental, and social aspects of
                    e community that form its character as the criteria for testing whether new
           development and public works projects respects and enhances the City's small
           town feel. This approach utilizes a broad palette of community features, neigh-
           borhood characteristics, and design images to describe the "Ojai experience" as the
           benchmark for the future (Land Use Element Figures 8 through 12). An important
           determinant of Ojai's character is its roadway system.
           Probably the best example of Ojai's policy of pre-
           serving the natural environment and forcing man-
           made features to fit into that environment is oak
           tree preservation. Large oak trees, which would be
           removed as part of road construction or widening
           projects in most cities, remain within OJai's streets
           and rights-of-way as ongoing reminders of Ojai's
           emphasis on development fitting around, rather
           than over the natural environment.
           The General Plan's approach to transportation is to
           balance community character and circulation needs
           to minimize the intrusiveness of the area's roadway
           system, and to provide physical improvements to
           the roadway system where it is physically and envi-
           ronmentally prudent to do so. In this concept, the Oak Tree Preservation
           roadway system will be designed to provide access and linkages between resi-
           dences, community activity centers, and the outside world, but will not be permit-
           ted to visually dominate the surrounding landscape or impact the serenity of Ojai's
           residential neighborhoods.
           OJai's local roadway system is composed almost exclusively of two-lane, undivided
           streets. Four lane and divided street sections are limited to portions of State High-
           ways 33 and 150. The area roadway system currently has only four traffic signals,
           located at the intersections of Highways 33 and 150 (where Ventura Avenue,
           Maricopa Highway, and Ojai Avenue come together), Ojai Avenue and Country
           Club Drive, Ojai Avenue and Bristol Road, and at Ojai Avenue and Signal Street. As
           part of the County's Congestion Management Plan, Fox Street as well as Bryant
           Street!Park Road will have traffic lights where each intersects with Ojai Avenue.
                                                                         r: \coj40 Jlem;ectlplalllfiJ/allcirc.cle
           a,Ai   GENERAL PLAN                        5                                  May 13,1997
Circulation Element
OJ ai's historic development, is a con-
tributing factor not only to its unique
small town character, but also to its
traffic congestion. When originally
planned, the downtown district of-
fered a wide boulevard that was based
on the ability of a horse and wagon to
tum around in the middle of the
street. Parking was located in the
front of commercial businesses to al-
low for convenient parking and ac-
cess. Unfortunately, planning for the
movement and volume of vehicles
throughout the City is much more Local Rural Roadway
complicated today, yet the space in which to move in this area remains the same as
in the horse and buggy era. A5 can be seen in the photo below, drivers in the
downtown area are faced with a number of choices within a short distance. In this
photo (which was taken during one of the City's larger community events), vehicles
can be seen parallel parking, turning, merging and, in one case, making an illegal
maneuver, all within a constrained street section filled with pedestrians.
Complicating        the     downtown
congestion issue is the fact that the
same area is also a major commer-
cial and tourist attraction in the Val-
ley.     During large community
events, the downtown Arcade and
Libbey Park area become congested
with tourists, event participants,
and shoppers all vying for parking
near the event location or commer-
cial business. Congestion also often
occurs when larger community
events at one of the area's two golf
courses take place. Local residents Dowlltmvn Circulatioll
have also cited local congestion occurs immediately following the dismissal of local
schools.
Traffic congestion at the ''Y'' intersection of Highways 33 and 150 frequendy occurs
dUring peak commuting periods. Referred to as the ''Y'' due to its unusual configu-
ration, the safety of the intersection of State Highways 33 and 150, has been the
subject of much public debate. Due to the limited number of roadways serving the
City, most of the traffic entering and exiting the City travels through this inter-
section, whose current geometries prOVide drivers approaching from the south
with litde time to maneuver into the appropriate lane after crossing the intersec-
tion. Residents note that those not familiar with the area are often unsure of which
                                                               r: lcoj40 J leroiectlplanlfi1Ul/lcirc.ele
a'Ai   GENERAL PLAN                          6                                   May 13,1997
Circulation Element
lane to choose and have created
unnecessary traffic congestion.
The geometrics of this intersection
are further compli-cated by the
introduction of an Ojai Valley Trail,
which crosses Ojai Avenue at this
intersection. One intersection im·
provement option recently dis-
cussed involved the installation of
a traffic circle at the ''Y.'' Although
the option was recognized as being
physically possible and as facilitat-
ing the movement of large num-
bers of automobiles through the Circulation Conflicts at "Y" Intersection
''Y,'' this concept was rejected because it would create a negative impact on pedes-
trian and bicycle circulation through the intersection.
As with many communities, Ojai has experienced a gradual acceptance and adop-
tion of uniform improvement standards to be applied throughout the community.
Although these standards bring a uniformity of design to the various components
of community infrastructure, their implementation has also begun to erode the
uniqueness of the community, especially in the realm of public improvements such
as roadways. This is evident in areas where new development has encroached into
older settings, imposing typical suburban development standards without a clear
plan for the end product. The result is typified by a rural street edge, characterized
by a dirt, gravel or asphalt path and soft street shoulder, suddenly interrupted by a
portion of concrete curb and gutter with sidewalk. Since it is unlikely that the
balance of the improvements will be made any time soon, the piecemeal imple-
mentation of such standards serves to disrupt the gentle small town, rural character
that the residents likely found more appealing in the first place.
A key concept of the Ojai General Plan Circulation Element is that the community's
roadway and transportation system is an integral part of the community's character,
its quality of life, and its economic livelihood. Ojai's historic downtown, which is
the center of the community's commercial and cultural focus, was developed along
Highway 150 to enhance the City's accessibility to visitors. Therefore, while it is
important to provide for the movement of traffic within, as well as through the
City, this objective will not be permitted to compromise the more important objec-
tive of preserving the community's essential character and the area's natural
environment which makes Ojai an attractive place to visit, live, and work.
Ojai believes that a constantly expanding circulation network and an endless se-
quence of programmed street improvements will not solve the problems of local
traffic congestion, and may in fact result in an irretrievable loss of the essential
qualities that make Ojai a desirable community. Expansion of the area's roadway
system using traditional traffic engineering principles and standards will not fit well
                                                               r: lco;40 Ilprojectlplallljinallcirc,ele
a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                           7                                   May 13,1997

Circulation Element
with the varying design fea-
tures that make up the charac-          Characteristics of a Livable Community include:
ter of the community, and will
                                   .IWell planned and designed transit: Livable communities invoillt:
tend to preclude pedestrian        careful coordination of transit planning with community development
and bicycle travel, which are a    planning. Livable communities are ndghborhoods where hOUSing,
key component of community         schools. and parks are within easy walking distance of user friendlY
character.                         transit opportunities that ejf«:tive!y link ruidents with focal social
                                   and economic se111ices and jobs. [n livable communities, transit ser-
                                    vice rtflms the diverse needs of tht: communi!!.
The intent of the Circulation
Element is that the area's trans-  .ITrallSit. pedeStrian and bicycle access: Land use planning. zoning
portation system should offer      and urban design encourage a/tentatives to alltomobile use. Such
                                   altentativer as walking, transit, and bike riding are designed and
Ojai area residents not only
                                   built into the community to ensure local mobili0'. In a livable com·
reasonably efficient automobile    muni0', use of the automobile is optional.
traffic distribution, but also
viable alternatives to automo-     ,/Mwd·use neighborhoods: Residential areas are complimented by the
                                   presence ofoffice and commercial areas, recreational areas, mId areas
bile travel. The transportation
                                   devoted to health, educational, and social service. Communities are
program outlined in the Gen-       planned amI built on a human scale that emphaSiZes ease of acass
eral Plan thus seeks to increase   and commulli~ spirit. Business fiel that they are part of a neigh-
the balance between various        borhood.
modes of transportation by
                                   '/Safe and secure: Streets are lVell lighted and deSigned to
increasing the desirability of     accommodate transit vehicles and pedestrians. Transit facilities and
transit, walking, and bicycling    pedestrian walkways are deSigned to take into account the safety and
by providing mixed use land        security expectations of all passengers, including persons with
use opportunities which re-        disabilities. TrajJic calming techniques are used to proVide safety to
                                   pedestrians'lower traffic speeds.
duce the distance between
home, work, and shopping and       ,/EnvironmentallY conscious: Well planned transit maximizes air
providing an enhanced system       quality. Parking is carefullY managed to save space and to C1Isure
of bicycle and pedestrian paths.   that buildings are accessible to pedestrians and transit, and not
                                   isolated by large parking lots. Livable communities also contain
                                   sufficient parks and greCl/belt to ensure a high quality of life for the
The General Plan and its vari-     residmts.
ous elements coordinate land
use, transportation, air quality,  ,/Invite jull communiry participation in the decision-making process:
                                   Residmts have a voice ill the juture of their neighborhoods. Livable
and other environmental con-
                                   communities are committed to a planning and management process
cepts and strategies. General      that includes a high level of participation by neighborhood
Plan objectives are designed to    organizations, small and minority businesses, and individuals who
improve traffic flow, local air    may not othenvise be heard.
quality, and energy conserva-
                                   Source:      Livable Communities Initiative, Federal Transit
tion, as well as protect sensitive              Administration Program Description, 1994.
environmental resources by
limiting the intensity and rate Figure 3 - Characteristics of a Livable Community
of new development to that
which can be accommodated on area roadways; achieving a rational mix and orga-
nization ofland uses which reduces, to the extent feasible, the need for automobile
use and the length of individual trips; and promoting transportation demand
management, systems management, and traffic calming programs. This balance
                                                                           r: lcoj401\projectlplan IfinalleiTe.ele
a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                            8                                             May 13, 1997

             Circulation Element
             ensures that the City of Ojai maintains and enhances the characteristics that em-
             body a truly "livable community" (see Figure 3 on previous page).
             The provisions of the General Plan also ensure that the City will act responsibly in
             reviewing proposals for new development. The Circulation Element recognizes
             that new development cannot be permitted to exacerbate existing traffic congestion
             problems, and that new development must be responsible for contributing to
             appropriate solutions.
Traffic Calming
             "Traffic calming" refers to programs designed to increase the compatibility of road-
             ways with their surrounding environment, as well as increase their carrying capac-
             ity, by creating a steady flow of traffic at slower speeds. By calming (slowing)
             traffic, less space is needed between automobiles to maintain safe stopping dis-
             tances, thereby allowing more vehicles to use roadways without requiring widen-
             ing. The effect of traffic calming is to create a safer, quieter environment for adja-
             cent land uses (Figure 4).
                                                          Traffic Circle with Oak Trees
                                                          and Enriched Pavemeo[
              Figure 4 - Traffic Roulldabout
             Traffic calming techniques which may be incorporated into the City's circulation
             system include: speed humps, roundabouts, and neck-downs. Speed humps are
             raised roadway pavement areas running across the entire width of a street that
             normally have a height of 3 to 4 inches and a length of approximately 12 feet.
             Speed humps represent a lesser risk to vehicles than do traditional speed bumps,
             and have the advantage of being largely self-enforCing and or creating a visual
             impression, real or perceived, that a street is not intended for high speeds or
             "through" traffic. A roundabout is an at-grade intersection having a one-way circu-
             lar roadway around a curbed central island. Sometimes called traffic circles or
                                                                              r: 1co;40llprojectlplanl(inal1circ.ele
             a'Ai GENERAL PIAN                          9                                      May 13,1997
                              Circulation Element
                              rotaries, a small, properly design roundabout provides for the safe and efficient
                              movement of people and goods while preserving, enhancing, or reclaiming the
                              adjacent neighborhood's livability.
                              Neck-downs consist of landscaped islands which are used to either narrow down a
                              roadway, or to define a parking lane on either side of a roadway. They can be used
                              to define entries into local residential neighborhoods, thereby discouraging
                              through traffic. They can also be used to create subtle changes in direction along
                              existing roadways by placing landscaping within existing parking lanes on one side
                              of the street, and providing parking and neck-downs on alternating sides of the
                              street (Figures 5a and 5b).
                              Figure Sa - Local Street Neck-dowlls            Figure 5b - Local Street Neck-dowlls
           CREATING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT FOR PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLES
Trails are an important        The City recognizes that Ojai's current "small town" character is largely due to local
compollellt of Ojai's illfra-  resident's ability to associate with one another at a pedestrian level. This is sup-
structure; as important to     ported by the existing pattern of land use. The historic organization of the town
the preservatioll of the       (Le., residential areas organized around a central downtown commercial core), is
rommuniry's character and
                               reminiscent of communities which measured most day-to-day activities with how
health of its residents as
are    adequate      streets,
                               long it took to walk from place to place. Ojai residents feel that the ability to safely
drainage. and utilities..      walk or ride a bicycle throughout the community is an important characteristic
                              which will need to be protected as the City grows.
                                                                                              r: lcoj40 J Iprojectlplallljillallcirc.ele
                              a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                          10                                    May 13,1997
             Circulation Element
             Another component of the City's
             approach to local transportation               17re Ojai Land Use Elemmt supports the development of
             planning is to build upon the exist-           tl  bicycle and pedestrian friendly transportation system
             ing level of pedestrian and bicycle            by   encouraging mixed·use and other live/work opportuni-
             activity, as well as existing and po-          ties  within the communiry.
             tential facilities in an effort to re-
             duce congestion on local streets, promote energy conservation, and improve air
             quality, as well as make the community less dependent on the automobile as the
             primary mode of transportation within Ojai.
             In keeping with OJai's desire to maintain a small town feel, the General Plan pro-
             vides for a hierarchy of equestrian, bicycle, and pedestrian ways designed to make
             it easier for residents and visitors to move, congregate, and interact with one an-
             other. Building on the success of the Ojai Valley Trail, the City of Ojai will take
             advantage of the many utility corridors and natural drainage courses (Figure 6), as
             well as City streets to establish a comprehensive network of trails serving residents,
             commuters) tourists, and recreational users.
                                                                                Existing
                                                 Trail Connection on            Culvert
                                                Existing Service Access
             Figure 6 - Lateral Trail Accessfrom Ojai Avenue at Existing Culvert Parallel to Canada Street
Ojai Master Plan of Trails
             The Ojai Master Plan of Trails represents a comprehensive strategy to provide an
             extensive system of walking, biking, and equestrian trails that encourages residents
             to use alternatives to the automobile, and where possible, to use non-automobile
             travel as the primary mode of transportation. To accomplish this, the Ojai Master
                                                                                          r: !co;40 llpro;"tlplan l(illa/lcirc.ele
             a,AI GENERAL PLAN                                 II                                          May 13,1997

Circulation Element
Plan of Trails includes a combination of four different types of trail sections, a
special pedestrian district, and various support facilities.
Ojai Valley Trail
The Ojai Valley Trail provides a shared off-street pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian
trail that connects to the Ventura County trails system. This trail provides recre-
ation and commuter connections along Highway 150 and 33. Extensions of this
trail also connect the Pedestrian Enhancement District, Ojai Village and Town
Center, Libbey Park, and Soule Park (Figures 7 and 8).
Bicycle and Pedestrian Trails
The Bike and Pedestrian Trail system includes a number of specialized trail sections
throughout Ojai. The trails denote where pedestrian and bicycle circulation is
most appropriate. The Trail also provides access to the major recreation facilities,
the Pedestrian Enhancement District, Ojai Village and Town Center, Ojai Valley
Trail system as well as National Park and local hiking and walking trails. The trail
system includes Class I, II, and III trails (Figures 7 and 8).
Trail Support Facilities
At strategic points in the trails system, facilities designed for the convenience of
trail users are planned to be provided (Figure 7). Such facilities may include
benches, drinking fountains, restrooms, picnic areas, interpretive and directional
signage, community information kiosks, equestrian staging, and automobile and
bicycle parking areas.
The type of facilities that will be provided at any particular location is dependent
on the physical conditions of the site.
Trail Stop
Generally located at major junctions of the trails system, trail stops will include, at
a minimum, directional signage depicting the Ojai trails system. Some trail stops
may also include rest areas, benches and drinking fountains, or be combined with
other trail support facilities (Figure 7).
                                                               r.lcoj40 Jlproiectlplan lfinallcirc.ele
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                           12                                 May 13,1997
                .•.•••.•.••...•••.........•..........•.••••...
                              J                        /
                                                                --'I
                                                                            ~                                                      ~
                                                                                                                                    ..
                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                        \1
                                                    ./
                                                                                                                                       ·v
                                                                                                                               ---:.:
                                                                                                                         I -I~  _:
                                                                                                                             j II
                                                                                                                                   I
                    .........•.- .....
                   t. .........        ,. '~~~
                                      /._ {              'L~... '~.~CHsa
                             "".0 ~""
                                     ,or<).)'
                                          "
                                                -";, /t,;"L "2;'<0.,.' n __
                                                                                                                                    Trail Support Facilities
                                  -l "'<'/       ,I
                                  ~           'I                                                                                    Bike/Pedestrian Undercrossing
                                  ~
                                  ''''-''1
                                MIRA        •
                                                                                                                                    Trail Stop
                                MONTE,
                                                                                                                                    Class I BikelHiking Path
                                           ~
                                                                                                               --                   Class II Bike Lane
                                                                                                                                    Class III Bike Route
                                                                                        Ojai City Boundary     I          I Shared Bike and Pedestrian Trail
                                                                              1······3  City ofOjai
                                                                                        Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                               I          I Ojai Valley Trail
                                                                              I       I Pedestrian Enhancement District (PED)
51l3/97(COJ401)
<'i>
                                                                                                                                                        Figure 7
N
LSA                                                                                                                                        Trails Master Plan

Circulation Element
                                  Figure 8 . Trail Classification System
                              ~           ~I
                            I Bike/Pedesman
                                    10'
                                                                               ~Parking Lane       Bike
                                                                                  (Optional)       Lane
                                   Path
         Bike/Hiking Path - (Class J) Bicycles and             Bike Lane· (Class II) Biglcles travd in a one-
         pedestrians use a paved or unpaved right-oj-way       way striped lane  011 a street.
         that is complete!>, separated from any street or
        highway.
                               I----!U
                                ~                                                 Equestrian
                                 Route                                         & Hiking Trail
        Bike Route - (Class III) Bio/cles share the          Equestrian Trail . Equestrian trails are
        road with pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic.      reservedfor the use oj horseback riders, and may
                                                             be combined with off-road biking and hiking uses.
        Source: Mainstreet Architects & Planners, 1995.
                                                                                            r: lcoj40 1 \project\pla'llfinallfis8-cir.ele
a!AI GENERAL PLAN                                         14                                                      May 13,1997

Circulation Element
                      Figure 8· Trail Classification System (Con't.)
                            Paths - Pedestrian paths tend to be lessjom.al than sidewalks. and can
                            be combined with bi0'cle and equestrian facilities.
                                                       10'                8'
                                                Bike & Pedestrian     Equestrian
                                                      Path              Trail
                                                                   6'
                       Multi-Use Trails - Multi-use trails promote a combination of trail uses
                        with a single right-ofway. 11ze ajai Vall'!}' Trail is a good example of
                       such a trail.
        Source: Mainstreet Architects & Planners, 1995.
                                                                                               r: Icoi40 Ilprojt:ct\planl[inallfigBa-cir.ele
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                                               15                                                     May 13.1997

             Circulation Element
Planning for the Pedestrian
             Sidewalks and Paths
             The City of Ojai is dedicated to creating a pedes-
             trian environment that is safe, efficient, and acces-
             sible to all residents. At the same time Ojai recog-
             nizes that different areas of the community require
             different sidewalk and pedestrian treatments con-
             sistent with the individual characteristics of the
             neighborhood. The City of Ojai, therefore, will
             strive to achieve a sare and comfortable walking environ
             ment by using a variety of sidewalk and path de-
             signs thrQughout the community. Due to the
             uniqueness of each street section, the City will ana-
             lyze the physical characteristics of the street right-
             of-way prior to trail implementation to determine
            "the appropriate sidewalk, path or other pedestrian
             facility is to be used (Figure 7). It is the City's in- Sidewalk Oak
             tent to logically transition sidewalk and trail sections so as to achieve a safe, com-
             fortable, and logical sidewalk and pedestrian path network.
             Site Development Considerations
             New developments will be required to be designed with pedestrians in mind, and
             thereby reduce pedestrian/auto conflicts and encourage people to walk. For exam-
             ple, buildings may be clustered along a pedestrian corridor or adjacent to a public
             walkway to reduce the distance for people to walk between buildings once they
             leave their cars, and to encourage drivers to leave their cars at home. The desirabil-
             ity of on-site pedestrian circulation, its connection to public sidewalks, trails,
             automobile circulation, and local and regional transit is an important factor in
             determining a new development's consistency with Ojai's character.
             Pedestrian Enhancement District (PED)
             The General Plan recognizes that, if walking is to be encouraged for both recre-
             ation and as an alternative fonn of transportation, pedestrians must feel safe and
             secure from adjacent street traffic; they must be provided with sidewalks and
             pedestrian paths that create logical and continuous connections between uses; and
             the over-all walking experience must be an enjoyable one. In order to meet these
             objectives, the General Plan makes a substantial commitment to pedestrian needs
             throughout the community. This commitment includes the creation of land use
             designations which focus on allowing residents to live and work at the same loca-
                                                                             r: Icoi40 J Iproiectlplan lfinallcirc.ele
             DIAl GENERAL PIAN                            16                                   May 13,1997
             Circulation Element
              tion, implementation of a comprehensive trail system, and provision of efficient
             local transit network.
             In addition, the General Plan designates an area within the City's Town Center and
             Village as a special "enhancement" district that will focus on making improvements
             to support pedestrian activities. This "Pedestrian Enhancement District" or PED
             delineates an area in the community where the movement of pedestrians is an
             important aspect of the area's character. New development and public improve-
             ments within this area will be designed to favor pedestrian circulation. Typical
             improvements are to include: pedestrian oriented signage, street furniture, and
             landscaping; wide and enhanced sidewalk paving; prominent pedestrian street
             crossings; and narrowed street sections.
Trail Design Principles
             The trail system identified above is intended to create an integrated "system" that
             serves local commuter, recreation, and tourist needs as well as to prOVide connec-
             tions to the regional trails system. In delineating the Master Plan of Trails, several
             principles were used to prOvide continuity, improve public access, provide logical
             transition and destinations, and ensure the safety of trail users. These design
             prinCiples will be used as review criteria for alI new projects which are adjacent to
             or may have an impact on the planned trails system, to ensure that continuity,
             access, logic, and safety considerations are maintained and/or enhanced.
             Continuity
             Using the Ojai ValIey Trail as the backbone, each trail has been planned to be an
             integral part of an overall network. New development will be required to respect
             this continuity and ensure that existing and future trail through routes and access
             points are maintained.
             Community Access
             Continued, unrestricted use of the trail system for recreation and commuting, as
             well as prOViding alternatives to the automobile is an important contributor to
             Ojai's over-alI character. It is thus Ojai's intent to retain and expand the public's
             access to the trail system and provide links between new development and the trail
             system.
                                                                            r:\coj40 llero;ectlplan lfina/leire.efe
             a,Ai   GENERAL PLAN                       17                                   M'!Y 13, 1997
            Circulation Element
            Destinations
            The Ojai trail system links neighborhoods, recreation, commercial and employment
            centers in the community, as well as other regional trail and open space systems.
            New development will be expected to integrate the utilitarian and recreational
            aspects of the trail system in project design.
            Safety
            Safety is a high priority for the trail system. Visibility of trails and trail crossings, as
            well as provision of appropriate security measures along trail routes are important
            considerations in the design of the system.
FACIliTATING THE USE OF PUBliC TRANSIT
            The City of Ojai sponsors a local transit service called the Ojai Trolley. The Trolley
            currently operates seven days per week from 7:30 a.m. until 5:30 p.m., and serves
            popular shopping areas, the Ojai Community Hospital, Ojai Valley Inn, Whispering
            Oaks, the community center, and Meiners Oaks. Regional transit service is pro-
            vided by South Coast Area Transit (SCAT), which operates a line connecting Ojai to
            downtown Ventura through Meiners Oaks and along State Highway 33. The SCAT
            line operates seven days per week from 5:30 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Both lines run on
            an hourly basis. An express route for commuters from Ojai to Ventura was can·
            celed due to lack of ridership.
            As a means of reducing traffic and improving air quality, it is the intent of the
            General Plan to increase public transit ridership. This will be accomplished
            through a combination of public education, provision of transit amenities, and
            coordination of local Trolley and regional SCAT line schedules. A public education
            program will be undertaken to increase the public's awareness of area transit
            services. This education program will also be used to increase the public's under-
            standing of the advantages of public transit, including its role in reducing traffic
            congestion and improving area air quality.
            Within new developments that could generate significant amounts of transit rider-
            ship (e.g., shopping, schools, senior housing), bus turnouts and bus shelters will
            be required to be provided, if requested by SCAT or if needed to enhance Trolley
            services and ridership. Where such transit amenities are provided, new develop-
            ment will also be required to provide convenient pedestrian access between new
            uses and transit stops.
            Currently, Trolley and SCAT services run independently. The City of Ojai will work
            with SCAT to coordinate Trolley and SCAT bus schedules to facilitate transfers
                                                                               r.lcoj40 Ilprojectiplan \fillallcirc.ele
            a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                            18                                    May 13,1997

            Circulation Element
            between the Trolley and SCAT. This will expand the range of potential services for
            both systems.
PUBliC UTIUTY CORRIDORS
            In addition to roadways, trails, and public transit, municipal Circulation Elements
            are required to address the need for public utility corridors for the delivery· of
            energy resources (gas and electricity), disposal of sewage, and provision of other
            public utilities (e.g., telephone, cable television). The General Plan intends that
            such utility corridors follow the same rules as for roadways, avoiding significant
            impacts on the natural environment, preserving oak trees, and fitting comfortably
            into the community's small town character. As a result, all such utilities are to be
            located below ground and within public street rights-of-way or dedicated utility
            rights-of-way or easements. New utility corridors are to be protective of the area's
            natural environment, and are to preserve mature oaks in place.
VALLEY WIDE SOLUTIONS TO TRAFFIC CONGESTION
            Morning and evening commutes in and out of the City are a major concern for Ojai
            residents. Due to the narrow width of State Highway 33, which connects Ojai to
            Ventura, commuters are often forced to negotiate the two lane highway in a long
            line of vehicles. Without adequate width to handle turns or slow moving traffic,
            congestion is common, especially dUring the evening peak commute hour. Con-
            gestion problems are particularly acute in the communities of Casitas Springs and
            Mira Monte, where numerous driveways front along the State Highway.
            Although residents are clearly frustrated with increasing congestion along State
            Highway 33, many have concluded that the commuter traffic is the price to be paid
            for living in Ojai and for protection of the rural character of the canyon connecting
            Ojai to Ventura. They feel that widening State Highway 33 would only result in
            temporary traffic improvements as it would also mean bringing additional develop-
            ment to the Ojai Valley.
            County policies have limited the widening of State Highway 33 due to the impacts
            which would result on adjacent rural communities. A bypass around these commu-
            nities is being proposed by the County and has been included in the State Trans-
            portation Improvement Program; however, funding for such a project is unlikely to
            occur within the planning horizon of the Ojai General Plan. In the absence of a
            comprehensive widening project, the County is proposing use of traffic controls,
            widening at critical intersections, and provision of acceleration and deceleration
            lanes, where feasible, to prOvide partial relief from congestion problems.
            The Circulation Element proposes taking a valley wide approach to solving conges-
            tion problems along State Highway 33. This would include limitations on develop-
            ment within both the County and City to reduce traffic impacts on the Highway
                                                                            r: 1coj40 I1projectlplan (fittal1circ.ele
            a,AI GENERAL PLAN                          19                                    May 13,1997

Circulation Element
until physical improvements and widening is in place, emphasizing transit alterna-
tives, and establishment of an areawide financing mechanism for highway improve-
ments.
The City of Ojai has adopted residential growth controls, and has tied the rate of
commercial growth to population growth. Ventura County has adopted residential
growth controls for the Ojai Valley area. In addition, Policy 4.2.2.4 of the Ventura
County General Plan prohibits discretionary development that would add any
traffic on State Highway 33 during critical weekday commuter traffic periods with-
out appropriate mitigation.} The County has not established commercial growth
controls.
The net result of these policies is a significant inducement for commercial develop-
ment within the unincorporated portions of the Ojai Valley, where the vast majority
of commercially zoned land actually fronts on the highway. While it may be argued
that new commercial uses along State Highway 33 would not violate County policy
because these uses would cater specifically to commuters during peak commute
hours, and that provisions of acceleration/deceleration lanes would mitigate peak
hour impacts, continuing commercial development along the State Highway will
increase overall traffic on the highway and eventually result in significant off-peak
congestion impacts by increasing the number of conflicting left tum movements 2
The Ojai General Plan proposes that the County link commercial growth to resi-
dential growth, thereby removing the advantage of developing commercial uses in
the County.
}
     Policy AQ-P4 of the Ojai General Plan Air Quality Element prohibits approval of develop-
     ment projects that "do not mitigate their peak hour trips on State Highway 33 at the Edison
     curve through Castias Springs except for affordable housing projects."
2
     Currently, Ojai commuters can stop at commercial uses along the east frontage of the
     highway on cheir way home without reqUiring a left tum movement. However. during off~
     peak hours and weekends. patrons would be required to make left tum movements either
     into or from commercial establishments.
                                                                          r: \coj40 Ilprojectlpla1l1jinal\circ.ele
a,Ai   GENERAL PLAN                               20                                       May 13,1997
           Circulation Element
           CIRCUlATION ELEMENT POLICIES
BALANCING COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND CIRCULATION NEEDS
           CIR-1 Provide for the efficient movement of vehicles by designing, constructing,
                 and maintaining a roadway circulation network which will function at an
                 acceptable level of service (LOS). The City will strive to achieve and main-
                 tain LOS C, where it is economically and environmentally feasible to
                 achieve that objective in a manner consistent with community character and
                 the non-transportation provisions of the General Plan, but will accept lower
                 levels of service where necessary to:
                 •        protect Ojai's unique community character or the quality of the
                         area's natural environment;
                 •        provide for the safety of pedeStrians and bicyclists and to avoid gaps
                          in the City's trails system;
                 •        conduct major community events that are important to the City'S
                          cultural, community, and economic health.
                 The minimum acceptable LOS along State Highways 33 and 150 would be
                 LOS D, except for any segments or intersection operating below LOS D as
                 of the date of adoption of this Circulation Element, in which case, LOS E is
                 considered to be acceptable.
                 At any intersection, the minimum acceptable LOS shall be C where the
                 minimum acceptable LOS for each intersecting street is also C. In all other
                 cases, the minimum acceptable LOS for an intersection shall be the lower of
                 the acceptable LOS standards for the intersection roadway links.
           CIR-2 Limit the intensity of future development to that which can be accommo-
                 dated on area roadways through creation of a mix of land uses that realisti-
                 cally balances (1) community growth potential, (2) community character,
                 environmental, and neighborhood protection needs, and (3) the desire for
                 improving the performance of the City's roadway system.
                 Where (1) existing or (2) projected traffic volumes at general plan build out
                 prevent a project from complying with this policy, limit development to the
                 maximum peak hour volume-to-capacity (y/C) ratio increases delineated in
                 Table A, unless a greater increase is required to accommodate the follow-
                 ing:
                 •       Construction of a single family dwelling on an existing lot of record.
                 •       An affordable housing project needed to achieve the City's Housing
                         Element objectives for the production of low and moderate income
                         housing.
                                                                        r: Icoj40 Ilprojectlplalll/inal\circ.t:le
           a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                         21                                  May 13,1997

Circulation Element
      •        A project or event that is important to the City's cultural, commu-
               nity, and economic health.
CIR·3 Continue to protect oak, sycamore, and other mature trees located within
      existing and future roadway rights-of-way and avoid widening and construc-
      tion of streets where such projects will result in significant impacts to his-
      toric structures or facilities within the community.
             Table A - Allowable Project-Related Traffic Increases
                  Where Roadway Performance Standards Are
                                 or Will Be Exceeded
          Existing or Fu-
         ture Linkllnter-      Volume to Capacity      Maximum Peak Hour
           section LOS               (VIC) Ratio          VIC Increase
                 c                    0.71· 0.80               0.010
                 o                    0.81- 0.90             0.0060
                 E                    0.91- 1.00             0.0030
                 F                      ,1.01                0.0030
        Source: £SA Associates, Inc., 1995.
CIR-4 Facilitate the application of special deSign standards that recognize the
      inherent differences between urban and rural land uses (e.g., requirements
      for construction of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks in urban, but not rural
      areas), protect and incorporate existing oak and other mature trees located
      in or adjacent to the street right-of-way into overall street design, as well as
      standards that promote safety in areas of special circumstances (e.g., hill-
      side and agricultural areas) and maximize the unique natural and manmade
      character of the community.
CIR-5 Achieve and maintain an organization of land uses which, to the extent
      feasible and consistent with community character and environmental pro-
      tection, integrates places of reSidence, retail commerce, daily service needs,
      work, education, and recreation, and which minimizes the impacts of
      through traffic within residential neighborhoods.
CIR-6 Analyze the desirability of roadway widening projects, proposed new road-
      ways, and proposed installation of traffic control devices in terms of their
      consistency with the General Plan's goal of preserving Ojai's unique charac-
      ter and its environmental quality.
                                                              r: lcoj40 Ilprojectlplalll(illal\circ,ele
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                            22                                May 13,1997

Circulation Element
CIR-7 Prior to commencing with new roadway construction, widening of existing
       roadways, or installation of traffic control devices, determine whether
       Transportation Systems Management, Transportation Demand manage-
       ment, and/or traffic calming techniques can be used to avoid the need for
       such physical improvements.
CIR-8 Because transportation capital, operation, and maintenance funds are se-
       verely limited, pursue transportation funding based on the following princi-
       ples:
       •        Roadway improvements required by new development are to be
                paid for by those who generate the need and benefit from them.
       •        Roadway improvements necessitated by existing development
                should have needed improvements financed from transportation
                funds, such as gasoline taxes, Transportation Development Act
                funds, local transportation sales taxes, etc. Where funding sources
                prove inadequate, roadway funds should be augmented by assess-
                ment districts, impact fees, and related funding mechanisms.
       •        Existing excess road capacity should not automatically be granted to
                new users. In cases where existing developments have provided
                excess roadway capacity in order to serve future development, new
                development should pay for that existing capacity just as it would
                for new roads.
       •       To the extent permitted by law, road maintenance should be paid
                for by road users.
CIR-9 Promote the design of roadways to optimize safe traffic flow within estab-
       lished roadway configurations by minimizing turning movements, uncon-
       trolled access, on-street parking, and frequent stops to the extent consistent
       with the character of adjacent land uses.
CIR-lO Maintain an adequate supply of parking to support the function of the uses
       it serves, and to facilitate transportation demand management programs.
CIR-II Reduce the need for vehicular travel by:
       •       establishing and maintaining a comprehensive system of bicycle and
               pedestrian paths and trails, and prOViding appropriate facilities
               along these routes, paths, and trails;
       •       supporting the responsible expansion of public transit services,
                including connections between major destinations within the com-
               munity and employment areas within Ventura;
                                                              r: !coj40 / \proiect\plan lfinalkirc.ele
O,AI GENERAL PLAN                         23                                    May 13, 1997

             Circulation Element
                    •       promoting the use of public transit and ride sharing through devel-
                            opment of convenient and attractive facilities;
                    •       promoting Transportation Demand and Systems Management Pro-
                            grams; and
                    •       facilitating workplace alternatives such as teleconferencing and
                            telecommuting centers, and facilitating the ability of residents to
                            work at home.
             CIR-12 Preserve and enhance the City's ability to hold community events that are
                    significant tourist and local draws by:
                    •       establishing a customized trolley schedule to be used during com-
                            munity events, connecting the "Y" Park-and-Ride and the downtown
                            Park-and-Ride lots to the event;
                    •       providing clear directional signage to the most popular locations
                            related to tourist areas to help direct visitors who are unfamiliar
                            with the community;
                    •       working with event sponsors to establish special transit services
                            connecting off-site parking areas to the event in order to reduce
                            congestions in the downtown area during events; and
                    •       permitting community groups to offer valet or shuttle service as
                            fund-raising activities during community events.
CREATING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT FOR PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLES
             CIR-13 Provide a comprehensive multi-use trail system which:
                    •       is safe and useful for everyday tasks such as travel to school, shop-
                            ping, work, and recreational facilities;
                    •       contributes recreational opportunities to the community, and serves
                            as a partial alternative to automobile use;
                    •       connects major destinations within the City; and
                    •       provides appropriate connections to regional routes and the trail
                            facilities within the National Forest.
                                                                          r: lco;40 l\projectlplan Ifina/leiTe.ele
           . O,AI GENERAL PLAN                          24                                 May 13,1997

            Circulation Element
            CIR-14 Avoid roadway and intersection improvements construction which could
                   compromise the integrity of Ojai's bicycle and pedestrian circulation sys-
                   tems. Prohibit roadway and intersection improvements which would create
                   gaps in the community's bicycle and pedestrian trails systems.
            CIR-15 Require that new commercial, industrial, institutional, and recreational uses
                   be designed to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access, giving on-site pedes-
                   trian and bicycle access equal priority to on-site automobile circulation.
            CIR-16 Enhance pedestrian safety by:
                   •       providing four-way stops at heavily used trail/street crossings;
                   •       constructing street "neck-downs" to narrow street crossings at key
                           pedestrian crossing locations; and
                   •       lengthening the "WALK/DON'T WALK" cycle or proViding a dedi-
                           cated pedestrian walk phase, including diagonal pedestrian cross-
                           ings at Signalized intersections.
            CIR-17 Provide new pedestrian connections between Libbey Park and those uses
                   which front Montgomery Avenue.
FACIIJTATING USE OF PUBUC TRANSIT
            CIR-18 Ensure public awareness of available public transit services through a com-
                   munity outreach program, which provides information on the availability of
                   transit services, and provides information on advantages of public transit
                   usage such as reduced traffic congestion and improved air quality.
            CIR-19 Require the provision of transit amenities including, but not limited to, bus
                   turnouts and bus shelters in new developments which can provide a signifi-
                   cant source of transit ridership (e.g., shopping, schools, senior housing)
                   when such facilities could improve Trolley service or ridership, and when
                   requested by SCAT.
            CIR-20 For uses located adjacent to transit stops, require the provision of conve-
                   nient pedestrian access between the development and the transit stop.
            CIR-21 Work with SCAT to coordinate SCAT and Trolley service schedules, increas-
                   ing the feasibility of passengers transferring from one system to the other.
            CIR-22 Work with SCAT to reinstate express commuter service on at least a trial
                   basis following the community outreach program described in Policy CIR-
                   18.
                                                                         r: !coj401 \projectlplalllfinal!circ,ele
            DIAI GENERAL PLAN                         25                                  May 13,1997

            Circulation Element
PUBUC UTIliTY CORRIDORS
            CIR-23 Require all new utilities to be placed underground3 and to be routed in a
                   manner which protects Ojai's unique community character, preserves ma-
                   ture oak and sycamore trees, and maintains the quality of the area's natural
                   environment.
VAIJ.EYWIDE SOLUTIONS TO TRAFFIC CONGESTION
            CIR-24 Ensure that new developments do not contribute to further deterioration of
                   levels of service on the regional roadway system, particularly with regard to
                   State Highway 33. Exceptions to this policy may be made for affordable
                   housing developments needed to achieve adopted Housing Element objec-
                   tives for the production of housing where no feasible mitigation measures
                   exist consistent with the need for production of affordable housing.
            CIR-25 Continue to tie the amount of Ojai's new commercial growth to the rate of
                   population increase in the City, and work with Ventura County to achieve
                   similar management of commercial growth within unincorporated areas,
                   thereby providing for the rational management of new traffic-generating
                   sources.
            CIR-26 Work with Ventura County and Caltrans to establish a funding mechanism
                   for needed improvements along State Highway 33.
            CIR-27 Ensure that the provision of roadway carrying capacity improvements sup-
                   ports, rather than leads, the determination of desired land uses and land
                   use character. While the absence of roadway carrying capacity presents a
                   constraint to development, its availability should not be permitted to lead
                   to development which is inconsistent with the desired character of the
                   community or the need to protect the area's natural environment.
            3      Electrical lines in excess of 66kv may be placed above ground when necessary.
                                                                             r: lcoj40 JIprojtctlplalllf!llallcirc.ele
            a,AI GENERAL PIAN                           26                                    May 13,1997
               Circulation Element
               IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING PROGRAM
INTRODUCTION
                     he Ojai General Plan Circulation Ele-
               T     ment Implementation and Monitor-
                     ing Program describes the specific
               actions necessary to implement the Circu-
                                                                     Implementation and
                                                                Monitoring Program Components
               lation Element's goals, objectives, ap-         ./      Development Review
               proach, and strategies. The Implementa-
               tion and Monitoring program is organized        ./      Special Studies and Programs
               into three separate program components
               (see box at right).                            ./       Implementation Monitoring
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
               The Development Review portion of the Circulation Element Implementation
               Program is intended to ensure that new development is consistent with the General
               Plan. This portion of the Circulation Element outlines the criteria that will be used
               to determine development requirements, as well as the site-specific analysis that
               will be needed. To ensure consistency with the Circulation Element, the follOWing
               fundamental questions need to be answered for each proposed development
               project:
               ./      Is the project design consistent with Circulation Element policies?
               ./      What roadway improvements need to be provided?
               ./      What trail improvements need to be provided?
Is the Project Design Consistent with Circulation Element Policies?
               All proposed discretionary development projects are to be consistent with the
               policies of the Circulation Element. Thus, the City will review policies CIR-3
               through CIR-20 to determine what modifications, if any, need to be made to the
               proposed discretionary development project to make it consistent with Circulation
               Element policies.
What Roadway Improvements Need to Be Provided?
               Individual developments will be reviewed to determine applicable roadway im-
               provement requirements by comparing them to the Circulation Element Map
               (Figure 9) and the Roadway Classification Table (Table B). At a minimum, new
               developments will be conditioned to provide the following improvements:
                                                                              r:1coj40 f Iprojectlpfan lfinallcirc.ele
               a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                        27                                     May 13,1997
                                                                                                                           .... •...................•..••.....••...
                ........................................•........
                  i-J ,,- 1-
                 G~I-
                  -·:;:'1
                           -",-)
                             " /1'
                          '" .. ..--
                                       ,~
                                            -
                                               J /
                                          .. ' ,."
                                     /' " ,
                                            /1
                                                    "
                                                           -,
                                                                 I
                                                                   I
                                                                   I
                                                                   I
                                                                   ,
                                                                   I
                                                                          -,                   I
                                                                                                ,
                                                                                          'v\"'i'~;;
                                                                                              ", I, "
                                                                                                      ,.
                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                l"
                                                                                                                ~. ),/
                                                                                                        r , .::~.J
                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                       '+-",\
                                                                                                               "'l'l{\~"~
                                                                                         I 'I' - \ ,:':1,' "'-''"~
                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                              _~:~~~?~:.~:r·_. ---·
                                                                                                                                                       VAUEY VIEW RD""
                                                                                                                                                              I\"I'V'\
                                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                                 r..'
                                                                                                                                                                                      [J--"
                                                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                         I,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ~ ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                           '•
                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ..~ "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  j(
                                            ::j    ---             i-,   --J,            I rr~Ji iT                                                                                                     ,   '.
                                                                                I,""'l        -1 ... ;--                                                                                             -'I
                                                                                ! It' I       .I' ,t1i'
                                                                                    dI,"" _' r;t)f                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                            }rl!yuii~·~~J~~.
                                                                                I                                                                               L.'  :""_'     -
                                                         u....uw,,-.......,.,),{.':·j-··:-i·1     ." (                                             !                                     I )-   1-                 !
                                                       ,......--.,...,       ,         . . . / [·-}L~:I·i:p/.~                                                                              I     ~
                                                                                         c
                                                                                        I'"
                                                                                                                                                       ,~  -,-' ""';""',", '~,-<
                                                                                                                                                       .~ 1_('          ;-:i- {~
                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                         'I;"     ~
                                                                                        '~
                                                                                                                                                                                         I I     ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                      <' ,~
                                                                                                                                                        is '" .        111 0     '£
                                                                                                                                                       '~ITI"., len.,e                           ~                 I
                                                                         (rI i
                                                                                         c                                                                                                                'I
                                                                                                                                                          }I:,~: \!~,:r, "               ;~LItl~ i
                                                                     . .          ·dDR
                                                                       /                                                                    J~~iT"\\_
                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                    '. <t.'     l1i l~                                                                                      ,r
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ...       -C-I,~::      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.,1[\ ~c_, I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~(\~~ti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            II:;' I::!; :
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .........I·····..- :~'
                                                                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ;      .,
                                                                                                                                                                                          LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                          I          I Ojai City Boundary
                                 MIRA
                                                                                                                                                                                          .--
                              MONTE
                                                                                                                                                                                          I······ ~     City of Ojai Sphere oflnfluence
                                                                                                                                                                                          1--1          4 Lane Divided
                                                                                                                                                                                          1---""1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1__ -
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3 Lane Divided
                                                                                                                                                                                          F-....3 2 Lane Divided
                                                                                                                                                                                          1          I 2 Lane Undivided
                                                                                                                                                                                               ~        Traffic Signal
5/13/97(COJ401)
<:-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 9
N
LSA                                                                                                                                                                                             Planned Circulation System

Circulation Element
•       All internal roadways
•        master planned roadways within the site to their ultimate planned configu-
         ration
•        Master planned roadways adjacent to the project site to their ultimate half-
        width
•        Other off-site roadways as necessary to maintain the roadway performance
         objectives outlined in policies CIR-l and CIR-l7.
If the performance of any street affected by a proposed project is below the stan-
dards outlined in Policy CIR-l prior to project approval, the project shall be re-
qUired to prOVide such improvements that are consistent with the General Plan to
ensure that the project will not contribute to the further degradation of roadway
performance, consistent with Policy CIR-2.
Planned Circulation System
Table B outlines the City's roadway classification system, and describes the primary
purposes of the various types of roadways within the community. The City'S
planned circulation system is illustrated in the circulation map in Figure 9. Finally,
Table C identifies planned roadway improvements.
                     Table B - Existing Roadway Classifications
       Oiai General Plan Roadway Classifications               Location/Description
      State Highways   State highway widths are      Two State highways serve the srudy
                       established by the State.     area. These include State Highway
                       Maintenance levels and high-  33 1 (Maricopa Highway) and Highway
                       way improvements (e.g., traf- 1501 (Ventura Avenue and Ojai Ave-
                       fic signals, roadway widen-   nue).
                       ing) are controlled by the
                       State Department of Trans-
                       portation.
      Collector        Roadways that serve abutting  Collector roadways include the follow-
      Streets          property and carry traffic to ing:
                       State highways.     Collector East/West Collectors
                       streets are two to foue lanes
                                                     Fairview Rd.
                       with widening at intersec-
                                                     Rancho Of'.
                       tions.
                                                     Cuyama Rd.
                                                     Hermosa Rd.
                                                     EI Paseo Rd.
                                                     Grand Ave.
                                                     Aliso S1.
                                                                      r: lcoi40Ilprojectlplan lfinallcirc.ele
O,AI GENERAL PLAN                              29                                     May 13,1997

Circulation Element
                     Table B - Existing Roadway Classifications
       Dial General Plan Roadway Classifications                 LocatioQ/DescriptioQ
                                                         NorthlSouth Collectors
                                                         Del Norte Rd.
                                                         Foothill Rd.
                                                        Country Club Dr.
                                                        Canada St.
                                                        Venruca St.
                                                        Signal St
                                                        Montgomery St.
     Local Streets      Roadways that provide foe       Local streets represent roadways not
                        neighborhood traffic move-      listed as State Highways or collector
                        ment. Local streets carry traf· roadways.
                        fic from individual properties
                        (0 Collector Streets and ulti-
                        mately to the State highways.
                        These streets are not encour-
                        aged to carry through traffic,
                        and are typically (Wa lanes.
     Couplet            A couplet may be a Collector,   The potential to divert traffic around
                        Local street, State highway,    the historic downtown area has been a
                        or a combination of these       discussion issue for some time. Origi-
                        roadways designed to cany       nal efforts focused on diverting
                        traffic in one direction. Spe-  through traffic around the commercial
                        cial cross sections for any     area. A more recent Couplet Study
                        couplet will be designed        provided a number of alternatives us-
                        based upon individual cir-      ing a system of one·way streets.
                        cumstances.
     Special            Streets that abut historic      There a number of examples within
     Circumstances      structures, facilities or lo-   the study area that demonstrate this
                        cated with oak tree con-        situation. The most visible include
                        straints.                       the preservation of oak trees within
                                                        the street right-of.way throughout the
                                                        Village Residential area. Other street
                                                        sections, such as along Ojai Avenue at
                                                        the Arcade are severely limited due to
                                                        the existence of historic or commer           4
                                                        cial stmctures.
     1 Included as part of the Congestion Management Program roadway network.
                                                                          r: lcoi40Ilprojectlplan lfinallcirc.ele
D/AI GENERAL PLAN                                30                                       May 13, 1997

             Circulation Element
                            Table C • City of Ojai Planned Roadway Improvements
                              Location                            Recommended Improvement
                Ojal Avenue (SR-33). between the     Upgrade    [0 a [wo lane divided roadway section.
                "Y" and Country Club Drive
                'Y' intersection Maricopa Highway   Add a free rightlUm lane from nonhbound SR-33 to
                 (SR-150). SR-33. and Del None Rd.   eastbound SR-33. along with appropriate transition
                                                     lanes to the east of the "Y".
                SR-33 between Signal St. and Mont-   Install landscaped pedestrian crossing with enhanced
                gomeryAve.                           pavement.
                Intersection of SR-33 and Mont-      Provide for an adjacent, procected east and
                gomery Ave,                         westbound left tum pockets from Ojai Avenue to
                                                     North and South Montgomery streets in character
                                                    with Ojai's historiC downtown area.
                Intersection of SR-33 and Fox        Provide for signalized intersection and pedestrian
                                                    crossing improvements.
                Fulton Street                       Extend approximately 600 feet to Bryant Circle to
                                                     provide a second access to the business park.
                Tapa Tapa Street/Willow Street       Provide an east/West connection by connecting either
                connections                         Tapa Topa or Willow streets between Fox and Mont-
                                                    gomery streets.
                Mallory Way                         Preserve right-of-way for a possible future road·
                                                    waylbikeway improvement in connection with rede-
                                                    velopment of adjacent properties.
                Santa Ana Suect connection          Connect Santa Ana between Canada Street and
                                                    Blanche Street to enhance east/west travel through
                                                    this area.
               Source: Robert Kahn, John Kain & Assodatesj LSA Assodates, Inc., 1995.
What Trail Improvements Need to be Provided?
             Individual developments will be reviewed to determine applicable trail improve-
             ment requirements by comparing them to the Trail Classification System (Figure 8).
             At a minimum, new developments will be conditioned to provide the following
             improvements:
             •       Appropriate physical improvements to link the site to the existing trail
                      system;
             •       Appropriate easements/rights-of-way to link the site to the planned trail
                      system;
             •       Appropriate easements/rights-of-way for planned trails through or adjacent
                      to the site; and
             •        Directional signage and traffic controls to ensure trail safety.
                                                                                    r: l,c0j40 J lprojectlplan lfinal\circ.ele
             a'Ai GENERAL PIAN                             31                                          May 13,1997

            Circulation Element
           Trail Standards
           The basic trail standards to be used for implementation of the Trail Classification
            System are depicted in Figure 8, which identifies proposed location and width of
            each trail type depicted in Figure 7. It is recognized that these standards m.ay need
            to be modified, revised, or adapted to site-specific physical or environmental con-
           straints as each trail is constructed.
SPECIAL STUDIES AND PROGRAMS
           The Special Studies component
           describes the long range imple-                Special Studies Implementation Priorities
            mentation measures that the com-
            munity will undertake to imple-             Priority                       Action
            ment the Circulation Element.
           Because they are long range, these             One       Program to be initiated
           special studies are to be imple-                         within  oneyear.
           mented at various times over the               Two       Initiate within the nat two to five
           life of the General Plan Circulation                    years.
           Element. This program assigns
           priorities to each special study that                    Initiate beyond the nextfive years.
           can be coordinated over time with
           the City's budget process and capi-
           tal improvement program (see on the right). As part of the annual General Plan
           review, the City Council will review and revise the priorities for individual studies.
           Upon completion of any study, specific implementation programs may be adopted
           as appropriate.
           Beginning with the first budget cycle follOWing one year after adoption of the
           Circulation Element, the City Council will annually review the list of special studies
           listed in this section and to revise the priorities of these studies, based on available
           resources. Upon completion of each study, appropriate General Plan implementa-
           tion programs may be added to the Implementation and Monitoring Program
           contained in the General Plan.
           The funding sources for each action listed below will be assigned annually as part
           of the General Plan Review and Update and the City's annual budget process.
Downtown Ojai Parking Study (priority One)
           Analyze opportunities for enhanced parking within the Village Mixed Use (VMU)
           designation, including, but not be limited to:
           •        an inventory of existing on and off-street public and private parking;
           •        existing and future development intensities (based on the most probable
                    build out within the VMU designation);
                                                                                r: lc0j40l!erojectlpfanl/inal!circ.efe
           a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                           32                                       May 13,1997

             Circulation Element
             •        an analysis of existing and future parking deficiencies that will identify the
                      number and location of spaces needed to meet existing and future de-
                      mand; and
             •        a detail action plan of both public and private parking improvements that
                     will ensure an adequate supply of parking to support all uses within the
                     City's downtown.
Bicycle and Pedestrian Crossing Study (priority Two)
             Complete a study assessing the feasibility of, and preparing a detailed design for, a
             bicycle and pedestrian under crossing at State Highway 33 and the San Antonio
             Creek. Coordinate the design studies with the Land Use Element Design Concepts
             for a gateway treatment in the same location.
Bicycle and Pedestrian Action Plan (priority Two)
             As part of an ongoing policy for the enhancement of bicycle and pedestrian oppor-
             tunities in order to achieve a more "livable" and sustainable community, develop a
             Bicycle and Pedestrian Action Plan that includes the following:
             •       Appointing a City Bicycle and Pedestrian Coortlinator to function as a liai-
                     son between the City policy makers and the biking and walking community
             •       Creating and soliciting community participation in a Bicycle and Pedestrian
                     Advisory Committee comprised of both professional City staff and citizens
                     having an interest and/or expertise in bicycling and walking issues
             •       Developing a community bicycle and walking information and safety pro-
                     gram designed to provide the general public with information regarding
                     local and regional trail locations, bicycle and pedestrian events and safety
                     programs, as well as an update on new trail system facilities development.
Pedestrian Enhancement District Guidebook (priority Two)
             Using the policies contained in the General Plan Land Use and Circulation Ele-
             ments, develop an illustrated guide for new and infill development within the
             Pedestrian Enhancement District (PED) designation. Include strategies, concepts,
             and examples of ways in which new and infill development can participate in the
             creation of a more bicycle-and pedestrian-friendly community.
                                                                           r:!coj401Iprojectlplallljinallcirc.ele
             a,AI GENERAL PLAN                         33                                 May 13,1997

             Circulation Element
CIRCULATION ELEMENT REVIEW AND UPDATE
             California Government Code Section 65400(b) requires the planning agency of
             each city and county in the State to provide an "annual report to the legislative
             body on the status of the (general) plan and progress in its implementation." The
             follOwing section details the contents of such a report, which will be prepared and
             delivered annually to the Ojai City Council regarding the implementation of the
             Circulation Element.
Circulation Element Review
             On an annual basis, the Planning Department will report on the implementation of
             the General Plan Circulation Element and provide the following information:
             ./     A summary of activities undertaken over the past year to implement the
                    General Plan Circulation Element.
                    A review of the General Plan Circulation Element Map and Master Plan of
                    Trails Map to ensure that:
                            adequate roadways are planned to support planned development,
                            and that the Land Use and Circulation Element continue to be cor-
                            related;
                            adequate trails are planned to provide a viable alternative to auto-
                            mobile travel; and
                            appropriate interface is provided between planned land uses,
                            planned roadways, and planned trails.
             ./     A status of planned roadway and trail improvements, including adequacy of
                    funding.
                    An assessment of valley wide and regional transportation policies and phYSi-
                    cal improvements over the past year and their associated impact on Ojai's
                    circulation policies.
                    Recommendations for future Circulation Element Revisions. Upon adop-
                    tion by the City Council, a copy of the Circulation Element will be provided
                    for review to the County and regional agencies who have an impact on
                    transportation planning with Ojai and its sphere of influence.
                                                                          r: \coj40Jlproject!plan lfinallcirc.ele
             a,AI GENERAL PLAN                        34                                  May 13,1997
          Circulation Element
IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING
          The following infonnation provides an index of General Plan Strategies and related
          implementation programs along with a description of the responsibility, timing,
          and funding that is likely to be necessary to implement the Ojai General Plan.
                     Table D - General Plan Implementation Monitoring Matrix
              Implementation
                    Program          Responsibility          Timing           Funding Source
           Development Review
           Review and   De[ennina~  Planning Depart.    Implemented on      Department budget
           tion of project consis-  ment                a project by pro-   and development
           tency                                        ject basis          review fees
                                    Engineering De-
                                    partment
           Special Studies and Programs
           Downtown Ojai Parking    Planning Depart-    Initiate within     Department budget
           Study                    ment                one year (1997)
           Bicycle and Pedestrian   Planning Depart-    Initiate within     Department budgets.
           Crossing Srudy           ment                the next 2 to 5
                                                        years (1997-        lSTEA Grants
           Bicycle and Pedestrian   Engineering De-     2000)
           Action Plan              partment                                FfA Grants included
                                                                            within the Livable
           Pedestrian Enhancement                                           Communities Initia-
           District Guidebook                                               tive (reqUires 20 per-
                                                                            cent match form
                                                                            City) Program fund-
                                                                            ing sources include:
                                                                           .fTransil Capital Dis-
                                                                           cretionary Grant of
                                                                            Loan Program
                                                                           .fTransit Fonnula
                                                                           Assistance Block
                                                                           Grants
                                                                           .fPlanning and Re-
                                                                           search Program
                                                                           ./Surface Transporta~
                                                                           tion Program
                                                                           .fCongestion Mitiga-
                                                                           tion and Air Quality
                                                                           Program
                                                                          r.!coj40 llprojf'ctlplanl(inallcirc.f'le
          a'Ai GENERAL PIAN                          35                                    May 13,1997
Circulation Element
          Table D - General Plan Implementation Monitoring Matrix
    Implementation
        Program            Responsibility         Timing            Funding Source
 Circulation Element Update
 Circulation Element Re- Planning Depart-    Annually in coor-    Department BudgelS
 view                    ment                dination with the
                                             City's budgel
                         Engineering De-     process.
                         partment
                                                               r: lcoi40I1projectlp!an lfina flcirc. eft
a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                         36                                   May 13,1997
            Conservation Element
            INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE ELEMENT
            The Conservation Element of the Ojai General Plan was prepared in conformance
            with State, law and pursuant to the realization of the City of Ojai General Plan
            overall goals, objectives and policies. The Element identifies natural resources;
            defines issues pertaining to the preservation of resources; formulates goals and
            objectives aimed at conservation of resources; and established policies and
            programs to implement objectives of long-term preservation and wise utilization
            of resources.
            The purpose of the Conservation element is to defme the City's resource
            conservation goals and to establish tools and mechanisms to obtain the desired
            goals. The Conservation Element, in combination with the Ojai Open Space
            Element, is formulated to guide the long-term management of the resources within
            City boundaries and to establish policy guidelines in its planning area. An inventory
            of these resources is provided in the Ojai Master Environmental Assessment
            (MEA). From the MEA's resource inventory, goals, policies and programs were
            formulated to ensure sound management and proper utilization and conservation
            of all resources of the City and preserved Ojai's unique living environment.
ASSUMPTIONS/DEFINITIONS
            The Conservation Element of the Ojai General Plan has been prepared pursuant
            to requirements of State Law. The Element is in conformance with the overall
            General Plan goals of the City of Ojai and has been formulated in a manner to
            implement the goals.
            As a premise to the establishment of the General Plan Conservation Element and
            its goals and policies, an outline of defmitions and assumptions used to create the
            Conservation Element is provided below:
                 o   Conservation involves a recognition and respect of all the earth's resources,
                     in that their management and preservation is the responsibility of our
                     fellow man for use and appreciation by future generations.
                 o   Conservation assumes that all things are either existing or potential
                     resources. Most resources are finite and if they are to be expended, it
                     should be done in a prudent and judicious manner.
                 o   Conservation inherently respects the inter-relationship between needs for
                     utilization and resources. It further establishes priorities which will
            OJAI GENERAL PLAN                               1                      MAY13,1987
            Conservation Element
                     detennme how resources will be conserved or utilized for the long-term
                     benefit of all living things.
LEGAL AUTHORITY
            Under State Law, a City is responsible for preparing a comprehensive General Plan
            for the long-term physical development of the City. Section 65302, pertaining to
            required Elements of the General Plan, states the following:
            "The General Plan shall consist of a statement of development policies and shall
            include a diagram or diagrams and text setting forth objectives, principles,
            standards, and plan proposals. The Plan shall include the following elements:
                A Conservation Element for the conservation, development. and utilization of
                 natural resources including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers
                and other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural
                 resources. That portion ofthe Conservation Element includingwaters shall be
                developed in coordination with any countywide water agency and with all
                district and City agencies which have developed, served, controlled, or
                conserved water for any purpose for the County or city for which the plan is
                 prepared. The Conservation Element may also cover:
                 (1) The reclamation of land and water.
                 (2) Flood ControL
                 (3) Prevention and control of the pollution of streams and other waters.
                 (4) Regulation of the use of land in stream channels and other areas required
                     for the accomplishment of the conservation plan.
                (5) Prevention, control, and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches, and
                     shores.
                (6) Protection of watersheds.
                (7) The location, quantity, and quality of the rock:, sand, and gravel resources."
            The Index Matrix within the Introduction Section of this General Plan provides an
            index/reference of State General Plan requirements and under which sections of
            the Ojai General Plan the State requirement is fulfilled.
            OJAI GENERAL PLAN                               2                       MAYn,1987
             Conservation Element
             ISSUES AND NEEDS
OVERVIEW
             The Ojai Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) provides an inventory of all
             resources in the Ojai Sphere of Influence. Resources are defined, located and
             evaluated in the MEA text and its associated maps. Issues pertaining to these
             topics are discussed in this section. Goals, Policies and Implementing Programs for
             preservation of the following resources are established in the Conservation
             Element, based on the data of the MEA.
                 o   GEOLOGICAL RESOURCES
                     o Important Farmland
                     o Mineral Resources
                 o   WATER/WATERSHEDS
                 o   BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
                 o   CULTURAL/HISTORIC RESOURCES
                 o   AIR QUALITY
                 o   SCENIC VIEWS/AESTHETICS {Conservation and Open Space
                     Elements)
                 o   RECREATIONAL AMENITIES {Recreation Element)
             General Plan issues that relate to conservation of the above resources are based on
             the MEA Inventory. Major issues which initiated the Conservation Element's goals
             and policies are summarized below.
GEOLOGIC RESOURCES
             Geologic resources and associated issues in Ojai include:
                 o   Important Farmlands utilized in agriculture which are valued as significant
                     soil resources. Preservation of these designated Important Farmland
                     resources is essential for the continuing land use and environmental
                     balance in Ojai.
                 o   Mineral and Oil Resources which are valued as significant soil resources.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                                3                    .MAY 13, 1987
            Conservation Element
                     Preservation of these important resources is essential for the continuing
                     land use and environmental balance in Ojai.
            GOALS, POUCIES AND IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS
INTRODUCTION
            The following conservation goals, objectives, policies and programs are presented
            in a manner to enable the reader to perceive the underlying intent of each goal, and
            to further understand the methods (policies and programs) by which the City will
            realize the General Plan's conservation goals and objectives. Goals have been
            established for each Issue/Need previously indicated. Goals related to Scenic
            Values/Aesthetics and Recreational Resources are contained in the Open Space and
            Recreation Elements.
GENERAL
            IN PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE OF THE OJAI, IT SHALL BE THE
            OVERALL GOAL OF THE CIlY TO PROVIDE FOR THE
            PRESERVATION AND PROPER UTIUZATION OF NATURAL AND
            CULTURAL RESOURCES TO MAINTAIN AND ENHANCE THE
            QUAUlY OF THE NATURAL UVING ENVIRONMENT AND
            NATURAL BEAUlY OF THE AREA.
                 Policy: The City shall implement the State requirements for development
                 ofa Conservation Element. The Element will be integrated into a unified
                 General Plan that reflects the complex relationship between resources,
                 conservation and community needs.
                     Program: Continue consideration of State General.Plan requirements in
                     formulation of specific conservation and general programs of the General
                     Plan.
                     Program: Provide an index in the Element of State requirements and
                     reference text where requirements are fulfilled.
                     Program: Establish appropriate standards and criteria for the conservation
                     and use of natural and cultural resources.
                 Policy: Identify, locate and evaluate the status of the City's natural and
                 cultural resources as they relate to natural and human needs.
            O]M GENERAL PLAN                                4                     MAY13,1987
Conservation Element
      Program: Maintain an inventory of the City's resources and pursue their
      conservation.
      Program: Utilize the City's Master Environmental Assessment an update
      it when necessary to maintain an up-to-date inventory and valuation of
      resources.
   Poller- Identify and evaluate those entities currently responsible for the
      management of the City's resources as an initial step in the
      development of a total It conservation system It •
      Program: Establish and maintain correspondence and coordination with
      governmental agencies and other involved organizations in pursuit of
      programs to conserve natural and cultural resources.
      Program: The following agencies and organizations, at a minimum, shall
      be contacted for their input into the City's Conservation Element. Further,
      when new programs are considered, applicable agencies shall be contacted
       for involvement.
               - U.S. Forest Service
               - California State Department of Conservation
               - County of Ventura
   Poller- Formulate a land use pattern that takes optimum advantage of
   natural and cultural resources in the Ojai Planning Area.
      Program: Integrate all General Plan goals and policies to respect and
      consider goals and policies of the Conservation Element.
      Program: Verify consistency between Land Use designations (specifically
      open space and recreation) and policies of the Conservation Element
      pertaining to preservation of resources.
      Program: Develop a general plan/zoning matrix chart in the Land Use
      Element of the General Plan.
      Program: Provide general plan conformance sections related to all
      Elements in any major project staff reports.
      Program: Review the Land Use Element at regular intervals to assure
      compliance with conservation goals.
0IAI GENERAL PLAN                             5                    MAY13,1987

             Conservation Element
GEOLOGIC RESOURCES, IMPORTANTFARMLAND
             IN ALL FUTURE DECISIONS, IT SHALL BE THE GOAL OF THE
             CITYOFOJAITOPROTECTIMPORTANTAGRICULTURALLANDS
             FROM FUTURE URBANIZATION.
                Policy. Recognize and incorporate the Ventura County Important
                Fannlands classification system into City programs pertaining to
                preservation of agricultural lands.
                    Program: Adopt a farmland classification system of all agricultural land
                   within the City Planning Area., and create an" Agricultural Overlay"
                    designation in the General Plan Land Use Element Map that will provide
                    for the preservation of all important farmlands within the City Sphere of
                    Influence. Relevant factors shall be soil type, crop importance and value,
                    location and longevity of agricultural worth.
                Policy: Preserve "Prime", "Statewide" and "Local" agriculturally
                significant land in agricultural use in large parcels and contiguous
                geographic areas.
                    Program: To the maximum extent feasible, maintain Prime, Statewide
                    and Local farmland parcels to a size of 40 acres or more, and respect
                    recommendations of the MEA pertaining to agricultural preservation.
                    Program: Incorporate criteria established in the General Plan Land Use
                    Element pertaining to Agricultural Use into a formal Agricultural
                    Conservation Program for preservation and proper utilization of farmland
                    in Ojai.
                    Program: Promote the preservation of "Unique" Farmland currently in
                    avocado and/or citrus production.
                Policy: Encourage actions such as agricultural zoning and use or the
                Williamson Act.
                    Program: Preserve existing agriculture in isolated areas (i.e. on cultivated
                    hillsides surrounding the community), on flood plains and unique areas
                    capable of average or better than average crop yields.
                    Program: Make information available at City Hall to all land holders
                    related to the Wtlliamson Act.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             6                      MAY 11, 1987
Conservation Element
       Program: Identify all properties within the City where fann activities take
       place.
   Policy: Encourage conservation or agricultural land in the adjacent and
   nearby surrounding areas to the City.
       Program: The City shall maintain exISting programs and pursue
       cooperative programs with the County of Ventura (i.e. greenbelt
       agreements) regarding farmland preservation.
       Program: The City shall promote cooperation with public and private
       entities for agricultural preservation.
   Policy: The City shall encourage the following activities in agricultural areas:
       o        Planting of suitable vegetation for soil stability and to maximize
                absorption capabilities;
       o        Utilization of broad, gentle sloping waterways in agriculture;
       o        Prevention of overgrazing;
       o        Soils testing on proposed development sites prior to project
                approval to determine soil type and degree of erosion hazard;
       o        Utilization of proper grading techniques in areas in or near
                agriculture where slopes could be conducive to erosion.
       Program: The City shall Support the ongoing programs of the U.S. Soil
       Conservation Service, California State Department of Conservation, and
       local Fann Bureau.
   Policy: Separate agricultural and urban uses so that efficient agricultural
   practice (crop dusting, fertilization, mechanical harvesting) can be
   accomplished without danger or nuisance to residential areas and
   without adverse effects on sensitive crops.
       Program: The City will review its Land Use Element for appropriateness
       of land designations.
       Program: The City will adopt resolutions requesting that the County zone
0IAI GENERAL PLAN                               7                     MAY13,1987
             Conservation Element
                    all important farmland within the Area of Interest for agricultural use with
                    a minimum lot size of 40 acres.
GEOLOGICAL RESOURCES: MINERAL
             PRESERVE MINERAL AND OIL RESOURCES WITHIN THE CITY
             AND ITS AREA OF INTEREST.
                Policy: The City shall identify and locate important mineral and oil
                resources in the area and discourage urbanization of those areas.
                    Program: A "Mineral Resources Overlay" shall be incorporated into the
                    General Plan for long-term conservation of land that has mineral and oil
                    resources. The location, type and importance of the resource as identified
                    and evaluated in the 0iai MEA shall be used as the basis of the Overlay.
                Policy: The City of Ojal shall discourage any use or excavation of
                mineral and oil resources within the City and its Area of Interest.
                    Program: The City shall not approve or encourage any development of
                    mineral and oil extraction activity within the City and its Area of Interest.
                    Program: The "Mineral Resources Overlay" shall be the identification basis
                    of preservation areas discussed above. No development will be allowed in
                    areas identified with a mineral resource value.
                    Program: The City shall adopt a resolution requesting that the County
                    prohibit mineral and oil resource recovery within the Ojai Area of Interest.
WATER/WATERSHEDS
             THE CITY OF OJAI SHALL STRIVE TO PRESERVE THE QUANTITY
             AND ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF WATER RESOURCES THAT
             MAY AFFECT THE 0JAIVALLEY.
                Policy: The City shall ensure that adequate supplies ofwater be available
                to all City residents and uses requiring water.
                    Program: Coordination between the City and all water agencies and
                    companies shall be maintained and the City shall work together with any
                    involved entities to enhance the quality and quantity of water in the Ojai
                    Valley.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             8                      MAYL1,1987
             Conservation Element
                Policy: The City shall identify the sources and availability ofwater, flood
                potential, and sources ofpotential damage to the City's water supply and
                quality in order to maintain the optimum quality ofwater In the City and
                its watershed.
                    Program: The City shall continuously or periodically update its data
                    relating to water supply and quality in the Ojai Valley.
                    Program: The Ojai MEA shall be periodically updated to ensure a current
                    data inventory of:
                    o       sources and availability of water;
                    o        flood control hazard areas;
                    o       erosion areas and erosion control measures;
                    o       drainage systems;
                    o        protection of watersheds;
                    o       affected and interested water agencies in the Valley;
                Policy: The City shall strive to protect natural watersheds, drainage beds
                and water recharge areas and rebuild those damaged to achieve recovery
                oflocal water and the preservation of water systems.
                    Program: The MEA shall identify these areas and the City shall prohibit
                    development within or adjacent to any areas that may be associated with
                    water resource or distribution values.
                    Program: The Open Space Element shall identify all significant natural
                    watersheds, drainage beds and recharge areas for consideration as
                    permanent open space.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
             THE OVERAll GOAL OF THE CITY OF OJAI SHALL BE TO
             PROTECT AND ENHANCE ALL SIGNIFICANT BIOLOGICAL
             RESOURCES.
             IN PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE OF OJAI IT SHALL BE THE
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                              9                     MAY13,1987
Conservation Element
OBJECTIVE OF THE COMMUNITY TO:
1. ALLOW NO LOSS OF EXISTING RESOURCE VALUE, WITH THE
   INTENTION OF PROTECTING RESOURCES THAT ARE
   UNIQUE AND/OR IRREPLACEABLE IN THE REGION.
2. ALLOW NO NET LOSS OF IN-KIND RESOURCE VALUE (WHILE
   MINIMIZING LOSS OF EXITING RESOURCE VALUE),
   INTENDING TO PROTECT RESOURCES WHICH ARE
   RELATIVELY SCARCE, OR ARE BECOMING SCARCE ON A
   REGIONAL BASIS.
3. MINIMIZE LOSS OF RESOURCE VALUE, INTENDING TO
   PROTECT RESOURCES WHICH ARE RELATIVELYABUNDANT,
   BUT ARE IMPORTANT OR ARE OF MODERATE VALUE TO
   REGIONAL ECOSYSTEMS.
   Policy: Identify and protect biological resources within the City and its
   Area of Interest.
       Program: Establish an inventory in the Ojai MEA that identifies
       important biological resources in the region, categorizes biological
       resources as associated habitat areas and ranks areas within the City
      Planning Area according to biological sensitivity (i.e. high, moderate, or low
       biological significance).
      Program: Disallow development and urbanization in areas having
       biological resources (identified in the Ojai MEA with high or moderate
      significance) or in areas nearby these identified areas.
      Program: Coordinate with local and regional agencies, organizations and
      citizens to preserve to the maximum extent feasible, the Ojai Valley's
      biological diversity and natural health.
      Program: Pursue correspondence with local and regional agencies
      organizations and citizens to obtain biological infonnation and educate the
      public on matters pertaining to biological resources, values and the
      importance of natural diversity and its overalliong-terrn benefits.
      Program: The City shall have available to the public all infonnation
      contained in the MEA pertaining to biological resources in the area, and
      shall encourage the use of the infonnation for use in public education.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                              10                     MAYL1, 1987
Conservation Element
      Program: The City will consult the Department of Fish and Game and the
      current Habitat Conservation Plan in order to formulate appropriate
      mitigation strategies prior to the approval of development in any area
      designated with high or moderate significance in the MEA.
  Policy: The City will require a biological investigation prior to development
  within any habitat areas identified in the Ojai MEA. The study will focus on
  the condition ofthe habitat, the abundance and diversity ofwildlife and relative
  biological significance of the area.
  Policy: The City shall preserve to the extent feasible all Oak and Sycamore
  trees within and adjacent to the community.
      Program: The City will continue to enforce the Tree Removal Permitting
      process.
      Program: The City will develop circulation standards respective of all
      biological resources.
      Program: The City will prohibit modification of significant water sources.
  Policy: It shall be the policy of the City of Ojai to allow no loss of
  existing resource value for rare, endangered and unique species habitat,
  except to provide for the maintenance of flood control facilities.
      Program: Identify / delineate the extent of existing habitat area and
      preserve as permanent open space.
      Program: The City will consult the State Department of Fish and Game
      (DFG), U.S. Fish and Wtldlife Service (USFWS), in accordance with the
      intended goals of the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 and
      California Endangered Species Act of 1970, and other qualified biologists
      to determine the need for additional species-specific actions. Such actions
      may include:
      o   Screening and setbacks from habitat areas, as in the case of highly
          sensitive wildlife species, to allow continued use of entire habitat
          available;
      o   Upon reviewing development applications the City should consider the
          us of fencing or other means of controlling access to habitat areas, as
          in the case of fi:-agile flora or wildlife habitat.
OJM GENERAL PLAN                                 11                 MAY13,1987
Conservation Element
       Program: The City will review the Open Space and Land Use Elements
       and designate these rare, endangered and unique species habitat areas for
       open space uses only.
   Policy: It shall be the policy ofthe City of Ojai to allow no loss of existing
   resource value for regionally significant Oak Woodland/Savannah.
       Program: The City will prepare an oak and sycamore tree preservation and
       management plan to identify/delineate the extent of existing habitat and to
       provide specific guidelines for their preservation as permanent open space.
       Preparation of the plan should include consultation with D FG through
       required notification process (Sections 1601-1606, California Fish and
       Game Code) and the U.S. Army Corps ofEngineers (COE) permit process
       (Section 404, Clean Water Act), if applicable, to determine additional
       protective actions, such as:
       o   The use of fencing and other means of controlling access and
           disturbance to maintain values of the habitat;
       o   Diversions or control of increased flood runoff from adjacent and
           upstream urban developments to prevent the scouring of bottom and
           bank vegetation;
       o   Maintenance of existing water supply for the continued support of
           habitats.
           Note: In some cases, these measures may not be adequate or feasible
           due to the presence of irreplaceable flora or physical habitat features.
       Program: The City will review the Recreation, Open Space and Land Use
       Elements ofthe General Plan and designate those regionally significant Oak
       Woodland/Savannah areas for Open Space, Recreation and/or low density
       residential uses.
   Policy: The City shall allow no loss or the existing resource value or
   regionally significant riparian habitat.
       Program: The City will prepare a riparian preservation and management
       plan to identify/delineate the extent of existing habitat and provide specific
       guidelines to preserve as permanent open space. Preparation of the plan
       should include consultation with DFG through required notification
       process (Sections 1601-1606, California Fish and Game Code) and the U.S.
DJAI GENERAL PLAN                              12                       MAY13,1987
Conservation Element
       Fish and Wtldlife Service pursuant to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
       (COE) pennit process (Section 404, Clean Water Act), if applicable, to
       determine additional protective actions, such as:
       o   Setbacks and edge screening of adjacent development to allow
           continued use of entire habitat available by wildlife;
       o   The use of fencing and other means of controlling access and
           disturbance to maintain habitat values;
       o   Diversions or control of increased flood runoff from adjacent and
           upstream urban developments to prevent the scouring of bottom and
           bank vegetation;
       o   Maintenance of existing water supply for the continued Support of
           habitats.
       Program: The City will review the Recreation, Open Space and Land Use
       Elements and designate these riparian habitat areas for Open Space and/or
       Recreational uses.
   Poliev: It will be the policy or the City or Ojai to allow in
  Woodland/Bmshland Ecotone areas no loss or existing resource value
  within "core" oak woodland and sycamore tree areas while
  minimizing/limiting loss or remaining existing resource value.
       Program: The City will preserve 60 percent of its brushland habitats,
       according to the following guidelines:
       o   Retain brushland habitats in large (40 acres minimum), contiguous
           habitat configurations.
       o   Retain corridors/links of native vegetation between habitat enclaves.
       o   Include oak/riparian buffer zones as a portion of the area preserved.
       o   Place lowest intensities of use, greenbelts or recreation open space
           adjacent to preservation areas.
       Program: The City will review the Open Space, Recreation and Land Use
       Elements and designate these Woodland/Brushland Ecotone areas for
       Open Space, Recreation and/or Low Density Residential uses.
DJAI GENERAL PLAN                             13                    MAY l1, 1987
Conservation Element
   Policv: It will be the policy of the City of Ojai to minimize loss of
   resource value of locally significant stands of oak and sycamore trees.
       Program: The City will retain for aesthetic and cultural value significant
       stands of oak and sycamore trees. Following are guidelines for developing
       in and around such trees.
       o   The area within the dripline of oak trees should not be disturbed.
       o   No impervious surfaces should be placed beneath these trees that will
           prevent soil aeration and root respiration.
       o   To avoid root-rot and disease, no landscape ground covers requiring
           year round irrigation shall be planted on new development parcels.
       o   Grading around oak and sycamore trees should not change the ground
           grade and drainage patterns in order to avoid the impoundment of
           water and subsequent root rot.
       o   Heavy equipment should not be operated beneath oaks and sycamores
           in order to avoid soil compaction and root suffocation.
       o   Trenching for the installation of utilities should avoid the root zone of
           oak and sycamore trees.
       Program: The City will review the Recreation, Land Use and Open Space
       Elements and designate these oak and sycamore tree habitat areas for open
       space recreation and/or low density residential uses.
   Policv: It shall be the policy of the City of Ojai to minimize the loss of
   resource values of locally significant stands of native brush land
   consistent with the best practiced methods for fire protection.
       Program: The City will retain 20 percent of brushland areas as natural
      open space in the form of a network of contiguous corridors, preferably
      around and along drainage Courses. Individual corridors to be retained in
       natural condition must be no less than 100 feet wide in order to be
      effective.
       Program: The City will review the Recreation, Open Space and Land Use
       Elements to allow only open space, recreation and low density residential
       land uses in these native brushland areas.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             14                       MtY~1987
             Conservation Element
CUL7VRAL RESOURCES
             IT SHALL BE THE OVERALL GOAL OF THE CITY TO PROVIDE
             THE LONG-TERM PRESERVATION OR PROPER SCIENTIFIC
             INVESTIGATION OF ALL KNOWN AND POTENTIAL CULTURAL
             RESOURCES WITHIN THE OJAI AREA OF INTEREST.
                Policy: The City shall develop programs to identify and analyze known
                cultural resources, attempt to discover potential resources and plan for
                their appropriate examination and disposition.
                    Program:       An updated record/literature search and an on-foot
                    archaeological survey (where warranted) will be conducted in conjunction
                   with the preparation of any development proposal provided that an
                    adequate survey has not been conducted previously.
                    Program:      A limited test-level investigation will be conducted for all
                    cultural resource sites that have not previously undergone adequate testing
                    prior to the approval of any development proposals with the imrnerliate
                    area.
                    Program: Within any development proposal area, a mitigation program
                    for cultural resource will be formulated and implemented prior to the
                    issuance of any grarling or demolition permit.
                    Program: Archaeological monitoring during grarling will be required in
                    areas where significant cultural resources have been identified or are
                    expected to occur .
                Policy:       The City shall attempt to preserve all Historical
                buildings/resources designated by the City Council and shall strive to
                identify and preserve potential historical resources.
                    Program: The City shall prepare and maintain a historical resources
                    inventory that identifies and evaluates historical resources in the City.
                    Program: No demolition or alteration of designated historical builrlings
                    or properties shall occur in the City unless they are declared unsafe by the
                    City or unless notice has been given consistent with City Orrlinances. This
                    program shall be adhered to by verification prior to the issuance of a
                    demolition pennit. Historical resources shall be registered and preserved,
                    accorrling to appropriate Federal, State and/or Local guidelines, for the
                    long-term benefit of City residents.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                              15                      MAYl1,1987
            Conservation Element
AIR QUALITY
            IT SHALL BE THE OVERALL GOAL OF THE CITY TO EUMINATE
            ALL AIR POLLUTANTS IN OJAI VALLEY.
               Policy: Respect the Ventura County Air Quality Management Program
               (AQMP) by incorporating the procedures, requirements and standards
               of the AQMP into City policy.
                   Program: The City ofOjai shall respect the County of Ventura AQMP
                   and require compliance as a minimum ofany development projectwith the
                   AQMP prior to approval.
                   Program: The City Housing and Land Use Elements shall be reviewed for
                   consistency in accordance with State Law. Said review shall always respect
                   Conservation Element goals.
                   Program: The City of Ojai will respect and adopt provisions of the
                   Federal Clean Air Act, associated State Air Resources Board requirements
                   and pursuant County of Ventura Air Quality Management Program.
               Policy: The City will monitor and control growth and development that
               can inhibit air quality goals.
                   Program: The City shall review all development applicants              In  the
                   community via the Growth Management Ordinance.
                   Program: The City shall continue cooperative programs with Ventura
                   County to the extent feasible in the review of development applications.
                   Program: Provisions of the City Growth Management Plan (Ordinance
                   No. 571) and other applicable ordinances in the City ofOjai shall supersede
                   the County AQMP in limiting growth and development in Ojai where said
                   ordinances apply more stringent standards to the preservation of air quality.
               Policy: The City shall support any regional effort to improve air quality
               throughout Ventura County and State of California.
               Program: The City shall cooperate with, and provide assistance to, regional
               agencies, when necessary, during efforts to obtain data in regional activities for
               quality improvement programs.
            OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             16                      MAY.t3, 1987
           Conservation Element
SCENIC VIEWS/ AESTHETICS
           (Also refer to the Open Space Element of the Ojai General Plan).
           IT SHALL BE THE OVERALL GOAL OF THE CITY TO PRESERVE
           THE AESTHETICALLY PLEASING ENVIRONMENTAND NATIJRAL
           SCENIC BEAUTY THROUGHOUT THE OJAI VALLEY.
              Policy. The City shall not suppon any activity associated with the
              degradation or the natural scenic character or the Ojal Valley and shall
              actively pursue the preservation or vistas and natural beauty or the Ojal
              whenever possible.
                   Program: View corridors, prominent visual amenities in the Valley
                   (including Topa Topa Ledge and ChiefPeak) and other aesthetic amenities
                   shall be identified as natural resources in the Ojai MEA. These resources
                   and surrounding or affected areas shall be preserved as natural open space
                  whenever possible.
              Policy. Preserve the natural features of the Valley and general
              environmental characteristics of the hillside areas with minimum
              disturbance to native habitat.
                   Program: Promote the identification ofbuffer areas between any identified
                   natural or aesthetic resources and urban development.
                   Program: A "Scenic Overlay" shall be incorporated into the GeneraiPlan.
                  The Overlay shall be used as reference material and resources data base in
                   the preparation and evaluation of environmental documents pertaining to
                   development proposals in Ojai.
              Policy. The City shall recognize local and regional elJons and programs
              regarding preservation of natural and scenic resources and shall utilize
              all available techniques to preserve these resources in the Ojai Valley.
                   Program: The City shall explore methods in the State of California
                   Constitution and Codes to pursue public easements and other manners in
                  which to preserve scenic resources.
                   Program: Article 13b, Section 8 of the State Constitution aimed to
                   preserve open space for its use and enjoyment of natural resources and
                  scenic beauty and recreation shall be implemented in the City of Ojai.
           DJM GENERAL PLAN                                17                   MAYL1,1987
            Conservation Element
                   Further, open space easements as allowed under State Code shall be
                   pursued (see also Ojai Open Space Element).
RECREATIONAL AMENITIES
            (Refer to the Recreation Element of the Ojai General Plan)
            OJAI GENERAL PLAN                          18                MAY 1.1, 1987
City of Ojai General Plan
Land Use Element
           Final
Land Use Element
TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                    PAGE
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                 I
      BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT. . . . . . ..                                          1
      GOALS AND OBJECTIVES                                                                                  2
      LEGAL AUTHORITI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . ..      3
      ELEMENT ORGANIZATION AND FORMAT ...•.........•..........                                              3
GENERAL PLAN APPROACH .. , ... , . , , ... , .. , .... , .. , , , .......•. , .•. , . 5
      PRESERVING OJAI'S SMALL TOWN CHARACTER .. "                                   ,                   ,. 5
      MAINTAINING COMPATIBILITI BETWEEN OJAI'S BUILT
            AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. , , . , .. , ' ,                                              , , .. 13
      BALANCING SMALL TOWN LIFE WITH A VIBRANT TOURIST
            ECONOMY, , , , , .. , , . ,                                           ,                    , , 14
      MANAGING THE PACE OF GROWfH AND DEVELOPMENT .. , ,                                                   15
      INTEGRATING OJAI'S VISION WITH ACTION TAKEN BY OTHER
            AGENCIES                    ,       ".",.,."                                               ,. 17
LAND USE ELEMENT POLICIES .. , , . , ,                  , .. , . ,               ,            ,        , , 20
      PRESERVING OJAI'S SMALL TOWN CHARACTER . " , . ' " "                                             " 20
      MAINTAINING COMPATIBILITIBETWEEN OJAI'S BUILT
            AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENTS ..... , ..... , .........•.. , 24
      BALANCING SMALL TOWN LIFE WITH VIBRANT TOURIST
            ECONOMY                                             ,,         ,          , .. ,               24
      MANAGING THE PACE OF GROWfH AND DEVELOPMENT                                                    , .. 24
      INTEGRATING OJAI'S VISION WITH ACTION TAKEN BY OTHER
            AGENCIES ,.",           ,., .. ,.,.""                              "         " .. "., 25
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING PROGRAM , . , ...•. , , .. , ,                                         , . , 26
      INTRODUCTION ,        " .. ,'.,                     ,       , .. ,                        ,.,., 26
      DEVELOPMENT REVIEW                  ,.,.,,.,,,                       ,                    , .. , , 26
      INTERGOVERNMENTAL COORDINATION AND COMMUNITI
      INVOLVEMENT PROGRAM                                 ,.,.,,                                ,          52
      SPECIAL STUDIES AND PROGRAMS                        ,., .............•... ,., 55
      LAND USE ELEMENT REVIEW AND UPDATE , .....•. ,., ...•.. '                                            56
      IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING .,.,                        "., .. , .• ,.,                                57
                                                                 r: 1coj40 llprojectlplan l/inailianduse.new
a'Ai GENERAL PIAN                       ii                                               May 13,1997

                             Land Use Element
                             INTRODUCTION
          BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT
                                      jai is a special place that evokes a
                              O       certain small town feeling in those
                                      who live or visit here. Upon entering
                             Ojai, one cannot help but gain an under-
                             standing of what small towns really are; OJ ai's
                             character harkens back to the "traditional"
                             small town, not the modern conception of
                             what small town image should be. For resi-
                             dents and visitors alike, Ojai is a friendly, com-
                             fortable place; it is familiar. For those who
                             were raised in small towns, Ojai invokes
                             reminders of home; for those who were raised
                             in larger cities, Ojai encompasses the best that
                             can be imagined of small town life.
Residents       charcuterize
Ojai as a "small town"
                             The Land Use Element of the General Plan sets
or "village. tt avoiding the forth Ojai's vision of its future the means by
tem "dry" because of its     which the City will protect its small town
connotations of large        character. The Land Use Element outlines the City's fundamental land use
size     and      unbridled  philosophy regarding appropriate types, intensity, and location of new
growth.                      development, and appropriate means for maintaining the area's environmental,
                             social, phYSical, and economic health and vitality. The Land Use Element, there-
                             fore, focuses on the organization of the community's phYSical environment into
                             logical, functional, and Visually pleasing patterns that are consistent with local
                             social values. Of primary concern are the type, intensity, location, and character
                             of land uses that will be permitted in the future.
                             OJai's overall land use pattern is well established, and is not intended to substan-
                             tially change over time. Future growth will primarily consist of infill development.
                             However, as this infill occurs, the City will face Significant challenges. Ojai's natural
                             setting and significant environmental features need to be protected, and at the
                             same time, private property rights need to be recognized.
                             Ojai residents recognize that preservation of the community's small town character
                             is not a matter of chance, but requires concerted action and vigilance. Thus, the
                             City has established residential and commercial growth management programs, as
                             well as design guidelines. The effect of these programs is to ensure that the rate,
                             scale, type, and character of new development contributes to, rather than detracts
                             from, OJai's unique character.
                                                                                          r.lco;40 J lpro;ect Iplall l(inalllanduse.lleIV
                             alAi GENERAL PLAN                            1                                       May 13, 1997
           Land Use Element
GOAL AND OBJECTIVES
           Despite significant economic, technological, and social changes in California, the
           residents of Ojai have been successful in preserving their community's character
           and the features that make Ojai such a desirable community. This has required
           integrating current planning tools with innovative ideas and a clear sense of
           community priorities and vision. These priorities and vision form the basis for
           OJai's land use goal and objectives.
                         City of Ojai Land Use Element Goal and Objectives
                                                                   Goal
             It is the goal of the Ciry of Ojal to achieve a well-designed, high qualiry. andfunctWnal balance of land
             uses which reflects Ojars unique character and communiry values, and which integrates the resolution of
             local and regional issues contained ill other elements of the 0ia; General Plan.
                                                              Objectives
             In implementing this goal, it is tlte objective of the City to:
                   identify and use the unique aspects of the communiry that comprise the "Ojai experience u as a
                   benchmarkfor new development;
                   provide a residentialUv;ng environment that t1Icourages a divmiry in lifestyles. alloJYs for a mixture
                   of uses which support pedestrian accessibility. and prOVides housing opportunities for all socioeconomic
                   groups;
                   preserve Diaes small town character and maintain a built environmmt that does not detract from
                   Diai's natural environment;
                   maintain a vibrant tourist economy which is in balance with Diai's small town life;
             •     manage the interrelatiollship between attaining 0iai's vision of its future and actions taken by other
                   organizations and agt1lcies in such a mauner as to facilitate cuhievement ofeach party's vision of the
                  future; and
             •     manage the growth and pace ofdevelopment to ensure that community resources are sustainable, and
                   capable of meeting the needs ofboth present andfuture residmts.
           Figure 1 - Land Use Element Goal and Objectives
                                                                                         r: Ico;40 1 jproiectlefan lfinaLllallduse.new
           OIAI GENERAL PLAN                                         2                                           May 13,1997

            Land Use Element
LEGAL AUI7fORITY
            Under State Law (Government Code Section 65302[aJ), evety City and County is
            required to adopt, as part of its General Plan, a Land Use Element which:
                      "designates the proposed general distribution and general location
                      and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry,
                      open space, including agriculture, natural resources, recreation,
                      and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and
                      grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other
                      categories ofpublic andprivate uses of land. The land use element
                      shall include a statement of the standards ofpopulation density
                      and building intensity recommendedlor the various districts and
                      other territory covered by the plan..."
            In addition, the General Plan Land Use Element may address other subjects or geo-
            graphical areas (both within or outside the City limits) which relate to the physical
            development of the City. Furthermore, State Law suggests that the elements of the
            General Plan focus attention on issues of greatest community concern.
            Table 1-2, Index to the Location ofState Mandated General Plan Issues Within the
            Ojai General Plan within the Introduction
            section of the General Plan, provides an
            index reference of State General Plan                              Polity Directives
            requirements and under which section of
                                                                   Goal: A genual. overall and ultimate
            the Ojai General Plan the State requirement
                                                                  purpose, aim, or end toward which tlte Cio/
            is fulfilled.                                          will direct effort.
                                                                   Objective: A specific statemmt of desired
ELEMENT ORGANIZATION AND FORMAT                                   Juture conditions toward which the Ciry will
                                                                  expend effort in the context of striving to a·
            To assist the reader in using the General chieve a broader goal.
            Plan, the Land Use Element is structured
            around five general themes, which General Plan Approach: Discussion as to
            represent a summary of specific commu- how the Ciry will resolve relevant issues and
            nity characteristics and concerns that manage its future.
            provide the framework for the land use
                                                                  Policies: Actions, activities, priorities, and
            policy included in the Land Use Element.
                                                                  policy direction that, wilen incorporated witll
            These themes include: preserving Ojai's the Gcncral Plan approach, detail how goals
            small       town      character,     maintaining and objectives will be accomplished.
            compatibility between Ojai's built and
            natural environments,          balancing small Figure 2 - Polil)' Directives
            1
                      Pursuant to Government Code Section 65302a, areas within Ojai that are
                      subject to flood hazards are identified in the Safety Element.
                                                                                  r: Icoj40llprojectlplafJ l(illallla"duse.new
            OIAI GENERAL PLAN                               3                                            May 13,1997

Land Use Element
town life with a vibrant tourist economy, managing the pace and gtowth of
development, and integrating Ojai's vision with actions taken by other agencies.
The Land Use Element is organized into the following sections below.
Introduction: A brief overview of the background and purpose of the Element is
provided. The Introduction also includes the Element's goals and objectives,
which represent the fIrst level of policy directives for the Land Use Element.
General Plan Approach and Policies:                The General Plan Approach and
Strategies represent the directives that the City will use to manage its future, guide
new development, and to protect the natural environment and the character of the
community (see Figure 2).
Implementation and Monitoring Program: The Implementation and
Monitoring Program is the City's blueprint for action. The program includes a
presentation of a specillc set of actions designed to implement Ojai's goals,
objectives and strategies. The action program includes the full range of specillc
steps necessary to translate the vision described in the Land Use Element into
reality.
                                                           r: lco;40Ilproject!plan lfinailianduse.new
DIAI GENERAL PLAN                          4                                     May 13,1997
           Land Use Element
           GENERAL PLAN APPROACH
PRESERVING OJAl'S SMALL TOWN CHARACTER
              t is the Ojai General Plan's approach to preserve the community's "small town"
           I  character by using the physical, environmental, and social aspects of the
              community that form its character as the criteria for determining the
           appropriateness of new development. Thus, new development must respect or
           enhance the City's small town feel and fit in with the existing land use pattern. A
           key component to Ojai's approach is to use the unique community attributes,
           overall community structure, and individual architectural and urban design features
           that together create Ojai's unique small town character. These will also act as the
           guiding principles for the design of new development projects, thus achieving a
           compatible "fit" between new development and the existing characteristics of the
           surrounding community, neighborhood, and area where they are developed (see
           Figure 3).
           The residents of Ojai share a common goal of ensuring that the existing "sense of
           community" is maintained, and that local social values are reflected in community
           and governmental decision making and the City's development review process.
                      Ojai's Land Planning and Design Approach:
              New developments shall use Ojai's unique community attributes, structure,
                    andfeatures as the guiding principles for all new project designs.
                                                 Commuuity
                                                . Attributes
                                            Community Character
                                                     and
                                              Quality ofLife
                                   Communilf                     Community
                                    Structure                     Features
           Figure 3 - Planning and Design Approach
                                                                    r: koj40 lleroieet\planlfinaillanduse.llcw
           a'Ai GENERALPLAN                           5                                   May 13, 1997
            Land Use Element
            The following provides a general description of the attributes, structure, and
            features that together make up Ojai's small town character. Community standards
            for all new development in Ojai are also detailed in the General Plan Land Use
            Implementation and Monitoring section of the Land Use Element.
Community Attributes
           As part of its approach to land use planning and community design, the Ojai
            General Plan recognizes a number of unique community attributes that together
            create Ojai's small town character. These attributes include those aspects of life in
            Ojai which attracted residents to the Ojai Valley, as well as what keeps residents
            from moving somewhere else. New development is to be compatible with these
            attributes to ensure compatibility with Ojai's community character.
                                                   Ojai Community Attributes
                                 0iai is a quiet, peaceful community whose pictu.resque valley setting,
                              architectural character, and protected natural environment combine to
                         provide a refuge from the chaotic sprawl of the metropolitan Los Angeles ar-
                                                        ea. It is a community that:
                           ... isfirst andforemost a placefor people andfamilies to live quality lives;
                                   ...protects its unique small town character and cultural heritage;
                            ... is not dominated by automobiles, "corporate architecture," or suburban
                                                                subdivisions;
                        ... respects its physical environment, andprotects the distinctive natural envi-
                                                      ronment of the Ojai Valley; and
                         ...successfully blends the best ofsmall town lifestyles and a tourist economy.
                     Figure 4 - Community Attributes
Community Structure
           Ojai's community structure is comprised of five general types of land uses: RuraV
           Open Space, Suburban, Village, Employment-Generating, and the Downtown.
           Overall, Ojai is surrounded by a ring of rural and open space lands which provide
           definition to the developed portions of the community. Within this ring are a
           variety of suburban density residential neighborhoods, as well as commercial
           developments, which are generally located along Ojai Avenue. North of the
           downtown area is a village-type area of older residential neighborhoods mixed with
           small scale commercial development. At the center of Ojai is a traditional small
           town downtown which functions as the civic, cultural, and social heart of the
                                                                                    r.lcoj40 J lero;ectle1anlfinal1landuse.lIew
           a,Al GENERAL PLAN                                       6                                       May 13,1997
Land Use Element
community. Southeast of downtown is an area of small industrial uses, as well as a
larger suburban business park development. New development needs to not only
establish a functional relationship with its site and surrounding properties, but
must also establish a comfortable fit with the overall structure of the community as
described below (see Figure 5).
In requiring that new development be consistent with existing land use patterns
and character, the General Plan recognizes that Ojai's unique land use character is
composed of a number of different types of uses that when taken together add
interest and diversity to the community. It is Ojai's intent, therefore, to preserve
this same diversity and individuality in new residential and commercial
development while ensuring that all new development "fit' with the surrounding
characteristics of each neighborhood area.
                      W$ Padru NCJJioooJ ForUl
                                                      ~~-
                                                      '-, . ~'"';'"',-;
                                                              LEGEND
                                                              o         Rural and Open Space Lnnds
                                                              GJ Suburban Development
                                                              ~ Village Area
                                                               •        TheTownCenter
        ..(>.                                                 o         Employment Generating Lands
        N     NoScalc                                                   Major Conununit)' Gateway
    Figure 5 - Community Structure
It is the intent of the General Plan to retain the community's existing land use
structure. This structure is depicted in the General Plan Land Use Plan which
outlines the general distribution of land uses that, along with the Land Use
Element text, define the types and intensities of uses, densities, standards and, in
some cases, the conditions under which the uses are considered to be appropriate.
                                                                r: \coj40 Ilprojectlplanlf1nalllanduse. new
OIAI GENERAL PLAN                              7                                        May 13,1997

Land Use Element
The Land Use Plan carries out the community's goal to guide future development
and manage growth in a way that promotes the heath, safety, and welfare of Ojai
residents. A copy of the Land Use Plan is provided in a map pocket at the end of
the General Plan.
Rural and Open Space Lands
One of the most unique characteris-
tics of Ojai is that the edge of devel-
opment is defined by an abundance
of open land which surrounds the
community.         Physically, Ojai is
bordered on the north by the Santa
Ynez Mountains and the Los Padres
National Forest, and on the south by
Sulphur       Mountain.           These
topographic features stand as a TI O· . V. II
backdrop to the community, and add           Ie 'Ia! a ry
opportunities for significant views and vistas both to and from the community. The
predominant development pattern along the highway corridors leading east and
west from Ojai is made up of a mixture of large citrus groves, range land, and other
agricultural uses. These rural and open land uses provide an important separation
between the City of Ojai and surrounding communities, and are a Significant
component of Ojai's small town character.
It is the City's intent that the large unbroken expanses of open lands around the
perimeter of the community be preserved. Development within these perimeter
lands is intended to consist of agricultural open space and very low intensity
development (less than I dwelling unit/lO acres [dulac]).
Suburban Development
The perimeter of Ojai's existing developed lands consists of suburban develop-
ment, much of it newer single family detached residential homes in the familiar
Southern California style. These neighborhoods were generally developed as
individual entities with few points of entry and little connection to the overall
community, and are designed physically and architecturally to facilitate automobile
travel. There is no easy connection to walking/bicycle paths, trails or designated
bicycle lanes leading into the center of town. The lack of street trees and the
presence of tract housing, including sidewalks at curbs, serves to further discon-
nect some of these developments with the character of Ojai. It is the city's intent
not to repeat this style of development.
                                                           r: Icoj40 J Ipro;tctlplalJlfillalllallduse.lIew
OIAl GENERAL PLAN                          8                                       May 13,1997

Land Use Element
There are, however, some
excellent examples of suburban
neighborhoods within Ojai,
which will serve as models for
future neighborhoods.           The
"Acbolada" is a subdivision that,
at one time, comprised the outer
edge of the developed town. Its
rock and tree-lined streets mean-
der with the topography and
serve to tie a diverse collection
of older and newer homes
together with a strong "sense of      The Arbolada
place" that is unmistakably Ojai.
In addition to the Acbolada, older residential neighborhoods in the vicinity of the
downtown can serve as models for future development. These neighborhoods
exhibit a grid street pattern, and were built by individual contractors, meaning that
each home is a unique architectural statement, even though many of these
neighborhoods consist of modestly sized homes. The elimination of tract housing
with its repetitive architecture is key to preserving Ojai's unique small town
character.
There is also a substantial amount of
suburban commercial development
that is distinguished by large front
setbacks and parking between the
street and buildings. Most of this
development occurred during the past
30 years, and is located on the
perimeter of the community at the
west and east ends of Highway 150. In
addition, one such area of suburban
style development can be found just to
the west of the town core. This area is Suburban Commercial Development
composed of grocery, banks, restau-
rants, and other related commercial uses. The large building setbacks and street-
oriented parking make the area unfrienclly to pedestrians and bicyclists, and creates
an unfortunate barrier between the neighborhood to the west and the town center
to the east. The General Plan strives to avoid recreating this style of commercial
development. Instead, the General Plan intends that new commercial development
be small in scale, and similar in character to commercial development found in and
around the downtown area. In these areas, buildings are close to the street, and
encourage pedestrian and bicycle access between buildings.
                                                           r: Iroj40 Ilprojectlpltmlfinal\fauduse.llew
OIAl GENERAL PLAN                           9                                     May 13,1997
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                -'"          ...._
Land Use Element                                                                               lJ
                                                                                                .              ".
                                                                                                 ('            "t
                                                                                                  "', I~
                                                                                                            ~....
Village Area
As one approaches the downtown area from almost any side street, buildings be-
come noticeably more dense, as lots become smaller and lot coverage increases.
Building setbacks lessen, and residential uses are mixed in with a variety of low
intensity commercial uses, such as lodging, realty, small medical and other service-
related office space, as well as some retail shops, such as antique stores and art gal-
leries.
                                                  The architecture of these areas
                                                  varies widely, and includes a mix of
                                                  building types and styles, from old
                                                  Victorian and Craftsman houses to
                                                  small masonty commercial build-
                                                  ings.    Where walking paths or
                                                  sidewalks are present, they are
                                                  typically narrow, and often of dirt,
                                                  gravel or asphalt. Trees are abun-
                                                  dant and street improvements have
                                                  often been made to accommodate
                                                  them, diverting curbs and walks
                                                  around the trunks and roots to as-
                                                  sure their survival. The General
Village Development                               Plan aims to preserve the existing
                                                  character and deSign of these areas.
The older residential neighborhoods
in the central portion of Ojai reflect a
traditional style of development which
is currently enjoying a revival
throughout the United States, and
which the City wants for its newer
neighborhoods. These traditional or
"neotraditional"         neighborhoods
feature a grid street system, and tend
to de.emphasize the presence of
automobiles by using narrower street
sections than are typically found in
suburban style developments. The Commercial                Development                within             an
deSign of individual houses also Established Ojai Neighborhood
su pports de·emphasizing the role of
automobiles by redUcing the visual prominence of the garage, often placing the
garage at the rear of the lot with access proVided via an alleyway. Rather than being
mass produced as part of a large scale tract, housing in these older neighborhoods
tends to be more individual. Although they are not necessarily large or laVish, each
house has a unique architectural design that is not repeated throughout a
                                                            r: !co;40 Ilpro;ectlplallljillal\lalldllse.lIew
a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                          10                                      May 13,1997

Land Use Element
neighborhood as it would be in a suburban subdivision. It is this traditional style
of development that Ojai desires for its future.
Commercial development within this area is pedestrian in scale, unique in their use
(art galleries, bed and breakfast) or focused at serving the personal service needs of
the surrounding neighborhoods. It is this style of mixed-use development that Ojai
desires for its future.
The Town Center
Found primarily in and around Ojai's historic downtown, the area's development
pattern is characterized by smaller, contiguous buildings located at the immediate
edge of the public right-of-way. These smaller buildings with many shop store-
fronts and entries ensure a busy pedestrian atmosphere. Most of the buildings in
and around the town core are low-lying, one and two stoty structures of plaster,
wood or masonry exterior.
The strength of Ojai's town core as
a memorable place can be attri-
buted to the vision of Edmond
Drummond Libbey, whose fman-
cial support in the early 1900s
resulted in the formalized plan for
the town centered on a civic park
and small commercial district. It is
the intent of the Ojai General Plan
to preserve this focus on a civic
park (Libbey Park), and to retain
the small size of the central
commercial district. The architec- TIle Arcade at the Town Center
ture of the downtown's key
structures includes the arcade, which brought together a row of diverse
commercial buildings behind an elegant Spanish colonnade, and the post office,
whose tower serves as a visual landmark to Signify arrival at the center of town.
Although many intrusions and diverging styles have been developed in and around
this center, the images of these two structures as a relaxed but elegant backdrop to
the park are so strong that their impression seems to leave little room for anything
else. New development within the downtown area is to be smaller in scale than
these structures, and should not compete for visual prominence with them. New
development should also incorporate the pedestrian-friendly design of the
traditional downtown, with buildings set at the sidewalk and parking located
behind.
In most circumstances, there is a sharp line of delineation between the "village"
areas around the town center and the center itself. Often, a transition in street
                                                           r: !co;40 f \proj~ctlplalllfiJlallla/l(illse.llelV
DIAI GENERAL PLAN                          11                                        May 13,1997
                            Land Use Element
                            width and improvements can be seen at the point of transition, corresponding with
                            a change in building type and lot coverage, which does well to emphasize the
                            ending of one district and the beginning of another.
                            It is the community's intent to recognize the significant impact that a traditional
                            downtown has had on Ojai's image as a small town by ensuring that new
                            development be compatible with the area's historic and architectural features, as
                            well as the civic and cultural focus the area provides to the community. Through
                            the implementation of General Plan policies, Ojai will strive to retain the Town
                            Center's importance as a traditional downtown for the enjoyment of visitors as well
                            as residents.
                            Employment-Generating Lands
                            To the east of Libbey Park, southeast of the downtown area, is an area of small
                            industrial uses, as well as a larger modem business park. Industrial development
                            outside of the business park primarily consist of small uses on individual lots.
                            Immediately east of Libbey Park are areas zoned for manufacturing use that are
                            primarily residential in character, as well as areas that consist of a mix of residential
                            and industrial uses. It is the intent of the General Plan to both protect existing
                            residential uses, as well as to allow for an expansion of employment opportunities
                            by establishing:
                            •       ,,-,,<panded opportunIties for home occupations to include such uses as
                                    cabinet shops, custom furniture manufacturing, artists galleries, and others;
                            •       areas permltttng a mix of residential and employment-generating uses,
                                    including establishment of appropriate development standards for these
                                    areas; and
                            •       performance standards for industrial uses located adjacent to residential
                                    areas.
           Community Features and Architectural Imagery
To achieve a successful fit Ojai's small town character has largely been created and is anchored by the many
with Ojai's small town      identifiable landmark buildings, and is reflected in the type, scale of architectural
character, new development  features that are used throughout the community. It is Ojai's intent to use local
should be compatible with   community landmarks, as well as the architectural imagery they possess, as the
neighboring    architecture palette to be used in the design of new developments. To successfully implement
and not overshadow local    this approach, new development will be required to integrate existing community
communiry landmarks.
                            architectural and design features which, as identified in the General Plan, support
                             the community's efforts to preserve the small town character.
                                                                                        r: \c0j40 llprojeetlplan l(inaillandllse. flew
                            a/Al GENERAL PIAN                          12                                      May 13,1997

                             Land Use Element
                             The Ojai General Plan also identifies several special areas in the community that
                             possess unique development and design opportunities and needs. Within these
                             areas, Ojai's approach to land use planning is to provide conceptual designs in the
                             implementation portion of the Land Use Element to provide project deSigners with
                             a starting point from which new developments may be created that fit with the
                             community's small town character. These conceptual deSigns can be found
                             beginning on page 36 of the Land Use Element.
          MAINTAINING COMPATIBIliTY BETWEEN OlAI'S BUILT AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENTS
                             The Ojai Valley's natural environment is a
                             critical component of the community's overall
                             character. Probably the best example of the
                             priority that Ojai places on preserving the
                             area's natural environment and forcing man--
                             made features to fit into that environment is
                             the City's policy toward oak tree preservation.
                             Large oak trees, which would be removed as
                             part of road construction or Widening
                             projects in most cities, remain within Ojai's
                           . streets and rights-of-way as ongoing re-
The Djai Gmeral Plan         minders of OJai's emphasis on development
recognizes Diai's steward-   fitting  around rather than over the natural
ship role in the manage-     environment.
ment of the natural envi-
ronment.                     Historical accounts of the Ojai Valley's
                             development often refer to the wealth of re- Oak Tree Preservation
                             sources, both mineral and natural, that could be found in the "Upper Ojai" area. As
                             is the case for many of Ojai's current residents, those who originally settled in the
                             area were looking for opportunity and a more healthy way of life. As time has
                             passed, the natural beauty of the Valley has been preserved, tempering the pace
                             and intensity of new development.
                             More than Simply expressing an affinity for the Valley's natural environment, the
                             General Plan is an important tool for defending that environment. The approach
                             of the General Plan is to proVide for the protection of the natural environment and
                             those resources which comprise the character of the community recognizing that
                             new development may be a threat to their preservation.
                                                                                       r: k"o;40 Ilpro;eetlpfallljilltlllfallllllse.lleIV
                             OIAl GENERAL PLAN                         13                                     May 13,1997
           Land Use Element
                                                                   Protecting the area's natural
                                                                   hillsides and ridge lines, as well as
                                                                   protecting remaining open lands,
                                                                   are important concerns of the
                                                                   General Plan, which takes a broad
                                                                   view       of         the         environment)
                                                                   recognizing that concerns extend
                                                                   beyond the City's boundaries and
                                                                   immediate physical environment to
                                                                   other issues such as water resource
                                                                   conservation, areawide drainage
                                                                   and flood control, 2 solid waste
           Beasant Meadows                                         management, and protection of air
                                                                   quality. This broad view of the
           environment also extends geographically, and is reflected in General Plan
           provisions related to regional planning and visioning programs, induding
           programs that indirectly affect the City of Ojal.
           The Ojai General Plan land use approach recognizes that the City must take a
           stewardship role in the management of the natural environment in both Ojal and
           the larger Ojal Valley where impacts to natural resources would impinge on
           community character and the quality of life of Ojal residents. In the review of
           individual projects, the Ojal General Plan considers natural features such as
           established trees, arroyos, streambeds, meadows, hillsides, and viewshed as critical
           elements of a project design that are to be proactively preserved and embellished
           upon in the design of new development.
BALANCING SMAIL TOWN liFE WITH A VIBRANT TOURIST ECONOMY
           The General Plan recognizes that Ojal residents have expressed the need to nurture
           and expand the range of community events that bring the community together and
           keep residents and families involved in local activities. Along with the physical
           components that comprise OJai's small town character, the large number of
           community cultural activities available to Ojal residents is a significant element of
           its small town character and strong sense of community. For a town of its size, Ojal
           has an unusually active community in terms of community events, such as the Ojal
           Music Festival, Summer Concert Series, Ojai Tennis Tournament, PGA Seniors Golf
           Classic, Ojal Mexican Fiesta, and the Ojal Theater Company's "Shakespeare in the
           Park." Ojal also boasts extensive public and private cultural facilities, such as art
           galleries and studios, as well as Libbey Bowl, which houses concerts and theater
           productions.
           2
                   Identification of areas within the City that are subject to flooding is included in
                   the Safety Element.
                                                                             r: leoj40 llpro;ect Iplan lfinall!anduse.new
           OIAI GENERAL PIAN                              14                                         May 13,1997
           Land Use Element
                                                               Tourism plays a significant role in
                                                               supporting these culrural facilities
                                                               and activities. Over the years, Ojai's
                                                               dramatic setting and small town
                                                               character have attracted exclusive
                                                               private schools and resorts to the
                                                               area. This, in rum, has created a
                                                               local market for the purchase ofworks
                                                               produced by local artists, as well as
                                                               a demand for specialty retail uses
                                                               far beyond that which could be
                                                               supported by OJai's resident popu-
          Tourist Oriented Business                            lation. This vibrant, visitor serving
                                                               economy, in rum, gives the City the
           ability to provide services and facilities that are not normally available in towns of
           OJai's size.
          While the area's visitor serving economy provides substantial benefits, it can at
           times, also impinge on the area's small town character by attracting large numbers
           of people, particularly during major events. Because the location of community,
           culrural, and tourist facilities encourages considerable pedestrian and bicycle activi-
           ty within the Town Center, congestion in this area during major community events
           can be highly disruptive. In addition, residents occasionally raise the concern that
           Ojai's commercial sector caters too much to tourists, fearuring expensive specialty
          goods, and sometimes neglects the daily shopping needs of local residents.
          It is the intent of the General Plan to both enhance the City's ability to continue to
          foster the community spirit that major events bring to the community, as well as to
          provide opportunities for new business which cater to local needs to grow and
          become successful. The City will continue to tap into the community's volunteer
          resourcefulness to ensure community events are a part of, but are not imposed on
          OJai's small town character. Implementation of the Village Mixed-Use land use
          designation will provide opportunities for new locally serving businesses, and
          improve pedestrian accessibility within the City's town center without negatively
          impacting the City's small town character.
MANAGING THE PACE OF GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
          The pace of development in the 1970s alerted the City of Ojai to the problems of
          rapid growth -- degradation of air and water quality, congested streets, and an
           inability for area public services and facilities to keep up with increasing demands.
          Mass produced suburban housing tracts with their repetitive architecrure nearly
          replaced traditional neighborhoods as the predominant housing type within the
          City. Unconstrained growth threatened to forever change the small town character
           that made Ojai such an desirable community and had attracted such an interest in
                                                                        r: lco;40 Ilproject!planl/illal\landuse.nelV
           a'Ai GENERAL PIAN                          15                                       May 13,1997
Land Use Element
development. Thus, in 1979, the City adopted residential growth controls to
manage the pace of single family and multiple family development. Affordable
housing projects, such as the recently completed 21 unit Montgomery Oaks deve-
lopment, were exempted from residential growth controls.
Through the 1980s, commercial development continued. It became apparent that
air and water quality were still threatened, traffic congestion continued to mount,
and public services and facilities still struggled to maintain pace with the area's rate
of growth. Commercial centers were being developed at a rate faster than the
City's rate of population increase, and as commercial development expanded in a
nearly continuous corridor along Ojai Avenue, the vitality of the downtown area
was at risk. In addition, Ojai's overall small town character was threatened as the
City became increasingly commercial in nature, and the City's commercial base
tilted toward serving the area's tourist population. Thus, in 1991, the City adopted
commercial and office growth controls to tie the rate of commercial and office
development within the City to the City's rate of population growth.
The purposes of the City's growth control ordinances remain valid today, and it is
the intent of the General Plan that growth controls remain in effect as long as is
necessary to ensure the follOWing:
•        Community features and attributes of Ojai's small town character are
         protected.
•        Quality of life and open space areas within the City of Ojai are preserved.
•        Public services and facilities are able to serve both existing and new
         development in an economical manner within present and future budget
         constraints.
•        New development not overburden the area's transportation facilities, nor
         require the widening or construction of new roadways in a manner
         inconsistent with the preservation of significant community or
         environmental features or attributes.
•        A balance of housing types are available to accommodate all economic
         segments of the community, including older persons on fixed incomes.
•        A balance is maintained between the City's residential, commercial, and
         office sectors, protecting the community from becoming essentially
         commercial or tourist oriented.
                                                            r: !coj40 llprojectlplan l/inal\landllse.new
O,AI GENERAL PLAN                            16                                    May 13,1997

           Land Use Element
INTEGRATING OJAl'S VISION WITH ACTIONS TAKEN BY OTHER AGENCIES
           The City of Ojai is not an island, but is part of a larger valley community, and has a
           population that is smaller than that of surrounding unincorporated areas. The
           overall valley community encompasses large areas of unincorporated County lands,
           including the mountainsides and agricultural lands that are a critical component of
           the Ojai's picturesque setting and small town character.
           Through its "Guidelines for Orderly
           Development" and the Ojai Valley
           Area Plan, Ventura County has
           established a means for coordi-
           nating its land use planning activi-
           ties with those of the City within its
           adopted "sphere of influence" and
           "area of interest. II However, OJ ai's
           existing adopted "sphere of influ-
           ence" and "area of interest" do not
           encompass all of the areas of
           concern to the future well-being of
           the CitY. Where needed, the poli-
           cies and programs of the Ojai He Ojai Vallry
           General Plan are directed to these
           additional areas of concern outside of the formal boundaries established by
           Ventura County and the County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO).
           Because Ojai is situated in an enclosed valley with substantial unincorporated lands
           and a significant unincorporated population, actions taken by Ventura County
           within these unincorporated areas can have a profound impact on the City and its
           residents' quality of life. Development within unincorporated areas escalates traffic
           volumes along City streets, increases demands on City parks and other public
           facilities, such as libraries and schools, and often introduces impacts that are
           incompatible with OJai's small town character.
           3        Sphere of influence refers to the area adopted by the County IAFCO, comprising the
                    City's "ultimate boundaries." According to County policy, the City is to be primarily
                    responsible for land use planning within its sphere, and applicants for development
                    will be encouraged to annex their properties into the City. The "area of interest" is
                    an area established by County policy within which applications for land use permits
                    are referred to the City for review and comment. Within the area of interest, the
                    County is primarily responsible for land use planning, and urban development is to
                    be limited to existing communities as designated on the County General Plan.
                                                                           r: leo;40 Ilpro;ect!plulIl/illuflltlndllse.lIew
           OIAl GENERAL PIAN                              17                                      May 13,1997
                                 Land Use Element
                                 In addition, major development
                                 upwind of Ojai along the State
                                 Highway 33 corridor can signifi-
                                 cantly impact air quality within the
                                 City of Ojai. Apart from simply
                                 monitoring regional programs that
                                 might have an affect on the General
                                 Plan srudy area, new regional
                                 planning efforts have and will
                                 demand that local agencies provide
                                 the necessary data and feedback
                                 relative to their planning activities.
                                 Since much of what is decided at
                                 the regional level is based on data Highway 33
                                 generated by individual participating cities, Ojai's approach will be not only to
                                 participate in providing information about the City, but also to actively monitor
                                 and comment on the conclusions reached.
                                 In the past, Ojai residents and the City srudied the feasibility of establishing a
                                 ''valley-wide city." While this concept was found to have merit as a tool for ensuring
Th, Ciry will illsist that       coordination of land and environmental management policie~ in the Ojai Valley,
  'cal valley-wide illterests be the concept was found to be economIcally mfeaslble. In addltlon, the reSIdents of
protected alld that COUllry      smaller unincorporated communities, such as Meiner's Oaks, wished to retain their
plallllillg programs reflect     separate identities. As a result, the Ojai General Plan emphasizes coordination and
local collditiolls alld valley   cooperative actions between agencies. The role of the City's General Plan in
wide commulliry values.          addressing land use and land and environmental management policy outside of the
                                 present City limits is to mitigate potential impacts of development and other
                                 activities occurring within the unincorporated portions of the Ojai Valley, and to
                                 provide a basis for cooperative action between the City and Ventura County.
                                 While management of land use and roadway capacity along State Highway 33
                                 between Ventura and the Ojai Valley is critical to Ojai's furure, it is largely in the
                                 hands of Venrura County and Caltrans. Decisions made by the County to permit
                                 development along the corridor, as well as decisions by the County and Caltrans to
                                 increase the capacity of the State highway or to defer such efforts have the potential
                                 for creating widespread changes in OJai's quality of life by reducing or increasing
                                 the ease of commuting to work in Venrura, or by eliminating or exacerbating a
                                 fundamental development constraint.
                                 Thus, the City of Ojai will work both on the local and valley-wide levels to enhance
                                 local valley resident's representation in regional planning efforts. In working with
                                 the County of Venrura, the City will insist that local, valley-wide interests be
                                 protected and that County planning programs reflect local conditions and valley
                                 wide community values.
                                                                                           r: lcoj40 J Iproject Iplalllfinalllallduse.llew
                                 OIAl GENERAL PLAN                          18                                      May 13,1997
Land Use Element
      LEGEND
      CJ Area ofIntere!lt
      . . Ojai City Limits
      CJ    Ojai SphereoflnJluence
                           Wheeler Springs                     .
                                 ---'
                                                ,--~             .      ~
                                                  • . :--...~      ... ~" .. -< .• , ....~
                                        --<:','      ;, .._. :          .
                             ,r-              ...~\-~~---'-
                              )  Meiners Oaks'
                    ,-_"
                            /      l. .
                   I
                   \,\
                       \
                         \
            ~
             --
         :l!acijic Ocean
                       .-
    Figure 6 - General Plan Stu4Y Area and Area ofInterest
It is Ojai's vision that the City and its individual communities and neighborhoods
need not abandon their local social values in pursuit of a "greater" regional good,
and that no one group should have to accept the brunt of the impacts of a regional
solution, nor should any group be forced to accept the brunt of other's possible
inaction toward a solution. It is thus a guiding tenet of the Ojai General Plan that
both the benefits and impacts of management decisions related to land use,
environmental regulation, and traffic flow need to balance regional and citywide
needs with the needs of the City's individual neighborhoods. Likewise, it is not
appropriate for a jurisdiction, neither the County nor the City, in approving a
development project, to internalize the benefits of development, and externalize
the related impacts.
                                                                           r: lcoj40 1\projectlplan Ifinalllanduse.lIew
OIAl GENERAL PLAN                                        19                                       May 13,1997

           Land Use Element
           lAND USE ELEMENT POLICIES
PRESERVING 0JAl'S SMAlL TOWN CHARACTER
           LU-l   Emphasize retention of Ojai's natural environmental setting, small town
                  character, and scenic features as a priority over the expansion of urban
                  areas.
           LU-2   Preserve the following physical components of Ojai's small town character,
                  along with the desirable features of individual neighborhoods, and
                  incorporate them into the design of new development wherever feasible.
                         a well-defined urban area surrounded by open spaces and grazing
                         and agricultural lands;
                         a traditional grid street system with limited collector streets and
                         arterial highways, wherein residences front on most streets and
                         there is a noticeable lack of suburban subdivisions bounded by
                         block walls;
                         preservation of existing mature trees in place;
                         a lack of mass produced housing tracts with repetitive architecture,
                         resulting in neighborhoods that feature a custom home atmosphere;
                         residential streetscapes dominated by broad canopy trees and oaks
                         within some streets and street rights-of-way;
                         provision of multi-family living environments in small projects
                         distributed along or in close proximity to the length of the Ojai
                         Avenue corridor;
                         retention of a feeling of "openness" and preservation of views of the
                         hills and mountains which form the Ojai Valley, defining the extent
                         of urban development, as well as preservation of the natural
                         character of these hillside areas;
                         preservation of Significant community monuments such as Libbey
                         Park, the arcade, and the post office, as well as the visual
                         prominence of these features within the downtown area;
                         a traditional small town downtown which is pedestrian friendly, of
                         higher intensity than the balance of the community, and which has
                         a unique historical architectural character;
                         a generally low proftle form of development;
                                                                   r: koj40 1!project\pfa1l1/illalllanduse.1lew
           O/Al GENERAL PLAN                        20                                   May 13,1997
Land Use Element
              a clear lack of corporate architecture in the area's commercial
              sector, emphasizing instead distinct architectural forms within
              various commercial neighborhoods;
              commercial signage which is integrated into the overall site and
              architectural design of the projects they identify, whose materials
              are compatible with adjacent architecture, and which portrays its
               message in an unobtrusive manner in the minimal amount of space
              feasible;
              an emphasis on the retention of natural landforms and the natural
              environment over its conversion to urban forms; and
              an emphasis on ease of pedestrian and bicycle access and
               transportation.
LU-3  Maintain an inventory of land uses that provides diverse economic, social,
      and cultural opportunities; reinforces the characteristics that make Ojai a
      desirable place to live; and integrates complementary land uses in a manner
      which minimizes vehicle miles traveled within the community.
LU-4  Create and maintain places and opportunities for the residents of Ojai to
      interact, exchange ideas, and realize common goals of a unified community.
      Integrate plazas and focal points into new commercial and multiple family
      developments.
LU-5  Promote a mix of urban and rural residential neighborhoods which
      encompass a range of housing types that:
              proVide a refuge from the congestion of nearby metropolitan areas;
              are visually attractive and compatible in intensity, dwelling unit size,
              and structural design with the need to protect the community's
              small town character;
              provide adequate housing opportunities to meet the needs of
              present and future Ojai residents; and
              protect the denSity and character of existing residential neigh-
              borhoods, avoiding large concentrations of multiple family
              developments by distributing such developments into an adequate
              number of smaller-sized multiple-family housing sites adequate to
              meet the City's housing objectives for all economic segments of the
              community
                                                          r:lco;40 J Ipro;ectle1an ]fillalllfl1lduse. flew
O,Ai GENERAL PLAN                        21                                      May 13,1997
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                     0
Land Use Element
LV-6  Maintain an adequate inventory of commercial lands for the provision of
                                                                                         11
                                                                                         -
                                                                                         U
                                                                                         .
                                                                                           '"
                                                                                         ....
                                                                                                   II'"
                                                                                                        '".
                                                                                                        '"
                                                                                                       ...
      goods and services to the community that:
              meets the needs of Djal residents and visitors without increasing the
              present proportion of commercial and office development (other
              than which is within the Maricopa Specific Plan) to the City's
              residential population;
              contribute to a sound local economic base; and
              are visually attractive and compatible in intensity, building scale,
              and architectural design with the community's natural environment
              and small town character.
LV·7  Promote a mix of attractive, employment-generating business park and
      industrial land uses that provide a sound and diversified economic base,
      and that are compatible with the community's overall small town character.
LV-8  Within commercially viable agricultural areas, permit only land uses which
      are oriented toward maintaining the long-term viability of agriculture and
      require minimum parcel sizes consistent with long-term agricultural use.
LV·9  Ensure that all extensions of public services and facilities to facilitate land
      use changes are accomplished in a manner consistent with the provisions of
      the Djai General Plan.
              Prohibit the extension of urban services into areas designated for
              agricultural, open space, or rural uses.
              Ensure that existing residents and businesses are not burdened with
              either the capital or operations and maintenance costs of public
              services and facilities needed to serve new development.
LV-lO Require that new developments be at an appropriate densiry or intensity
      based upon compatibility with the majority of existing surrounding uses.
             As part of the development review process, treat the densities and
              intensities outlined in the Land Vse Element for specific
              designations as the maximum allowable, and do not approve the
              maximum allowable density or intensity unless the proposed
              project is consistent with provisions of each of the elements of the
              Djai General Plan.
              Require that adequate buffering and transitions be proVided
              between dissimilar uses.
                                                        r: leo;40 Ilpro;ectlplani/inailianduse.new
OIAI GENERAL PLAN                        22                                    May 13, 1997

Land Use Element
              Where a question of compatibility exists, require the new use to
              conform to the lower intensity.
              As part of the development review process, new development or the
              alteration of existing development is to be viewed not only as a
              freestanding object, but also as part of a street, neighborhood, and
              as part of the entire community.
              ReqUire that the bulk and massing of new structures relate to the
              prevailing or planned scale of adjacent development.
              Require that setbacks from streets relate to existing setbacks along
              the street, the scale of the structure, and the desired character of the
              development.
              Require that new development respect the views of eXlstmg
              developments; provide view corridors which are oriented toward
              existing or proposed community amenities, such as parks, open
              spaces, and natural features.
LV-II Limit the intensity of new development to that which is consistent with the
      long-term availability of the resources needed to support existing and
      future developments, as well as can be supported by adequate public
      services and facilities within present and reasonably foreseeable budget
      limitations.
              Permit new developments only where and when adequate water
              and sewer infrastructure can be ensured by providing systemwide
              infrastructure improvements in advance of needs.                                  Where
              construction of master planned facilities is not practical in advance,
              permit the construction and use of on-site facilities only to the
              extent that future construction of the master planned facilities will
              not be jeopardized4 .
              Ensure that new development will not exacerbate congestion
              problems along State Highway 33 between Ojai and Ventura or
              along local roadways.
4
      Within low and very low density residential areas, septiC tanks may be used for
      sewage disposal in lieu of community sewer system, subject to applicable health
      requirements.
                                                            r: \coj40 1\projectlplalllfillalllalldllse.new
OIAI GENERALPIAN                         23                                        May 13,1997
           Land Use Element
MAINTAINING COMPATIBIlJ1Y BETWEEN OJAI'S BUILT AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENTS
           LU-12 Recognize Ojai's natural environment as a key community asset, and estab-
                 lish a system wherein the natural environment will be protected not only as
                 an amenity for the developed pomons of the City but also because of a
                 sense of responsibility and commitment to good stewardship of the natural
                 environment.
           LU-13 Ensure that new development is consistent with the provisions of the Ojai
                 General Plan Open Space, Conservation, Safety, and Noise elements.
           LU-14 Limit the intensity of development within existing open space lands that are
                 not committed to long-term open space to that which is consistent with
                 their environmental values, sensitivity of specific environmental features,
                 and their contribution to the overall small town character of the
                 community.
           LU-15 Improve traffic flow and eliminate traffic congestion through a combination
                 of limiting land use intensity and expansion of roadway capacity where such
                 expansion is compatible with the environmental values (Le., preservation of
                 OJ ai's small town character, oak tree preservation, etc.) expressed in the
                 General Plan and with the need for preserving Ojai's small town character.
           LU-16 Limit the use of land within the occupied habitats of rare, endangered plant
                 or animal species to permanent open space.
BALANCING SMAIL TOWN liFE WITH A VIBRANT TOURIST ECONOMY
           LU-17 Recognize and support visitor serving uses as an integral part of community
                 life, and ensure that visitor serving uses and activities are designed and
                 managed in such a manner that they are secondary to OJai's small town
                 character and identity as a desirable place to live.
MANAGING THE PACE OF GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
           LU-IS Limit the rate of residential, commercial, and office development as
                 necessary to:
                          preserve the attributes and physical features which comprise Ojai's
                          small town character as expressed in the General Plan;
                          maintain a balance between the expansion of the City's population
                          and its commercial and office sectors, as well as between the City's
                          local and tourist economies;
                                                                    r: lcoj40 Ilprojectlplall lfillalllallduse.llew
           OIAI GENERAL PIAN                       24                                       May 13,1997
           Land Use Element
                           ensure the adequacy of public services and facilities, including
                           schools, and avoid exacerbating congestion on area roadways and
                           regional highways; and
                           protect vital resources such as air and water quality.
INTEGRATING OJAl'S VISION WITH ACTIONS TAKEN BY OTHER AGENCIES
           LU-19 Establish a sound basis for the City of Ojai to work with Ventura County,
                  Caltrans, and other public service agencies to ensure that actions taken by
                  these agencies do not adversely alfect Ojai's quality of life or its unique
                  small town character.
                           Identify opportunities for joint programs to further common
                           interests in a cost efficient manner.
                           Assist agencies providing services within the City of Ojai, as well as
                           agencies involved in land use, transportation, and the provision of
                           public services and facilities within unincorporated areas adjacent to
                           the City to understand the importance and phYSical components of,
                           as well as the potential impacts of their actions on preserving Ojai's
                           small town character.
                          Work with agencies providing services within the City of Ojai, as
                          well as agencies involved in land use, transportation, and the
                           provision of public services and facilities within unincorporated
                           areas adjacent to the City to resolve differences in the interests and
                           concerns that might exist between them and the City of Ojai.
           LU-20 Maintain a system of inter-jurisdictional communications and development
                  review that respects the values of adjacent communities and that eqUitably
                  distributes both the benefits and impacts associated with a proposed
                  project.
           LU-21 Establish and maintain a local data base for use in local, county, and
                  regional planning efforts. Through monitoring of regional planning
                 activities, ensure that information is used to provide an understanding of
                 the regional implications of local land use decisions and the local
                 implications of regional land use decisions.
                                                                      r: lcoj40 Jlprojectlplallljillalllanduse.llew
           OIAi GENERAL PLAN                          25                                     May 13,1997
          Land Use Element
          IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING PROGRAM
INTRODUCTION
                he Ojai General Plan Implementation
          T     and Monitoring Program describes the
                specific actions necessary to imple-
          ment the community's vision as expressed
                                                                       Implementation
                                                                       and Monitoring
                                                                   Program Components
          in General Plan goals, objectives, approach,
          and strategies. Where appropriate, the pro-        ,/   Development Review
          gram uses a "checklist" style format to help
          guide City decision makers, project design-        tI   Intergovernmental Coordination and
                                                                  Community Involvement
          ers, and the public through the General Plan
          implementation and monitoring process.
                                                             ,/   Special Studies and Programs
          The Implementation and Monitoring Pro-
          gram is organized into five separate compo-        .I   General Plan Review and Update
          nents (see box at right).
                                                             ,/   Implementation Monitoring
 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
          The Development Review component presents a comprehensive set of develop-
          ment review criteria to be applied to new planning, public improvement, and
          development projects within Ojai. The development review criteria are used to
          help determine the consistency of proposed new development with policies con-
          tained in the Ojai General Plan Land Use Element. The criteria has been developed
          to answer the follOWing fundamental questions:
          ,/      Is the project consistent with the General Plan designations and Land Use
                  Map?
          ,/      Has the project been included within the residential or commercial growth
                  allocations as determined by the Ojai Growth Management Plan?
          ,/      Does the project meet General Plan public facilities performance standards?
          ,/      Is the project consistent with City wide or specific area design concepts and
                  planning principles?
                                                                        r: lcoi40 J Iproject!pfalll(inallimple.Jlew
          O,AI GENERAL PLAN                         26                                        May 13,1997
               Land Use Element
Is the Project Consistent with the General Plan Designations and Land Use Map?
              All developments will be reviewed
               to determine whether proposed          17,e identification of a maximum intellsiry on the Gen·
               land uses are consistent with the      eral Plan Land Use Map does not imply that all parcels
               site's General Plan Land Use desig-    could  be developed at tlteir maximum intensiry or that
                                                      any specific parcel is entitled to tire maximum intmsiry.
               nation. An initial determination
               can be made by comparing the
               proposed land use with the spe-
               cific location on the General Plan Land Use Map. Development projects, whether
               new or expansions to existing uses, are permitted by the development intensity of
               their site as indicated on the General Plan land use map and as listed below.
               Development intensities outlined in the General Plan Land Use Element may be
               permitted only if the proposed project is consistent with all relevant policies,
               review criteria, and approach contained in the General Plan and all relevant stan-
               dards contained in the Development Review Program.
              The Ojai General Plan Land Use map is located in a map pocket at the end of the
               General Plan.
              Agriculture
              Agriculture (AG): The primary pur-
               pose of areas designated as Agriculture        Primary Use:                                Agricultural
               is to prOVide for agricultural uses and       Acres:                                            642.88
               related open land uses which are              MtUimum     Use  Intmsity:                 I  dull  0 acrtS
                                                             Population Intensity:                  0.23 person/acre
              considered to be an important environ-
               mental and economic asset to the City
              of Ojai. In addition, the Agriculture designation is intended to preserve lands best
              suited for agricultural activities from the encroachment of incompatible uses; to
              prevent the intrusion of urban development into agricultural areas in such a man-
              ner as to make agricultural production uneconomical or impractical; to provide
              appropriate areas for certain open uses of land which are not injurious to agricul-
              tural uses but which may not be harmonious with urban uses; and to promote the
              public interest by encouraging, preserving, and protecting such uses within the
              General Plan study area. Uses include those which are associated with the commer-
              cial production or preprocessing of agricultural crops or livestock, along with
              limited residential uses.
                                                              Primary Use:                Single family residential
                                                             Ams:                                               974.69
              Residential
                                                              Maximum Use Intensity:                       0-1 du/acre
                                                              Populatwn Intensiry:                  2.3 persons/acre
              Very Low Density Residential (VLR):             -Minimum lot size may app!y as indicated on the
              The primary purpose of areas                    General Plan land use map.
              designated Very Low Density Residential
                                                                                 r:\coj40 J Iprojectlplan lfinal[imple,ne""
              OIAI GENERAL PIAN                        27                                             May 13,1997

 Land Use Element
 is to provide a quasi-rural atmosphere for individuals and fu.cilities who desire a
high degree of freedom and independence from their neighbor:; and yet maintain
the benefits associated with City services. This designation is typically found
around the edges of the community and is used as a transition to protected natural
features such as the Los Padres National Forest, surrounding hillsides, and active
agricultural and farming operations. Uses include single family residences on a
single lot, the keeping of large animals, and individual private recreation fu.cilities.
Low Density Residential (LR): The
primary purpose of areas designated as         Primary Use:               Singlefamily r<sidential
Low Density Residential is to provide for      Acres:                                           483.60
a transition from lower density quasi·         Maximum    Use Inte1lsiry:                  1 -2  dulacre
rural areas within the General Plan            Population Intensiry:                4.6    persons/acre
study area to more urban uses. Uses
include detached single family residences on a single lot, the keeping of large
animals, and individual private recreation facilities.
Medium Density Residential (MR):
The      primary purpose       of areas        Primary Use:               Singlefamily residential
designated as Medium Density Residen-          Acres:                                           432.57
tial is to provide for a single family         Maximum    Use Inte1fsiry:                  3-4   dulacre
development within a neighborhood              Population IntenSity:              9.25     persons/acre
conte.Xl:. This designation includes both
custom and tract styles of residential development. The Medium Density
Residential designation provides a transition of uses from low to higher residential
densities and family residences on a single lot. Uses include detached single family
residences on a Single lot.
Medium High Density Residential
                                               Primary Usc:                         Attached single.
(MHR): The primary purpose of areas
                                                                                  familY residential
designated as Medium High Residential          Acres:                                           140.23
is to provide for an area of transition        Maximum Use ["tmsiry:                 up to 8 dulocre
from single family densities to those          Population Intensiry:              J 8.5 persons/acre
found in the Village Mixed-Use
designation. This designation includes
single family residential on individual lots up to eight attached dwelling units on a
parcel.
High Density Residential (HR): The
                                              Primary Use:            Multiple family residential
primary purpose of areas designated as
                                              Acres:                                              3.75
High Density Residential is to provide
                                              Maximum Use Intensity:              up to 15 dulacre
for the orderly development of high           Population [ntmsity:              34.6 personslacre
density,    multiple-family residential
development in a manner that will be
compatible with surrounding properties and protect neighborhood character and
values. It is intended that this designation be located on the periphery of less
                                                                r: !coj401!pro;tctlplafl lfinallimplt.ntw
DIAI GENERAL PIAN                         28                                        May 13,1997

Land Use Element
intense residential areas and adjacent to major or secondary streets, shopping
areas, or other intense land uses. This designation includes detached single family
residences on a single lot, single family attached units, as well as multi-family
development.
Special Housing Overlay (SPL): The
primary purpose of areas designated              Unless otltenvise stated, the development of units
Special Housing Overlay is to identify           within  the Special Housing designation Jor the
                                                 purposes described abo", are considered to be a~
lands which are appropriate for the
                                                 empt from growth control policies included in the
development of affordable housing.
                                                 Gmera/ Plan.
Projects within the overlay areas may be
developed using density increase incen-
tives up to a maximum density, or may be developed within the requirements of
the underlying designation. Typical use include the development of senior
housing, affordable housing, single resident occupancy facilities, public and private
institutional housing, as well as public and private shelters or transitional housing.
This designation includes all types of housing units, although medium to high
residential densities are considered to be typical.
Commercial
General Commercial (GC):                The
primary purpose of areas designated as           Primary Use:            Commercial and office uses
                                                 Acres:                                           45.27
General Commercial is to provide
                                                 Maximum Use Intmsiry:                      0.50 FAR
appropriately located areas for the
general shopping and commercial ser-
vice needs of the area residents and workers, as well as the needs of highway users
and tourists. Appropriate uses include a range of common retail and personal
service uses, specialty, offices, highway oriented uses, financial institutions, hotels
and motels, and art and studio facilities.
Downtown Commercial (DC): The
primary purpose of areas designated as           Primary Use:                  Specialty commercial
Downtown Commercial is to provide                Acres:                                            9.66
for the establishment of commercial and          Maximum Use Intensity:                     1.50 FAR
office related land use types which
recognize and are compatible with the historical small town narure of OJai's
downtown Arcade area. Appropriate uses include a wide variety of commercial
uses, emphasizing specialty retail and office uses. Typical uses include specialty
retail (e.g., handcraft shops, art galleries, bookstores, curio/antique stores, and
flower shops), commercial services, professional and business offices, restaurants,
markets, cultural facilities, financial institutions, and bed and breakfast inns.
                                                                   r: 1coi40llprojectlplan Ifillul1imple. new
DIAI GENERAL PLAN                           29                                         May 13,1997
Land Use Element
Manufacturing
Commercial Manufacturing (CM):
The primary purpose of areas                  Primary Use:                 Limited manufacturing
designated as Commercial Manu-                                   and   complementary       commercial
facturing is to provide for a broad range     Aues:                                             29.24
of manufacturing and commercial uses          lV(aximum   Use  Intensity:                  0.45     FAR
which are complementary to one
another. Typical uses include light manufacturing, commercial sales and services in
support of light manufacturing, and warehouse and distribution facilities.
Manufacturing Planned Develop-
ment (MPD): The primary purpose of            Primary Use:                       Limited industrial
areas designated Manufacturing Planned                                         and    manufacturing
Development is to provide for industrial      Acres:                                            18.72
                                              N[aximum Use IntenSity:                      0.45 FAR
manufacturing, research and develop-
ment, and office based firms seeking an attractive pleasant working environment
within a master planned industrial park development. Appropriate uses include
those which can be made compatible with other uses within the community in
terms of generation of noise, dust, odors, vibration, glare, air pollutant emissions,
traffic and transportation, and the generation and storage of hazardous materials.
Typical uses include light manufacturing and assembly, small-scale warehousing
and distribution, and research and development. In addition, restaurants, delis,
administrative offices, and other business support uses may be permitted.
Mixed-Use                                       Primary Use:                Nfixture   of commercial
                                                                                    and residential.
Village Mixed-Use (VMU): The primary
purpose of areas designated as Village          Aaes:                                          58.98
Mixed-Use is to provide the opportunity
for development of commercial and resi-         Maximum Land Use Intensity:
dential mixed-use projects close to local
services and facilities and which foster                                              Dwellillg
                                                         Use             FAR            Units
the use of alternative modes of circula-
tion such as pedestrian or bicycles. Com-        Commucialon!.?          0.50
mercial uses allowed within Village              Residentialollp         NIA          8 dulaae
Mixed-Use designated areas are intended          Live/Work               0.50         8 dula""
to serve the needs of the local residents,       CommlResidential         1.0         8 dllla""
support the local artist community, and
promote community interaction.                   Population intttlsj~ rangesfrom
                                                 9.2 penons aue to 18.5 persons/acre.
Within Village Mixed-Use areas, appropri-
ate uses include medium density residential, medical and professional offices,
personal services, delis, coffee houses, small cafes, repair shops, florists, music and
dance studios, art galleries and studios, artist "live work" combinations, and other
uses which are found to be consistent and not more objectionable or detrimental
to the general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
                                                                  r.lroj40 Ilero;ectle1an lfi1tallimple.lIew
O/AI GENERAL PLAN                         30                                           May 13,1997
Land Use Element
Public/Quasi-Public
Institutional, Recreational (lR): The
primary purpose of lands designated as           Primary Use: Educational, institutional, and
Institutional, Recreational is to provide                                 recreational open space uses
for a variety of uses and activities which       Acres:                                            614.63
                                                 !v[aximum Use Intensity:            0.18    to  0.25   FAR
have an overall institutional or recre-
ational character, and which will have a
non-commercial impact on public services and facilities. Because of the sensitive
location of IR-designated lands at a primary entry to the City, provision of substan-
tial open space buffers will be necessary. Typical uses include public and private
educational facilities, churches, golf courses, cultural and social service facilities,
and hotels.
Public/Quasi-Public (P): The primary
purpose of lands designated as Public is         Primary Use:                       Governmental and
to provide adequate space for the con-                                                 institutional uses
duct of public and institutional activities      Acres:                                            405.83
                                                 lviaximu11I Use [ntmslry:                         Variable
within the community. Typical uses
include governmental offices and facili-
ties, churches, and cultural facilities.
Open Space
Open Space/Resource (OSRE): The primary purpose of lands designated as
Open Space/Resource is to proVide areas for the preservation of environmental,
historical, or cultural resources, managed production of natural resources, and
protection of the public health and safety.
Within areas designated as
Open Space/Resource, only uses         Primary Use:                Natural open space and dedicated
consistent with the preservation                                natural   recreation and resource areas
of local environmental, cultural,      Acres:                                                     I.I 10.09
or historical resources, produc-       Nlaximum   Use  IJltetfsity:         Intensity   is govemed     by the
tion of natural resources, and                                            individual    character    of eaell
the protection of the public                                        site.  Residential     denSity    ranges
health and safety may he consid-                               from I dulIO acres to I dul80 acres
                                                             as indicated on the Ojai General Plan
ered appropriate subject to ap-
                                                                                          Land Use Map.
plicable City of Ojai General
                                       Population 11ltmsity:           Ranges from 0.03 personlacre
Plan policies and ordinance                                                         to 0.23 personlacre.
provisions. Typical uses include
open space preserves, dedicated
open space, streams, rivers and open drainage easements, trails, rural camp-
grounds, nature preserves and sanctuaries, nature parks and demonstration gar-
dens, historic buildings, sites, or cemeteries, agriculture, and very low density
residential uses, as well as limited mining or excavation of natural resources.
                                                                      r: koj40 I !projtetlpfatllfimlilimple.lltlV
OIAI GENERAL PLAN                           31                                             May 13,1997
Land Use Element
Specific Plan
Specific Plan Development (SPD):
The primary purpose of lands desig-                       Primary Use:                                       Variable
nated as Specific Plan Development is                     Acres:                                                 NIA
to provide an opportunity in which all                    Maximum Use [ntensig:                   Land we inte1tsiry
residential land uses are considered to                                              shall be detennlned through
                                                                          the development review process. In all
be appropriate,' as weU as support
                                                                 cases. the overall intmsiD' shall be compatible
uses (i.e., open space and recreation,                        with adjacent, aisting, and planned land uses.
public facilities, commercial, and all
employment generating uses) that
may be appropriate subject to applicable                  General Plan policies and Ojai City ordi-
nances.
                                     Land Use Assumptions
  Land Use Inventory: The Ciry oiDia; maintains a land use data base and ~ographjc infonnation
  system (GIS)for all parcels within the General Plan study ar<a.
  Area Measurements: All land use areas included in the General Plan are measured in net acres.
  Net acre includes parcel acreage less dedicated street rights-ofway prior to development.
  Maximum Land Use Intensity: Residential maximums are based 011 the number ofdwelling units
  per each acre on land. Non·residmtial maximums are based 011 a floor area ratio" or FAR. FAR
  includes thefloor area of the building divided by the net lot area.
                                    Building Floor Area
                     £rample:                                       Floor Area Ratio
                                        Net Lot Area
  Population Intensity: Population intmsiry is based on average of 2.43 persons per household, with
  a projected vaca1U:J' rate oj 5 percent.
  Probable Build Out: He build out oj the General Plan is assumed to be the eventual use oj all land
  within the General Plan study area according to assumption factors contained in the Ojai General
  Plan Environmental Impact Report.
  Probable Build Out Intensities:
  CIry ofO;al Population (at build out based on 2.43 persollS
  pe, household, with a projected vacancy rate of 5 percent):                                    9.327 persons
  Ciry ofO;al Dwelling Units (at build out):                                                        3.838 units
  Probable Build Out Horizon Y,ar (11 duIY,ar for ,ntir< stut!? ar<a):                               Year 2050
Figure 7 - G",eral Plan Land Use Assumptions
Development within areas designated as Specific Plan Development is to be pro-
cessed through the use of a specific plan pursuant to Government Code Section
65450, or similar mechanism. In addition, development within this designation
                                                                                r: lcoj40 J Iprojtalplanlfina/limp{t.nm
OlAf GENERAL PLAN                                     32                                             May 13,1997

                         Land Use Element
                         must provide a greater level of community amenities and cohesiveness, achieve
                         superior design, and create a more desirable living environment than could be
                         achieved through conventional subdivision design and requirements.
       Has the project been included within the residential or commercial growth
       allocations as determined bJ1 the Ojai Growth Management Plan?
                            The City of Ojai has a Residential and Commercial Growth Management Program
                            for all residential, commercial, and office development. The Program includes
The Qjai GrOlvth Man-       restrictions on both the number of single family and multi-family dwelling units
ag,ment Program is in-      that can be developed each year within the City of Ojai, as well as the annual
cluded in Title 10.         allotment of new office and retail commercial development according to the
Chapter> 6 and 11 of the    amount of population increase predicted in a given year. All new residential and
Qjai Municipal Code.        commercial development projects will be reviewed to determine whether the
                            proposal has obtained a development allotment or is exempt (see Table A) from
                            the provisions of the plan.
                                    Table A • Applicability of Oja! Growth Management Program
                         The Ojai Growth Management Program applies [0 all new residenti:l1, commercial, and office devel-
                         opment e..xcept where the follOwing conditions exist;
                         a)       The project includes approved senior citizen housing; facilities for me physically handi-
                                  capped; low~income housing; replacement, alteration, repair, demolition, or construction of
                                  strucrures accessory to residential dwellings.
                         b)       Commercial developmenc is pennined as of right, or as a discretionary approval within
                                  General Plan land use designations other than the General Commercial (GC), Village
                                  Mixed-Use (VMU).
                         c)       The project involves the replacement. alteration, repair, demolition, or maintenance of
                                  commercial buildings or the construction of structures accessory to existing commercial
                                  buildings.
                         d)       The project involves building additions and expansions to existing principal commercial
                                  uses or Slnlctures, provided it does not involve the construction of a separate structure and
                                  does not exceed 25 percent of the existing principal commercial use or structure.
                         Source: Ojai Municipal Code Title 10 Chapters 6 and 11.
       Does the project meet General Plan public facilities performance standards?
                         All new development projects will be reviewed to identify applicable public services
                         that will be affected by the proposed project. Development projects within Ojai
                         shall not result in a quantifiable reduction in the level of services provided to
                         existing development and as identified in Table B below.
                                                                                                r: lco;40 I Ipro;eetlp{an lfi"a/limp{e,new
                         O,AI GENERAL PLAN                                 33                                         May 13,1997

Land Use Element
Therefore, all development projects must demonstrate that they can either meet
these standards or incorporate appropriate actions which:
./       construct and/or pay for the new on-site capital improvements that are
         required to support the project;
./       ensure that all new off-site capital improvements that are required by the
         project are available prior to certificates of occupancy;
         are to be phased so as to ensure that the capital facilities that will be used
         by the new development are available prior to certificates of occupancy;
         ensure that, in the event that public services or off-site capital facilities are
         impacted prior to development, the level of service provided to existing
         development will not be further impacted by the new development; or
./       provide infortnation that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Coun-
         cil that the beneficial impacts of the project outweigh service deficiencies
         created by the project, and that overriding considerations are appropriate.
         Table B - Municipal Facilities and Services Mitigation Standards
 Facility/Service               Mitigation Standard
 Flood Control and Storm        Adequate facilities  to pmtect structures for human occupancy
 Drainage                       and major roadways from the IOO-year flood..
 Water Facilities               Adequate fire flow as established by the Vencura Councy Fire
                                Protection Disuict, along wim 5ufficiem water storage for ernee·
                                geney situations and for maintenance of service pressures on an
                                ongoing basis.
 Wastewater Facilities          Provision ofsewer service to all commercial. office, and manufac·
                                turing uses, as well as (0 all urban residential areas.
                                Unrestricted .flow in sanitary sewers dUring average and peak
                                conditions.
                                Adequate treatment capacity such that the rated capaCity of treat-
                                ment facilities accepting sewage from Ojai is greater than average
                                and peak flows.
 Solid Waste Services           Once weekly pick-up of residential solid waste. Street sweeping
                                as needed to meet NPDES requirements. Maintain solid waste
                                diversion goals of 25 percent, and increase to 50 percent by the
                                year 2000.
 School Facilities              Maintain a neighborhood school concept that provides capacity
                                to meet projected enrollment.
  Park Facilities               Four acres of active and passive parkland per 1,000 residents.
                                                                    r:lco;40 Ilpro;tctlplan lfinallimplt.ntw
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                             34                                        May 13,1997

                             Land Use Element
                                       Table B • Municipal Facilities and Services Mitigation Standards
                               Facility/Service               Mitigation Standard
                               Fire Prevention and Suppres-   A  five (5) minute maximum response time for fire and emer-
                               sion Services                  gency medical calls on both a citywide and response area basis.
                                                              Adequate fire fighter staffing and deployment such mat concur-
                                                              rent response can be provided to one emergency medical call
                                                              and one structural fire call, meeting staffing requirements with
                                                              regular on-dury fire fighters.
                               Police SeIVices and Crime Pre- I.S Officers per 1,000 population.
                              ventian
                              Soure", City ojOjai, 1995.
                             Prior to approval of any new development or redevelopment project, the applicant
                             shall review the proposed project with representatives of the individual service
                             provider to detennine whether all needed facilities and services needed to support
                             the project will be provided in a timely manner. In cases where the new capital
                             facilities needed by new development is greater than the new development's "fair
                             share" of those facilities, at the City's discretion a reimbursement agreement or
                             other financial mechanism may be established to enable the developer to recoup
                             the cost of providing capital facilities beyond the need directly created by the
                             project.
            Is the project consistent with City wide or specific area design concepts and
            planning principles identified in the General Plan?
                             All new development will be reviewed to determine consistency with basic General
To achieve a successful fit Plan development design concepts and planning principles outlined below:
with Ojai's small town char~
actcr,    new   development
should appear to have al-    Community Design Characteristics and Imagery
ways existed at the same
location.                    Ojai's small town character is anchored by the many identifiable landmark build-
                             ings as well as reflected in the type and scale of architectural features used through-
                             out the community. Project designers will be required to use local community
                             landmarks as well as the architectural imagery they possess as a palette of design
                             approaches to be used in new developments. To successfully implement this
                             approach, new development will be required to integrate existing community
                             architectural and urban design features which, as identified in the following figures,
                             support the community's efforts to preserve Ojai's small town character.
                                                                                                 r: lco;40Ilprojectlplalll(illal\imple. flew
                             a,AI GENERAL PLAN                             35                                        May 13,1997

Land Use Element
         Figure 8 - Ojai's Architectural Landmarks and Diverse Imagery
 Ojai's small town character is reflected in many identifiable landmark
 buildings as well as in the type and scale of architectural features used
 throughout the community. When put in context with OJai's reverence
 for the surrounding natural setting, these identifiable features add to the
 unique physical character that make the town memorable. It is Ojai's
 intent to use these local community landmarks and architectural imagery
 as a palette of design elements to be used in the planning of new
 development projects.
 OJ ai's architectural imagery includes those existing design features that
 individually may go unnoticed but collectively reflect Ojai's unique
 character. The following pallette of community design features illustrate
 aspects of existing development that Ojai residents feel are important to
 the community character, and should be used as examples, not only of
 "good" or "quality" design, but the type of design details which will help
 project designers achieve the best "fit" with Ojai's community character.
                                                                                        Post Office: The Ojai Post Office architecture
 Landmarks                                                                              with its prominent bell tower represents botll (l
                                                                                        visual and auditory landmark signifyi1tg the
                                                                                        arrival at the center of tOIVII.
 Ojai's small town character is reflected in a number of the community's
 more prominent landmark buildings and public spaces. Libbey Park, for example, demonstrates Ojai's
 commitment to providing a central public space for community and tourist recreation, social interaction, and
 cultural awareness. These community landmarks reflect the "image anchors" with which residents and visitors
 already associate. The City of Ojai intends to taI(e advantage of the design features of such recognizable places,
 buildings, and landmarks to establish a palette of design features that illustrate how the community's character
 can be integrated into new development throughout Ojai.
                                                                                     ~ .•.    :
                                                                                                 r'
                                                                                                 ';t.'
    Arcade: The architecture of this key landmark includes the    Libbey Park: A community focal point, the park is a central
    arcade. which brings together a row of diverse commercial     activity center for local and tourist activities. ubbey Park is
    buildings behind an elegant Spanish colonnade.                characteristic of the traditional town square, or central village
                                                                  green.
                                                                                                         r: Ico;40 JIpro;ectlpJallljillalljig8-a.luc
a/AI GENERAL PLAN                                              36                                                            May 13, 1997

Land Use Element
                               Figure 8 - Ojai's Architectural Landmarks
                                          and Diverse Imagery (Con't.)
  Landmarks
                                         .',.~ -
     Ojai Va/lo/ Trail: Once an abandoned rail right-or-way, the Ojai    City Hall: Once part of a residential estate, the Ojai City Hall
     Valley Trail exemplifies Ojai's commitment to encouraging the       is a good example of adaptive reuse and conservation of Ojai 's
     use of bicycle and pedestrian facilities for alternative            unique character.
     transportation.
   Arbolada: The Arbolada exemplifies Ojai's commitment to                 Highway /50: Many of the older buildings along Ojai Avenue
   provide a more relaxed suburban neighborhood designed to fit            are reminiscent of Ojai's history as a regional tourist
   within a natural setting.                                               destination. These buildings also reflect the beginning of a type
                                                                           of architecture which was typically seen along California's
                                                                           highways beginning in the 1930s.
                                                                                                              r: ICQj40llproject Ip/alllfilla//fig8-a./ue
DIAl GENERAL PLAN                                                     37                                                          May 13,1997
Land Use Element
                            Figure 8· Ojai's Architectural Landmarks
                                       and Diverse Imagery (Con't.)
  Viewsheds and Vistas
  The surrounding mountains provide a distinct and memorable backdrop to Ojai. Views of the Tapa Tapa and
  surrounding hillsides give the community its sense of refuge; a feeling that Ojai is a place that is protected,
  tucked away. The preservation and/or enhancement of the existing viewshed will be used as an important
  project review criteria.
   View of Black Mountain from Persimon Hill Development.     View of the Tapa Tapa upon arrival at Ojai's west entry.
  Streets as Public Spaces
  OJ ai's streets are considered public spaces where residents, visitors, and business people interact on a daily
  basis. Ojai recognizes that its streets represent more than just facilities designed to move traffic around and
  through the community. In some cases, Ojai's streets make a bold statement as to the community's attitudes;
  the preservation of mature oak trees within the right-of-way for example. In the Arbolada, the streets reflect
  the relaxed, suburban residential environment. The character of the street changes substantially at the town
  center, from a soft shouldered, rural edge to a more defined, hard edged cross section. This change helps to
  reinforce the image of the town center as a true "center," more urban and civic in quality.
  As with other aspects of Ojai's physical character, street designs will be balanced with the individual needs of
  a paticular area of the community. Ojai places a priority on creating safe, functional, and logical walking,
  cycling, and driVing opportunities for all users consistent with OJ ai's unique character.
                                                                                             r: ko;40 llpro;ect Ipft/II lfilwl\fiss·b./lic
a!Al GENERAL PLAN                                         38                                                     May 13,1997

Land Use Element
                            Figure 8 . Ojai's Architectural Landmarks
                                      and Diverse Imagery (Con't.)
  Streets as Public Places
      "
               '. '. -,' ":
            -I'~
     ';' ' >i
      ,-:'"
                          _
     ',-
                                                     Front porches in the "Village Area" add a pedestrian feel to the
                                                    neighborhood,
              !
     The Arcade offers protection for pedestrians
     as well as adds to a memorable pedestrian
     experience.
  Community Architecture
  Most buildings within the community are understated and residential in scale, Traditional building forms,
  including broad eaves and low-lying roofs, are typical. No single style predominates, except within the town
  center, where the Spanish colonial architecture of the Post Office and the Arcade establish a strong and
  memorable civic presence, Successful new development "fits" within the existing area and contributes to the
  preservation or enhancement of the overall character of the community
                                                                                           r: lcoj40 Ilprojectle1alllfiWjllfig8-b.lue
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                                      39                                                       May 13, 1997
 Land Use Element
                               Figure 8 - Ojai's Architectural Landmarks
                                           and Diverse Imagery (Con't.)
   Community Architecture
     Residential Architecture Style Used for Commercial Purposes      Village Residential
  Architectural Details
  Ojai has the quality of being "hand made." This quality is prevalent in the expression of many details that have
  evolved out of a natural expression of the relationship
  of the community to its setting. Mortarless rock walls,
  stone lined street edges, split-rail fences, hand-painted
  signs, all contribute to the sense of balance between the
  built and natural environment that prevails throughout
  the town.
   Understated Signage                                             "Sidewalk" Oak Tree
                                                                                          r: lco;40 J Iproiectlp/alllfinal\figB-c.Iuc
O/AI GENERAL PLAN                                               40                                             May 13,1997
Land Use Element
                            Figure 8 - Ojai's Architectural Landmarks
                                      and Diverse Imagery (Con't.)
   Community Architecture
      Officc Use Emphasizing Residential Architectural Styles   Retail Commercial with a Visual Emphasis on
                                                                Landscaping and From Porch
     Real Estate Office with Low Key Signage                    Tourist Commercial with Pedestrian Oriented Signage
     and Residential Architectural Forms
                                                                                             r: lco;40 1\projectlplalllfillull&8-c,lue
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                                            41                                                  May 13,1997
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                  ...               ....
Land Use Element                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                (J
                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                       ~ _
                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                 "'"
                                                                                                                   •
                                                                                                                       I~      11'"
                                                                                                                                     ...'"
                           Figure 8 - Ojai's Architectural Landmarks
                                      and Diverse Imagery (Con't.)
  Architectural Details
                             Pedestrian Oriented Signage
    Traditional Presentation                                Residential Style for Commercial Use
                                                                                        r: lcoj40 J Iproiectlplan Ifilla/lfigB·d.lue
O/AI GENERAL PLAN                                        42                                                  May 13,1997

Land Use Element
                          Figure 8 - Ojai's Architectural Landmarks
                                and Diverse Imagery (Con't.)
 Architectural Details
                                       -. -~..;
    Nontraditional Street Edges
   Traditional Front Porch                         Unconventional Landscaping Used to Soften the
                                                   BUilding Facade
                                                                              r: lcoj40 I\project Ip/all lfi1Ul11/isB.d.!ue
OIAI GENERAL PLAN                               43                                                 May 13,1997
Land Use Element
General Plan Area Design Concepts
The Ojai General Plan identifies certain areas within the community that have been
identified as having specific development and design opportunities (see Figure 9).
As a method to more accurately describe General Plan Land Use policy within these
identified areas, the City has created these design concepts to give project design-
ers a starting point from which new developments may be created that fit with the
community's small town character. All new development within the areas identi-
fied will be required to demonstrate consistency with the design prinCiples in-
cluded in each of the design concepts presented below.
                                              I   J     1
                                             [~J"~~-                                          /
                                                                                                   /
                                                                                         /
                                                                                      :t"'0iiII0~
                                                                                           \     'r
                                                                    1.-_.....--.0..
                                                                                         r\       :I
                                                                                      N No Scale
                                                         Town Center              East Ojai Avmue
                                                                                  Design Concept
                                                            r: lc0j401Iproject]plan l(inallimple.new
a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                        44                                     May 13,1997
Land Use Element
                          Figure 10 - Ojai Town Center Design Concept
  Existing Character: Ojai's Town Center has a delightfully
  active atmosphere where people tend to park and leave their
  cars in one place to access a variety of activities on foot.
  Existing development in the town center has been developed
  over time using a scale of architecture that encourages
  community involvement, informal gatherings, and pedestrian
  movement between uses. Such community activity is highly
  valued by residents as one of the main components of OJai's
  small town character.
                                                                              citye
  The strength of Ojai's town center as a memorable place can be              /loll
                                                                                                   LEGEND:
                                                                                                   _       To....nCenl<:f
  attributed to the vision of Edmond Drummond Libbey, whose
  financial support in the early 1900s resulted in the formalized
  plan for the town centered on a civic park and small commercial district. The architecture of its key structures
  includes the arcade, which brought together a row of diverse commercial buildings behind an elegant Spanish
  colonnade, and the post office, whose tower serves as a visual landmark to Signify arrival at the center of town.
  Although many intrusions and diverging styles have been developed in and around this center, the images of
  these two structures as a relaxed but elegant backdrop to the park are so strong that their impression seems
  to leave little room for anything else.
  Other landmarks within Ojai's Town Center include the Ojai Valley Museum, Libbey Park Bowl, Saint Thomas
  Aquinas Chapel, and the Pratt House. Most of these community landmarks are located within a short distance
  of one another, close to commercial and community activity centers. Their architectural character and viSibility
  will serve as a benchmark for evaluating the compatibility of new development within nearby areas.
  Lalld Use alld Desigll Opportullities: Opportunities for development within the Town Center area are limited
  due to the lack of large vacant parcels. lnfill and redevelopment opportunities, however, are likely to occur in
  areas north of the downtown Arcade, east and southwest of Libbey Park, near City Hall, as well as the creative
  and adaptive reuse of existing commercial buildings.
                                                         Existing Commercial-----------,
                                                         (nRU Commercial - - - - - - - - ,
                                                            Pedestrian Way ---,,----"\
                                                                                                       To ltzrking---,
                   Baranc. Creek
   Source: Mainstreet Architects & Planners, 1995.
                                                                                          r: Icoj40 lleroject\plan lfillallfig 1O.lue
O/Al GENERAL PLAN                                         45                                                  May 13,1997
Land Use Element
                  Figure 10 - Ojai Town Center Design Concept (Con't.)
             Enhanced--------,                                                        r-----          Potential
             Pedesuian                                                                                Infill
             Crossing
              To
             Ojai
             Trail
             RestoredJ
             East Barranca
                                                                                                   / Flexible
             and Trail                                                                               Parking &
                                                                                                     Market
                                                                                                    Square
                                                                                               f
                                                                          -i'=;;"'....1.::&;~+-- Parking
              East Point ------llloi:"--, ')";;!l3"!l
              ofEnrry to
              Downtown
              Core
             Source: Maillstreet Architects & Planmrs, 1995.
  Design Principles for New and 11lfill Development: New and infill development within the Town Center will
  adhere to the following general design principles:
          New development within the Town Center will:
          ,/        Take care not to overshadow the existing historic and landmark architecture
          ,/        Integrate appropriate design features and characteristics found in surrounding development
          ,/        Include a pedestrian design focus
          ,/        Create lively spaces for both visitors and residents.
                                                                                           r: Icoj40 Jlproject!pfan lfinallftg1O.lue
D/AI GENERAL PLAN                                            46                                                May 13,1997
Land Use Element
                          Figure 11 - Village Mixed-Use Design Concept
  Existing O,araacr: As one approaches the northern Village
   Mixed-Use area from almost any side street, buildings
   become noticeably more dense, as lots become smaller and
   coverage increases. Building setbacks lessen, and residen-
   tial uses become mixed, with a variety of low intensity com-
   mercial uses, such as lodging, realty, small medical and
  other service-related office space, as well as some retail
  shops. such as antique stores and art galleries.
  The architecture of these areas varies widely and includes
  a mix of building types and styles, from old Victorian and
  Craftsman houses to small masonry commercial buildings.                                      LEGEND,
  Where walking paths or sidewalks are present, they are                                       ~ Village Mixed-Ux
  typically narrow, and often of dirt, gravel or asphalt. Trees
  are abundant and street improvements have often been made to accommodate them, diverting curbs and walks
  around the trunks and roots to assure their survival.
  Immediately east of Libbey Park and southeast of the Town Center has been zoned for industrial use but has
  remained predominantly residential in character. Originally intended to transition to industrial uses, tl,e
  smaller residential parcels has been slow to change.
  Land Use and Design Opportunities: Opportunities for development within the Village Mixed-Use area include
  infill development on vacant and underutilized parcels, as well as providing opportunities for residents to live
  and work witllin the same building or at the same location. Parcels designated as Village Mixed-Use located
  north of Ojai Avenue are planned to integrate commercial service and limited retail uses within the existing
  residential setting. New development is planned to include a pedestrian design emphasis which focuses on
  providing enhanced pedestrian access to all uses.
                                   Landscape Buffer                   New Mixed-Use Buildings
  Source: Mainstreet Architects & Planners. 1995.
                                                                                         r: \coi40 Ilproje"t1plan lfinal!fis 11.lue
a,AI GENERAL PlAN                                         47                                                 May 13,1997
Land Use Element
                 Figure 11 - Village Mixed-Use Design Concept (Con't.)
   Parcels south of Ojai Avenue are planned to take advantage of the proximity to Libbey Park and the downtown
   arcade through the creation of pedestrian links and view corridors across the eXisting arroyo at the east side
   of Libbey Park. Opportunities exist for the development of smaller "cottage style" businesses such as cabinet
   shops, custom manufacturing, artist studios, and galleries in areas east of Montgomery Street. This will allow
   residents the opportunity to live and work in the same location.
                                                  Porches, Overhangs,
                                                  Ra i lings, and Steps
                Source: AI/ail/street Architects & Planners, J995.
  Design Principles for New alld !Ilfill Mixed-Use Area:
           New development within the Village Mixed-Use area will:
           ,(       Participate in the creation of a pedestrian oriented mix of residential and commercial
                    land use development
                   Take advantage of existing opportunities to link residential and commercial uses through
                    the use of pedestrian sidewalks. pathways, and bridge
                                                                                           r: Ico;40 llprojectlplallljinalljiall.lue
a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                                                48                                            May 13,1997
Land Use Element
               Figure 11 - Village Mixed-Use Design Concept (Con't.)
   Design Principles for New and Infill Mixed-Use Area (Can't):
          ,/     Preserve and maintain the residential scale and character of the area.
                         The size of commercial and industrial buildings should be compatible with nearby
                         residences.
                         Building uses for commercial, office, and/or industrial uses should emphasize
                         residential forms compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
                         Noise, glare, odors, and ground vibration caused by commercial and industrial uses
                         should be no greater at the property line than would be expected of a typical
                         residential uses.
                         Operating hours of commercial and industrial uses should be limited to the 8:00 a.m.
                         to 9:00 p.m. period.
                                                                                      r: lcoj40llerojectlplan l(illallCg 11.1ue
a,AI GENERAL PIAN                                    49                                                  May 13, 1997
Land Use Element
                  Figure 12 - East Ojai Avenue Corridor Design Concept
  Existing Character: The approach                                   ,
   to Ojai out of the upper Ojai
   Valley from the east reveals
  glimpses of a cozy, orchard filled
  vaBey. As the highway levels out, - ,
  orchards bordered by low rock
  walls line the way and announce IJ
   that residents have prospered here
                                               I..    I~,~!
   for many years. At the bridge over
  San Antonio Creek, visitors are                                                 SouZo
  aware that they are approaching a                                             GoljCour5e                                          .....
  developed       area,      but      the                                                                                           N No Scale
  tentativeness of tl,e development
  does not clearly reveal the quality of the town that lies ahead. The businesses along the highway within this
  area are disconnected, too far to be within walking distance to the Town Center, and thus have continued to
  remain underutilized and predominantly auto dependent.
  Land Use and Design Opportunities: The eastern portion of the Ojai AvenuelHighway 33 corridor has perhaps
  tl,e most to offer in tefils of opportunities for development. Unlike tl,e Town Center and Village Residential
  areas, the East Ojai corridor still contains sizable parcels which are underutilized or vacant. Key to the
  development of this area is the establishment of an architectural focus or "theme" which would be implemented
  as development occurs. Reminiscent of uses that traditionally bordered the State's highways in the 1930s and
   I 940s, Ojai will encourage that new development in this area be oriented to visitor serving uses such as hotels,
  motels, resturants, and specialty commercial uses. New developments will also be expected to integrate a
  "California Highway" style of architecture into project designs (see design principles detailed below).
  The East Ojai Avenue Corridor also provides opportunities for the establishment of an eastern entry statement
                         or "gateway." Consistent with the California Highway theme suggested above,
                            monumentation would be constructed at the San Antonio Creek crossing (see concept
                              Ulustration below) in combination with a bicycle trail under crossing (see Ojai Master
                                Plan of Trails).
                               Design Principles for New and Infill Development:
                                                                   The design concept for the East Ojai Avenue Corridor is to
                                                                   stimulate architectural interest and diversity by suggesting
                                                                        a style (California Highway) of architecture that is more
                                                             ..~ . in keeping with the rural character of OJai's east end.
                                                              " .~ The California Highway style is based on the design
                                           .,   ''-<....               elements commonly found in buildings built along
                                    ~: .: ~->._ "-:--: _ '::9lifornia's early interstate system. Although a specific
                                    V);;'<:~J1~'C-              ". -,      architectural style is not suggested, new development
                                    '/,/1'1£/ " "/       v··""""....~_. should include elements that evoke the scale, feel, and
                                                           "          . 2haracter reminiscent of 1930s and 1940s rural
   Source: MaillStmt Architects & Plallllers, 1995.                        highway or agriculatural uses.
                                                                                                          r: Ico;40 Ilproiectlplan lfillallftg12.1ue
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                                                      50                                                     May 13,1997

Land Use Element
          Figure 12 - East Ojai Avenue Corridor Design Concept (Con't.)
          Design Principles for New and Infill Development (Can't):
          .I       Although parking may be provided in front of buildings. parking lots should not be the
                   dominant visual feature of a site .
          .I        Buildings should be one story and clustered to create pedestrian courtyards.
          .I        Buildings should be designed to be free-standing or broken up into small groups;
                   unbroken "strip" type of development is to be avoided.
                   Where feasible, adaptive reuse of existing structures is encouraged.
                                     Single loaded parking for highway
                                               convenience related uses
           Parking at rear                             OjaiAvenue
        and side 0 building
                                              Pedestrian circulation      " - Rural fencing detail
                                              between uses
      Source: Mainstreet Architects & Planners, 1995.
                                                                                         r: Icoj401lpro;ectlplan lfinall& J2.luc
D/Al GENERAL PLAN                                            51                                             May 13,1997
            Land Use Element
 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COORDINATION AND COMMUNITY
INVOLVEMENT PROGRAM
            The Intergovernmental Coordination and Community Involvement Program pro-
            poses actions that reflect the City's commitment to truly representational govern-
            ment, a government that looks for appropriate responses to specific issues. For
            example, some issues, such as the protection of natural resources, affect not only
            Ojai, but all Ojai Valley communities, as well as agencies charged with the manage-
            ment of resources within the Valley. Many issues cross geographic boundaries and,
            therefore, require concerted efforts by several governmental entities before they
            can be resolved. Intergovernmental coordination means actively pursuing regional
            solutions to regional problems. Ojai is committed to working with its neighbors to
            address these issues.
            At the same time, Ojai recognizes that to be truly representational, local govern-
            ment must reflect the values of the people it serves. To do so, Ojai has estab-
            lished, as part of its General Plan implementation program, mechanisms for inform-
            ing the community on local issues and soliciting citizen input.
Coordination ofLand Use Planning Activities
            Actively coordinate with the land use planning efforts of adjacent jurisdictions, and
            prOvide constructive comments regarding the impacts that such programs will have
            on the City of Ojai by taking the follOWing actions:
            ,/ Actively lobby the County and Ventura River Valley Municipal Advisory Agency
                Council to consider the formation and adoption of a municipal organization or
                advisory body (such as an area-wide planning commission) that would oversee
                the management of land use throughout the Ojai Valley.
            ,/ Closely monitor County development activity and respond to individual land
                use proposals that would impact local land use. Continue to monitor adjacent
                County land use proposals that could impact local land use and circulation
                decisions.
            ,/ Work with the National Forest Service to develop a wilderness transition area
                that provides guidelines for development adjacent to the Los Padres National
                Forest area.
            ,/ Work with the County on both a staff level and the City Council Board of Su-
                pervisors level to establish basic principles for development review and mitiga-
                tion of cross-jurisdictional impacts within the Ojai Area Plan jurisdiction, consis-
                tent with the concept that the impacts of new development must be offset by
                project related benefits within each of the jurisdictions in which the impacts
                will be experienced.
                                                                         r: ]coi40 J !projectlplan l(illallimpJe.lIew
            a'Ai GENERAL PLAN                          52                                      May 13,1997
           Land Use Element
           ./ Pursue fonnation of ad hoc coalitions with other local agencies and community
               groups as a means of increasing the effectiveness of Ojai's voice in regional
               planning efforts and the planning efforts of adjacent jurisdictions.
           ./ Provide local utility providers with a copy of the General Plan Annual Review
               and Update Report for review and comment.
           ./ Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 65401, ensure that all
               departments within the City, and all other local government agencies (includ-
               ing the County, school districts, and other special districts) submit a list of pro-
               posed projects to the City, and that the City review and report on the consis-
               tency of these projects to the City Council as part of the General Plan Annual
               Review and Update Report.
Encourage Community Awareness
           The effectiveness of the programs described in the Ojai General Plan are dependent
           on the participation of community residents. To ensure that residents are made
           aware of these programs, the City shall publicize local programs and prOvide a
           forum for public debate of local issues by implementing the following actions:
           ./ As part of the annual review and update of the General Plan, hold an annual
               "Open Forum" before the City Council to allow public discussion of current and
               future land use issues facing the community.
           ./ Use public access cable to broadcast Planning Commission, City Council meet-
               ings, public events, and special presentations related to Ojai's future develop-
               ment.
           ./ Work with local cable television proVider to include a "reader line" on the local
               TV directory channel advertising public hearings, and public discussions and
              workshops regarding land use within the City.
           ./ Establish a connection with the public Internet and develop a "home page" and
              electronic mail system to provide public access to agenda, announcements, and
              other public infonnation via home and business computers.
                                                                       r:!coj40 J Iproiectlplan Ijinallimple.neIV
           OIAI GENERAL PIAN                        53                                      May 13,1997
              Land Use Element
Citizen Involvement in Community Decision Making
              Many of the questions facing Ojai are complex issues requiring policy recommenda-
              tions and an evaluation of tradeoffs that are not easily done in a public forum. To
              address these issues, the City Council may appoint task forces or committees to
              research specific issues and to provide policy direction to the City Council. Mem-
              bers to these task forces would be appointed by the City Council. The task forces
             will be requested to provide recommended policy direction within a specific time
              frame, and will be disbanded after the presentation of their recommendations.
Obtain Feedback Regarding City Programs
             To provide local decision makers with regular input on how satisfied residents are
             with their community and their quality of life, a Community Survey will be devel-
              oped and updated every five years. Future surveys will address not only General
             Plan issues such as land use and circulation, but more specific issues currently
             facing the City as well.
Involve The Community In The Development Review Process
             In order to facilitate citizen participation in the development review process which
             would be meaningful to individuals at the neighborhood level, and to facilitate the
              public hearing process, the City of Ojai encourages informal meetings between
             citizen groups and developers on proposed development projects. The purpose of
             such meetings is to facilitate interaction between the developer and neighborhood
             interests in a relaxed, informal setting, and to provide the developer with the
             opportunity to inform and obtain feedback from the neighborhood. Specifically,
             the City encourages developers to meet with affected citizens, and ask Ojai resi-
             dents to give direction to proposed developments by:
             ./ delineating specific neighborhood values, goals, and objectives;
             ./ participating in choosing among alternative project designs; and
             ./ participating in the review and modification of development plans.
             Although the results of these informal meetings are not binding upon the City,
             early consultation and discussion between developers and affected citizens can
             significantly facilitate the development review process by resolving issues of social
             compatibility before public hearings begin.
                                                                         r: !c0j40 JIprojectlpfan l/inallimplt.lIew
             O,AI GENERAL PIAN                           54                                   May 13,1997
              Land Use Element
SPECIAL STUDIES AND PROGRAMS
              Upon adoption of the Ojai
              General Plan, the City Council              Special Studies Implementation Priorities
              will be asked to teview the list of
              special studies listed in this sec·     Prioriry                         Action
              tion and to prioritize these stud·
              ies, assigning responsibility for         One       Program to be initiated
              implementation of each task (see                    within oneyear.
              box at right).                            Two       Initiate within the nat two to five
                                                                 years.
              Each year, as part of the annual
              review and update of the General          Three     Initiation b'!Y0nd the nextfive years.
              Plan, the City Council (see Land
              Use Element Review and Update)
              will be asked to reprioritize the list of special studies. Upon completion of each
              individual study, appropriate General Plan implementation programs may be added
              to the Implementation and Monitoring Program contained in the General Plan.
              The funding sources for each action listed below will be assigned annually as part
              of the General Plan Review and Update and the City's annual budget process.
City of Ojai Municipal Code Revisions (priority One)
              Subsequent to the adoption of the General Plan, the City will undertake a General
              Plan and Zoning Consistency Program to revise the Zoning Code to achieve consis-
              tency with and implement the General Plan. As part of the program, the City will
              prepare new zones, regulations, and exhibits which reflect the adopted General
              Plan land use policies. Table C provides a listing of the actions to be taken as part
              of the General Plan and Zoning Consistency Program, as well as any milestones
              which will need to take place prior to implementation of each action.
City of Ojai Growth Management Ordinance Readoption (Priority Two)
              One year prior to the expiration of the City's Growth Management Ordinance, the
              City will prepare for the readoption of the growth provisions contained in Title 10,
              Chapters 6 and 11 as confirmation of the growth management policies contained in
              the General Plan (see Table C).
                                                                                r: Icoj40llprojectlplan l(inallimple.lIeIY
              GIAI GENERAL PLAN                        55                                           May 13,1997

           Land Use Element
                Table C • General Plan and Zoning Consistency Program Actions
             Prerequisite to Imple-
             mentation Action                                    Action
             A. Adoption of General     •    Revise the Ojai Zoning Code to reflect land use
             Plan Update (1996-1997)         changes and additions, as well as general policies
                                             contained in the General Plan.
                                              Develop and adopt a mixed-use ordinance
                                             consistent with the Village Mixed-Use (VMU) Gen-
                                             eral Plan land use designation.
             B. Expiration of City           Revise Title 10, Chapters 6 and 11 to reflect the
             Growth Management Or-           growth management polices contained in the Ojai
             dinance (1999-2000).            General Plan Land Use Element.
Community Entrance And Directional Signage Program (Priority Two)
           The City will take advantage of the existing character of entrances or "gateways"
           located along State Highways 33 and 150 as well as Creek Road by developing a
           programs that establishes City identification improvements at key entrances to the
           City (see Figure 5 - Community Structure). Such gateways are where visitors will
           receive their first impression and residents can feel a sense of place. It is impor-
           tant, therefore, that entrance signage designs not only identify the City's boundaries
           but also convey the image with which residents would like to be associated.
           Secondary directional signage will also be established as a method to provide
           direction to public parking, City Hall, Public library and other public facilities;
           historical and cultural places of interest; transit facilities; Forest Service station and
           trailheads; public parking areas; as well as locations where civic and cultural events
           are held.
LAND USE ELEMENT REVIEW AND UPDATE
           California Government Code Section 65400(b) requires the planning agency of
           each city and county in the State to provide an "annual report to the legislative
           body on the status of the (general) plan and progress in its implementation." The
           following section details the contents of such a report, which will be prepared and
           delivered annually to the Ojai City Council regarding the implementation of the
           Land Use Element.
                                                                           r: lco;40 J Iproiectlplanlfinal\impfe.lIelV
           a,AI GENERAL PIAN                           56                                        May 13,1997

            Land Use Element
Land Use Element Review
            On an annual basis, the Planning Depanment will report on the implementation of
            the General Plan Land Use Element and provide the following information:
            ./ A summary of activities undertaken over the past year to implement the General
                Plan Land Use Element.
            ./ A review of the General Plan Land UsetZoning Map, indicating the appropri-
                ateness of the mix, location, and relationships between proposed land uses,
                including an evaluation of the General Plan Land Use Map to ensure that:
                    residential designations provide housing opportunities for all economic
                    segments of the community at densities consistent with the provisions of
                    the General Plan Housing Programs;
                    commercial development meets the retail service and office needs of City
                    residents and provides a healthy tax base to help support community ser-
                    vices; and
                    each land use designation within and adjacent to the General Plan study
                    area promotes continued consistency with surrounding General Plan land
                    use designations.
            ./ A status of vacant land and land use absorption rates by land use type.
            ./ An assessment of valleywide and regional policies developed in the past year
                and their associated impact on Ojai's land use policies.
            ./ Recommendations for future Land Use Element Revisions. Upon adoption by
                the City Council, a copy of the Land Use Element will be provided for review to
                the County, local utilities, and regional agencies who have an impact on land
                use planning with Ojai or its sphere of influence.
IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING
            The following information presented in Table D provides an index of General Plan
            Strategies and related implementation programs along with a description of the
            responsibility, timing and funding that is likely to be necessary to implement the
            Ojai General Plan.
                                                                       r: lcoj401 Iprojectlplan Ifinallimple.llt'W
            OIAI GENERAL PIAN                        57                                     May 13,1997
Land Use Element
          Table D - General Plan Implementation Monitoring Matrix
     Implementation
         Prognm             Responsibility          Timing              Funding Source
 Development Review and General Plan Consistency Program
 Review and                Planning            Implemented on         Department budget
 detennination of project  Deparunent          a project by           and development
 consistency                                   project basis          review fees
 Intergovernmental Coordination and Community Involvement Program
 Coordination of land use  City Manager's      Ongoing and            Department budgets
 planning activities       Office              updated on an
                           Planning            annual basis
                           Department
 Encourage community       City Manager's      Ongoing and            Department budgets
 awareness                 Office              updated on an
                           Planning            annual basis           Development review
                           Department                                 fees (as they apply to
                                                                      public notice and
                                                                      advertizing)
 Citizen involvement in    City Manager's      On an as needed        Department budgets
 communHy decision ma-     Office              basis to address
 king                      Planning            specific issues        City general fund
                           Department
                                                                      Other sources of
                                                                      funding may also be
                                                                      available depending
                                                                      on the specific issues
                                                                      to be studied
 Obtain feedback          City Manager to      Every 2 to 5           Department budgets
 regarding City Programs  coordinate with aU   years
                          City departments                            City general fund
 Involve the community    Planning             On an as needed        General Fund
 in the development       Department and       basis as
 review process           other City           detennined by
                          Departments          the City Council
                          depending on
                          specific issue.
 Special Studies and Programs
 City of Ojai Municipal   Planning             To be initiated        Department budgets
 Code Revisions           Department           within 1 year of
                                               the General Plan
                          City Attorney's      Adoption (1996-
                          Office               1997)
                                                                r: lcoj40 J Iprojectlplan lfinallimp/e.new
a,AI GENERALPIAN                            58                                        May 13,1997
Land Use Element
          Table D - General Plan Implementation Monitoring Matrix
    Implementation
         Program           Responsibility          Timing                Funding Source
 City of Ojai Growth     Planning             To be initiated          Department budgets
 Management Ordinance    Department           within 1 year of
 Readoption              City Attorney's      ordinance
                         Office               expiration
                                              (1999)
 Community Entrance      Planning             To be initiated          DepaDOCnentbudgets
 and Directional Signage Department           within 2 to 5            (planning and pennit
 Program                                      years in                 process)
                         Engineering          conjunction with
                         Department           the City'S capital       City Capital
                                              improvement              Improvement Funds
                                              program (1997-
                                              2002)                    ISTEA Grant Funds
 land Use Element Review and Update
 Land Use Element        Planning             On an annual             Department budgecs
 Review                  Department in        basis in
                         coordination with    coordination
                         other City           wiili City'S
                         departments and      annual budget
                         the Ojai City        process
                         Council.
                                                                 r: lcoi40 Jlprojectlplan Ifinallimple.lIew
a,AI GENERAL PLAN                          59                                         May 13,1997
Noise Element
INTRODUCTION
The Noise Element of the General Plan provides a basis for comprehensive local
programs to control and abate environmental noise and protect citizens from
e.xcessive exposure. The fundamental goals of the Noise Element are:
o    To provide sufficient information concerning the community noise
     environment so that noise may be effectively considered in the land use
     planning process. In so doing the necessary groundwork will have been
     developed so that a community noise ordinance may be utilized to resolve
     noise complaints.
o    To develop strategies for abating e.xcessive noise exposure through
     cost-effective mitigating measures in combination with zoning,·as appropriate,
     to avoid incompatible land uses.
o To protect those existing regions of the planning area whose no environments
     are deemed acceptable and 'a1so those locations throughout the community
     deemed !lnoise sensitive".
o    To utilize the defmition of the community noise environment, in the form of
     CNEL Of Ldn noise contours as provided in the Noise Element for local
     compliance with State Noise Insulation Standards. These standards require
     specified levels of outdoor to indoor noise reduction for new multi-family
     residential constructions in areas where the outdoor noise exposure exceeds
     CNEL (or Ldn) 60 dB.
History
Since the time of the industrial revolution, the use of mechanical devices has
increased dramatically. The technology has brought motor vehicles, jet aircraft, and
literally thousands of labor saving implements into common usage and has, at the
same time, increased both the magnitude and frequency of occurrence of
man-made sound in the environment.
The need for increased attention to noise in the planning process is a consequence
ofthis potential for continued elevation ofambient noise levels, the spread ofnoise
producing activities into formerly quiet areas, and heightened awareness of the
impact of noise on human health and amenity. Noise affects both physiological
and psychological well-being. In adrlition to causing hearing loss, noise interferes
with activities such as communication, sleep, and thought. Noise can· be a source
of great armoyance for many persons and may be a contributing factor in
stress-related health disorders.
OJAf GENERAL PLAN                            1                NOVEMBER 26, 1991

               Noise Element
LEGISLA1TVE REQUIREMENT
              The requirement for Noise Element preparation was first codified in 1971. In
               1976, the Department of Health Services issued Noise Element guidelines (Health
              and Safety Code Section 46050.1) followed shortly thereafter by model Noise·
               Ordinance AB 2038's Chapter 1009, (statutes 1984). Revisions to the General Plan
               statutes made extensive changes to the Noise Element requirements. Generally,
               these revisions shortened the list of State required issues and encouraged local
              governments to design their own approaches to noise controL The underlying
               purpose of the noise element, to limit community exposure to excessive noise
               levels, remains unchanged.
               In making city and county governments in California responsible for a Noise
               Element in their General Plans, the State Legislature has recognized the steady
               escalation of outdoor noise as a significant environmental hazard. Unlike other
               hazards faced by California residents, such as earthquakes or floods, noise is
              generated primarily by man's own activities. Considering noise in the planning
               process, then, is essential to controlling its impact on the community.
               Specific authority for this Element ofthe General Plan is contained in government
               Code Section 65302(g), which was revised by Senate Bill 860 (Belenson, 1975). The
               amendment became effective January 1, 1976, and requires the following:
                    A noise element which shall mognize gllidelines adopted by the Office ofNoise Control
                   pllrsllant to Section 39850.1 of the Health and Safety Code, and which qllantijies the
                    commlil/ity liaise C1Ivironment in temlS ofnoise expOSlirri COl/tOlirsfOr both near and long-term
                    levels ofgroJvth and traffic activity. Slich noise expOSlirri i'!fOrmation shall become agllideline
                   for achieving noise compatible fand Jlse and also to provide baseline levels and noise salim
                    identificationfOr local noise ordinance enfOrcement.
                    The sOllrees ofenvironmental noise considerridin this analYsis shallinc/litle, but am not limited
                    to, thefOUowilzg:
                         (1) Highw'!Ys andfmew'!Ys.
                         (2) Primary arterials and major local smets.
                         (3) Passenger andfrriight on-line railroad operations andgrotl1ld rapid transit rystems.
                        (4)  Commercia~ general aviation, heliport, helistop, and military airport operations,
                            aircraft overflights, jet engine test stands, and all othergrolmdfacilities and
                            maintC1lancefllnctions rrifated to airport operation.
               OJAI GENERAL PLAN                                       2                      NOVEMBER 26, 1991

Noise Element
        (5) Local industrialplants, including, bllt not limited to, railroad classificationyards.
        (6) Otherground stationary noise sOllrceS identified ry local agencies as contriblltory to
            the commllnig tioise environment.
    Noise exposllre information shaU be presented in terms 0/ noise contouTY expressed in
    communig noise equivalent level (CNEL) or dqy-night average (Ldn). CNEL means the
    average equivalent A-weighted sound level during a 24-hollr dqy, obtained after addition 0/
   jive decibels to sollnd levels in the eveningfrom 7pm to 10 pm and after additions 0/ 10
    decibels to sOllnd levels in the night before 7 am and after 10 pm. Ldn means the average
    equivaientA-weightedsound level during a24-hollr dqy, obtainedafter addition 0/10 decibels
    to sound levels i1l the night before 7 am a1ld after 10pm.
    The contollTY shaU be shown i1l minimllm increments 0/5 dB and shaU co1ltinue dOlvn to 60
    dB. For areas deemed noise sensitive, inclllding, bllt 1Iot limited to, areas cOT/taining schools,
    hospitals, rest homes, long-term medical or mental carefacilities, or any other local land IIS8
    areas deemed 1Ioise se1lsitive ry the localjurisdiction, the 'JOise exposure shaU be determined
    ry m01litoring.
    A part 0/ the noise element shaU also include thepreparati01l 0/a commllnig 1Ioise exposure
    inv81ltory, cllmnt andprojected, which id81ltifies the 1IIImber 0/perr01ls exposed to VariOIlS
    levels 0/ 1Ioise throllghollt the commll1lig.
    The 1JOise element shaUalso recommendmitigating measures andpossible solutions to existing
    andforeseeable noise problems.
    The state, Ioca4 orprivate agenry responsiblefor the constmction, maintenance, or operation
    0/those tra1lspo1fation, indllstrial or othercommercialfacilities specifiedinparagraph 2 0/this
    sllbdivision shaUprovide to the local agenry prodllcing the generalplan, specific data relati1lg
    to rom1lt andprojected levels 0/ activig and a detailed methodologyfor the development 0/
    noise contollTYgiv81l this supplied data, or thry shallprovide 1Ioise contollTY as specified i1l the
   foregoi'zg statements.
    It shaU be the responsibilig 0/the localag81lryprepari1lg thegeneralplan to specifj the man1ler
    in which the noise element Will be i1ltegrated into the cig or coung's Z011i1lgpla1l and tied to
    the 1a1ldlise and cirrolation elements and to the local noise ordinance. The 1Ioise element, once
    adopted, shaU also become the gllideli1lefor determining compliance lvith the State's Noise
    Insulation Standardr, as contained in Section 1092 0/ Title 25 0/ the California
    Administrative Code.
As a mandated part of the General Plan, the Noise Element is intended to serve as
the local governments guide to public and private development matters related to
OJM GENERAL PLAN                                     3                      NOVEMBER 26, 1991
               Noise Element
RELA170NSIllP TO OTHER GENERAL PLANELEMENTS
               The Noise Element is one of the more technical elements of the General Plan.
               However, the approach of this report is to present discussions of noise primarily
               in qualitative form for the lay-person to easily comprehend. Those.wishing a more
               detailed technical "-'<planation are referred to the Technical Report performed by
               Walker, Celano and Associates in Appendix B.
               Circulation Element
               The principle noise sources evaluated in the element are transportation noise
               sources, which are road, rail, and air traffic. Noise generated by these sources
               depends primarily on the number and type of vehicles in operation as planned for
               in the Circulation Element. The noise element affects the Circulation Element by
               suggesting that noise evaluation be included'in the analysis of location and design
               alterations for new roadways.
               Land Use
               Inseparable from the circulation considerations in the General Plan are the
               locations, types and densities ofland uses throughout the City. The locations of
               circulation routes in relation to different land uses can be a major determining
               factor of noise exposure. It is important that consideration be given in the Land
               Use Element to separating the most sensitive land uses from the sources of high
               noise levels. Land use noise standards are recommended as a part of this Element
               to assist in these considerations.
               Housing Element
               The Housing Element is related to the Noise Element in that both the location and
               insulation requirements of housing are, in part, determined by noise exposures.
               The Housing Element is concerned with the provision of adequate housing of
               acceptable quality, and noise exposure is an important factor affecting the quality
               of housing. The Noise Element recommends design standards for new housing in
               OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             4                NOVEMBER 26, 1991
             Noise Element
             high noise impact areas. This will affect the cost and, in some instances, the
             location of new or rehabilitated housing.
             Conservation Element
             The Conservation Element identifies passive areas such as open space along creek
             beds, where low noise levels should be maintained.
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
             The following is not intended as a comprehensive glossary of acoustic terminology,
             but will provide, in approximately logical order, information sufficient to allow a lay
             person to better understand the technical language in the document.
             On a most fundamental level, sound is described by:
             Sound Pressure Amplitude - the actual pressure or force per unit area of the sound.
             The amplitude of the faintest rliscernible sound is approximately 1/5,000,000,000
             of a standard atmosphere (14.7 pounds per square inch). The standard reference
             pressure, which corresponds approximately to the minimum discernible sound
             pressure, is 20 micropascals. The amplitude of the highest reasonably tolerable
             sound is approximately 1 million times this minimum rliscernible value. The
             subjective manifestation of amplitude is loudness, but this is dependent upon other
             factors as well. The human ear acts as a signal compressor, with a factor of 3 in
             amplitude resulting in a factor of only 2 in perception of loudness.
             Sound Frequency - the rate at which the sound pressure fluctuates between values
             above and below the static pressure, in cycles per second. The unit Hertz (Hz) is
             defined as one cycle per second. Subjectively, frequency defines pitch. One octave
             of pitch corresponds to a 2 to 1 ratio of frequencies, and "middle COl is
             approximately 256 Hz. The normal range of human hearing is nominally 20 Hz to
             20,000 Hz, but, particularly at low frequencies, this is very dependent upon the
             amplitude of the sound.
             Decibel (dB) - A unit rlivision on a logarithmic scale whose base is the tenth root
             of ten, used to represent ratios of quantities proportional to power. In simple
             terms, if the power is multiplied by a factor of ten, then ten is added to the
             representation of the power on the decibel scale. If 0 dB represents 1 unit of
             power, 60 dB represents one million units, etc.
             Level - Sound amplitudes are more conveniently described on a decibel scale. A
              OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           5                  NOVEMBER 26, 1991
 Noise Element
 pressure amplitude ratio of 10 corresponds to alevel difference of 20 dB. By using
o dB to represent a sound pressure amplitude of 28.3 micropascals or 20
 micropascals rms, the range of normally dealt-with sound amplitudes covers the"
level range 0 to 120 dB.
Sound Pressure Level (SPL - dB) - The ratio, in decibels, of the mean squared
sound pressure to the square of the reference pressure, 20 micropascals.
A-weighted Sound Level (FALor SAL - dB) - Sound pressure level in decibels
"measured by use of the A frequency weighting and the fast or slow exponential
time averaging. The A-weighting filter discriminates against low and very high
 frequencies in a manner similar to the human hearing mechanism at mode"rate
sound levels. The fast exponential has an averaging time of1/8 second. The slow
exponential has an averaging time of one second.
Time Average Sound Level (L",T - dB) - The level, in decibels, of the mean squared
sound pressure averaged over time period T. This is often referred to as
"equivalent sound level" and hence the "eq" subscript. The "equivalence" is to a
sound of constant level which has the same total acoustic energy content.
Sound Level Meter - An instrument consisting of a microphone, amplifiers, display
device (meter or numerical) and frequeneyweightingnetworks, meeting appropriate
performance specifications, for the purpose of determination of sound levels. For
measurement of time-average sound levels (L,~, an integrating sound level meter
is required. This employs aspecial metering circuit which weights equally all sounds
occurring within the measurement period. In a standard sound level meter, only
events which occurred within the past approximately one second (or 1/8-second
depending upon the meter setting) of the reading are included in the result. Some
meters are capable of performing both functions simultaneously.
Ambient Noise - The noise which results from the combination of all sources, near
and far. The ambient noise level is expressed as L",T or CNEL as judged
appropriate to the situation.
Background Noise -The steady noise level which characterizes a given environment
in the absence of transient sources. The background noise is usually expressed as
r..,." the noise level which is e,xceeded 90% of the specified time period.
Intrusive Noise - Noise from an identiftable source which causes a discernible
change in the existing acoustic environment. Noises can be intrusive by virtue of
excessive overall level, or as the result of unusual spectral or temporal
0IAI GENERAL PLAN                             6                  NOVEMBER 26, 1991
Noise Element
characteristics.
Noise Contour - A line on a map which indicates locations of constant ambient
sound level near or around known sources of noise. In practice, noise contours are
often shown as calculated for the dominant source of noise only.
OJM GENERAL PLAN                         7                  NOVEMBER 26, 1991
               Noise Element
               NOISE EXPOSURE
EFFECTS OF NOISE
               Noise may have a variety of consequences for physical, mental, or social well-being.
                For discussion, these effects are categorized as either auditory of non-auditory.
               Auditory effects ofnoise include hearing loss and interference with communication.
               Non-auditory effects include physiological reactions, interference with sleep,
               adverse affects on hwnan performance, and annoyance.
               Auditory Effects
               Hearing Loss: Permanent hearing loss is, so fur as is presently known, the most
               severe effect of noise upon health. While noise-induced hearing loss was once
               associated primarily with certain industrial situation, increasing nwnbers of people
               in urban areas are presently exposed to ambient noise levels which over long
               periods of exposure will cause significant hearing impairment. Even where daily
               exposure to general community noise does not in itself pose a distinct hazard to
               hearing, it may still contribute to hearing loss. Community noise may prevent the
               person who works in a high noise situation from receiving enough quiet while off
               the job to allow the ears to recuperate from temporary hearing loss experienced on
               the job.
               Speech Communication: Interference with the ability to hear and understand
               speech communication is one of the more common experiences of noise intrusion.
               In a highly developed society, much value is placed on verbal exchange. Noise can
               reduce the amount and quality of this interaction. Normal conversation speech in
               the range of 60 to 65 dB and any noise in this range or louder may interfere with
               speech.
               The impact ofnoise on speech communication can be evaluated in terms ofspeech
               intelligibility requirements. Speech intelligibility is measured in terms of the
               percentage of key word in a group of sentences that can be correctly understood.
               As noise level increases, the percentage ofwords understood will decrease, unless
               the people communicating move closer together or raise their voices. One
               hundred percent intelligibility is not necessary for satisfactory communication in all
               situations. Most people can correctly infer the content of a sentence even though
               one or more words may not have been heard. Once intelligibility drops below
               about 90 percent, however, conversation becomes strained.
               Non-Auditory Effects
               Physiological Reactions:       In addition to hearing loss, a nwnber of other
               OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             8                   NOVEMBER 26, 1991
 Noise Element
 physiological responses to noise have been docUmented. Changes in cardiovascular
 blood pressure and blood volume, breathing rate, pulse rate, and endocrine gland
 secretions have all been observed to result from exposure to noise. These'
 non-auditory effects distinguish physiologically from responses that occur in
 emotional states of fear or anger. They usually take place without conscious
 knowledge of their occurrence.
 It is not yet clear whether these physiological responses are associated with the
 onset or prolongation of any disease in humans. Noise has been cited as a
 contributing factor to the development of peptic ulcers, hypertension, colitis,
 migraine headaches and other disorders; but a causal link between noise exposure
 and non-auditory disease has not been established with certainty.
 Sleep Interference: From everyday experience as well as laboratory research, it is
 evident that noise interferes with sleep. In addition to awakening a person, or
 preventing the person from falling asleep, noise can shift the stage of sleep from
 a deep, restful stage to a lighter one. In laboratory tests this is observed as a change
 in brain-wave pattern of a sleeping subject. The significance of these shifts in stage
 of sleep to a person's long-term well-being has not been established.
 Disruption of sleep can occur at sound levels as low as 35 dB, but there is a great
 deal of variability in response among individuals. Some people awaken consistently
 when exposed to rather low level noise while others practically never awaken, even
 at levels up to 75 dB. A number of factors influence the degree to which noise may
 interfere with sleep. Impulsive or fluctuating noise is more disruptive than
 steady-state noise. Familiarity with the noise may reduce its ability to awaken, but
 there is no clear evidence that the quality of sleep is unaffected.
 Because of the number of variables involved, it has been difficult to establish a
 quantitative relationship between noise exposure and sleep interference.' In light
 of present knowledge, however, researchers recommend that noise levels inside
 dwellings not exceed 35-40 dB for satisfactory sleeping conditions.
·Physical and Mental Performance: Noise levels found in certain industrial situations
 are known to adversely affect the ability to perform physical tasks, even when the
 task requires little mental concentration. For a familiar, steady-state noise this is
 generally true only when the noise exceeds 90 dB. Irregular or unfamiliar bursts of
 noise can affect work efficiency atlower noise levels. Usually, the total quantity of
 work performed will not decrease, but the number of errors made will increase.
 Any task requiring the use of speech or other auditory signals will be subject to
 noise interference.
 OJM GENERAL PLAN                               9                    NOVEMBER 26, 1991

              Noise Element
              The ability to perfonn mental tasks such as reading, problem solving, or writing is
              also impaired by a noisy environment. As with sleep interference, there is a great
              deal of variability in individuals' responses. The degree of distraction, or
              interference with concentration, is related to the person's state of motivation,
              morale, stress, and fatigue, as well as characteristics of the noise such as intensity,
              pitch, impulsiveness, and infonnation content. Complex or demanding tasks are
              more likely to be disrupted by noise than are simple assignments.
              Annoyance: Annoyance is considered here to mean feelings of displeasure or
              resentment associated with the experience of noise, either because the noise is
              judged unpleasant or because the noise disrupts some ongoing activity. Annoyance
              is partly a psychological response to noise and partly a sociological response.
              Attitudes or values prevalent in a particular community can influence an individual's
              evaluation of noise.
              Annoyance is the most difficult of all noise responses to describe. Annoyance is
              a very individual characteristic and can vary widely from person to person. What
              one person considers tolerable can be unbearable to another of equal capability.
SEASONAL EFFECTS ON THE ACOUSTICAL ENVIRONMENT
              Weather conditions affect sound generation, sound propagation and conditions at
              potential sound reception points. In the most obvious sense, wet weather causes
              a significant increase in tire noise from roadways, and indeed, full rain generates
              considerable noise as it strikes roofs and other surfaces. No effort has been made
              to quantify these effects, as they are so unpredictably variable with details of the
              local surroundings.
              A more subtle effect would be the tendency of residents to keep windows open for
              ventilation in times ofwarm weather. This, again would be quite variable, as homes
              in warm areas are more commonly air conditioned, producing perhaps just the
              opposite effect.
              Quantitatively, with "typical" sized windows and nonnal residential construction,
              the difference between outdoor noise levels and indoor noise levels is
              approximately 10 dB when windows are open and 20-25 dB when windows are
              closed. This was demonstrated by measurements taken at Whispering Oaks as part
              of the Technical Appendix. To allow windows to be kept open at residents'
              discretion without causing excessive indoor noise pollution, the Noise Element has
              recommended 55 dB exterior noise guideline.
              0IAI GENERAL PLAN                             10                 NOVEMBER 26, 1991
              Noise Element
              The most commonly considered effect of weather on noise levels is the effect on
              sound propagation over long distances as specific atmospheric parameters vary.
             The important parameters are: wind profile and direction, temperature and·
              temperature proftle, humidity. These will be discussed in the following paragraphs.
SOUND PROPAGATION IN THE ATMOSPHERE
              In an idealized atmosphere, sound travels at the same speed in all directions and
              loses no energy to the air. In this case, we say that sound levels decrease by 6
              decibels (dB) for each doubling of the distance between the sound source element
              and the receiver. This is because for each doubling of distance, the radiated sound
              power is distributed over four times the area, and a power ratio of one-quarter is
              equal to -6 on the dB scale.
              Wind
              In a real atmosphere, the air is moving at different speeds, at different elevations
              and locations. The effective speed of sound is higher in the direction of the wind
              and lower in the direction against the wind. As sound propagates from areas of
              lower to higher effective sound speed, the "direction" of propagation is bent or
              "refracted" toward the regions of lower speed. Thus, in a typical windy
              environment, where the wind speed is lower near the ground than aloft, noise levels
              are accentuated in the direction of the wind and greatly attenuated in the direction
              against the wind. This is not the result of the wind "pushing" the sound energy in
              its direction (a small effect, since sound travels 700 mph in still aid), but rather
              because sound which started propagating upwards is refracted down to add with
              sound which would have reached the receiver anyway. In the most extreme case,
              the spherical model used for analysis in the ideal atmosphere is transformed to a
            . quasi-cylindrical model, in which levels drop at a -3 dB per distance doubling rate.
              In this case, the far-field noise level from a source which produces a 75 dB at 50 ft.
              would be increased by the wind gradient refraction from 35 dB to 55 dB at a
              distance of one mile. Effects of this magnitude are rare, since the structure of the
              wind gradient is seldom sufficiently stable over an extended enough region. Winds
            .of sufficient strength to produce significant increases in propagation are usually
              sources of noise themselves.
              In the up-wind direction, however, the so-called shadow zone created by upward
              refraction of sound (recall that in the upwind direction, the effective sound speed
              decreases with height) can result in noise levels many tens of dB lower than would
              occur in neutral conditions. This is an important consideration for noise s.urveys
              and enforcement measurements, particularly if the source is more than 100-200 ft.
              0IAI GENERAL PLAN                              11               NOVEMBER 26, 1991

  Noise Element
  from the reception point.
  Temperature Profile
  The speed of sound in air is proportional to the square root of the absolute'
  temperature. Therefore, as for the wind proflle, sound will be refracted from
  regions of high temperature toward those oflower temperatUre. On a sunny day,
  the temperature decreases with distance from the ground (a so-called lapse
  condition). This causes sound to be refracted upward, causing formation of
  shadow zones near the ground in all directions and potentially increasing noise
  levels at hillside or other elevated locations.
  In the late evening following a warm day, conditions can reverse, forming an
  atmospheric layer (inversion) within a few hundred feet of ground where the
  temperature increases with elevation: In' this case, acoustic energy is partially
  trapped near the ground and the rate of attenuation is significantly reduced, similar
  to the down-wind condition.
  Temperature and Humidity
  The air in the atmosphere converts a small percentage ofacoustical energy into heat
  energy by three mechanisms: heat conduction, viscosity and molecular absorption.
  The first two effects are miriuscule, and of no significance relative to community
  noise issues. The third effect can result in several dB per thousand feet excess
  attenuation at high frequencies. The degree of absorption depends upon the
  relationship of the sound frequency and the characteristic time constant for
  e:<citation of internal vibrations in nitrogen and (more importantly) oxygen
  molecules.
  The time constant is strongly dependent upon the amount of water vapor in the
  atmosphere, and is secondarily dependent upon the temperature. Without
  reference to detail, it turns out that relatively dry air (20-35% relative humidity) has
  the greatest absorption. Very dry air and humid air have low absorption.
  Normally, these differences are of significance only for sounds of frequency 2 kHz
  or above, but at large distances (1000 ft. or more) they technically should not be
. ignored.
  Overall Effect
  In the built environment, the effect on sound propagation ofstructures, terrain and
  vegetation usually is greater than atmospheric irregularities. However, for hillside
  residences or other receivers which are located in remote areas at significant
  distances from major noise sources, noise levels can be expected to be higher than
  OJAI GENERAL PLAN                               12                  NOVEMBER 26, 1991
              Noise Element
              predicted from inverse square law propagation (6 dB per distance doubling) when
              atmospheric inversions and stable winds are present.
CATALOG OF NOISE SOURCES
              This section contains a detailed description of the current noise environmentwithin
              the City of Ojai. This information is from the Technical Report prepared by
              Walker, Celano and Associates which is included as Appendix B of this Noise
              Element.
              The predominant land use in the City is residential. Residential land uses should
              therefore be considered the most noise sensitive in Oiai. Other noise sensitive land
              uses include schools, hospitals, museums, convalescent homes, libraries, and parks.
              Maintenance of a relatively quiet ambiance is important in maintaining the overall
              atmosphere of the area.
              The rural environment and lack of either a railroad or airport in the vicinity create
              a considerably quiet noise environment. The primary source of noise affecting the
              City of Ojai is motor vehicle traffic. CNEL Contours were computed for all
              roadways carrying traffic flows of 2000 Average Daily Trips (ADT) or greater.
              Because it was observed that the day-evening-night distribution of traffic in 0iai is
              not typical per usual traffic models, the distributions from the November, 1989
              count were used to determine CNEL weighting factors. FHWA RD77 and
              CALVENa noise emission models were used as a base line, but were modified to
              agree with measured data.
              The second source ofnoise is the industrial area on Bryant Street and Bryant Circle.
              At the present time, the main source is a precipitator atop the roof of the ITI
              facility near the northerly end of South Bryant Street. The Bryant Circle Industrial
              area is located at the east end of the City. The existing land uses in this industrial
              park are currently not significant noise generating sources. However, the future
              buildout of the Bryant Street area, which abuts a quiet residential area to the south
              and west, could pose potential noise impact conflicts.
              Additional noise sources identified by the City as sources ofcommunity complaints
              were:
              o    Gasoline powered leafblowers. Measurements were obtained for one of these
                   devices being operated in the 0iai Valley Hospital parking lot.
              o    Street sweepers, Jackhammers, Chain Saws, representative of transitory
              OJAI GENERAL PLAN                            13                  NOVEMBER 26, 1991
             Noise Element
                  mechanical sources. Street sweepers and trash pickup trucks are represented
                  in some of the measurement data.
             a    Air Conditioners, Ventilation equipment noise was measured at OjaiValley
                  Hospital and at the Acacias.
             a    Crowing Roosters and Peacocks.
             o    Barking Dogs.
             o    Recreational Activities at Sarzotti Park and Nordoff High School Athletic
                  Field.
             o    "Boom-Box" motor vehicle sound systems. Concerts and other entertainment
                  functions at Libbey Park Bowl.
~TALOG OF NOISE SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
             Ojai is primarily a residential community. Except for the main commercial corridor
             along Ojai Avenue and the industrial area on Bryant Street, essentially all roadways
             affect residential uses to some extent. Specific Noise Sensitive Receptors are as
             follows:
             o    Residences on the west side of Highway 150/33 south of the Maricopa
                  Highway/Ojai Avenue Intersection. TIlls area was judged to have the highest
                  noise impact potential in the City, due to the high traffic flow and proximity to
                  the roadway.
             o    Ojai Valley Hospital, located on the north side of Maricopa Highway.
             o    Nordoff High School, located on the south side of Maricopa Highway.
             a    Matilija Junior High School and Ojai Valley (private) School, located adjacent
                  to one another on the north side ofOjai Avenue west of Country Club Drive.
             o   Topa Topa Kindergarten, located on the east side of Montgomery Street at
                 Aliso Street.
             o    Whispering Oaks Senior housing, located on the south side ofOjai Avenue east
                  of downtown.
             OJM GENERAL PLAN                              14                   NOVEMBER 26, 1991
              Noise Element
              o   Acacias convalescent hospital, located on the southwest comer of Grand
                  Avenue and Montgomery Street.
              o   Libbey Park, on the south side ofOjai Avenue opposite the central commercial
                  area.
              o   Sarzotti Park, located across from residences on Park Road, south of Grand
                  Avenue.
              o   Ojai Library, located on the southeast comer of Ojai Avenue and Ventura
                  Street.
              o   Ojai Museum, located on the west side of South Montgomery Street.
              o   Ojai Art Center, located directly south of the museum on Montgomery Street.
              o   Clausen's Funeral Home, located on the northwest comer of North
                  Montgomery and East Matilija.
              o   Mim's Manor Convalescent Hospital, located on the north side of Eucalyptus
                  Street.                              "
              o   Mountain Vista Manor Convalescent Hospital, located on the north side of
                  east Oak Street.
              o   Grey Gables residential" care facility, located on the northwest comer of North
                  Montgomery and Grand Avenue.
FUTURE AND EXISTING ACOUS71CAL ENVIRONMENT
              The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires that noise contours be
              drawn on a City map for all significant noise sources in the community. However,
              noise contours as calculated from available modeling programs have meaning only
              in areas where essentially unobstructed sound transmission is possible. In Ojai,
              there are few locations where this situation exists, most notably along the Maricopa
              Highway between NordoffHigh School and El Roblar Drive. In most other areas,
              roadways are flanked by existing structures. Reflections from the structures cause
              noise levels between them and roads to be higher than predicted, generally by 1 to
              3 dB. Shielding by the structures causes noise levels behind them to be lower than
              predicted by 3 to 10 dB.
              0IAI GENERAL PLAN                              15                NOVEMBER 26, 1991
Noise Element
For this Element, graphical noise contours were calculated based on the actual
roadway geometry presented on a 600 ft. per inch map provided by Public Works,
The two or four lanes of each road were divided into 25 ft. long segments. Each
segment was treated as a point source of sound, the strength of which was
determined based on the ADT, speed, temporal distribution and truck mixture
traffic. FHWA RD-77 and CALVENO models were used to represent individual
vehicle noise emissions. Sound from all roadway segments affecting a given
contouring area were combined in a computer model which logically traces the
noise contour around the roadway grid. Propagation is based on spherical wave
spreading (-6 dB per distance doubling) plus 1.5 dB per 1000 ft. atmospheric and
ground absorption. The contour points were then stored on magnetic disk files for
subsequent plotting in CAD (computer aided drawing) program.
The results of these contour calculations are shown at 1n = 2000' on the contour
map on the following page. They have also been plotted at 1n = 600' on a City
                                       =
Street and Parcel Map and at a 1n 400' on the City Zoning Map. It must be
noted that the contours presented on the maps are approximate, and are intended
to provide an overview of the acoustical environment. Detailed assessments of
noise at specific locations will vary, based on local topographical conditions,
existing structures, roadway conditions, driver habits, etc.
Results of noise measurements and computations indicate the following general
characteristics of the Ojai acoustical environment:
o    Daytime noise in most areas of the City is dominated by automobile traffic.
o    Nighttime noise is very low, due to the near disappearance of traffic from local
     streets after around 10 p.m. Along Ventura Avenue, noise continue to be
     dominated by traffic. At other locations, crickets and other insects are the
    significant nighttime noise source.
o    Overall, the characteristic noise levels are approximately:
     o   50-55 dB daytime, 35-40 dB nighttime in side-street areas
    o    58-62 dB daytime, 40-50 dB nighttime a1ongOjai Avenue, south ofthe "Y',
         and Maricopa Highway
    o    67-69 dB daytime, 53-60 dB nighttime along Ventura Avenue
o   Background noise levels late at night are 20-25 dB in absence of insect noise,
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                              16                NOVEMBER 26, 1991
  Noise Element
     35-45 dB in close proximity to active crickets.
  o  Individual noise sources which intrude on the general acoustical environment
     were observed to be:
     o   Trash pickup trucks
     o   Barking dogs
  o  Ventilation and other electrical and mechanical equipment
  o  Street sweeper
  o  Individual automobiles and pickup trucks with excessively noisy exhaust
     systems, loud "boom-box" sound systems and/or unnecessarily noisy "off-
     road" type tires
  o  Mechanical equipment from the industrial facility on Bryant Street
. OJAI GENERAL PLAN                         17                NOVEMBER 26, 1991
              Noise Element
              NOISE CONTROL
              A common approach to mitigating noise impacts is through the use of setbacks.
              This approach may be more desirable for the City of Ojai due to its low volume
              roadways and the desire to avoid a "walled in" look. The setback approach simply
              requires that the homes or noise sensitive uses be setback away from the roadway
              at a distance great enough so that they are outside the noise impact zone. The
              setback area is landscaped. The landscaping actually provides very little noise
              reduction, however, residents seem to become less aware of the "noise probably
              because they can not see or have an obstructed view of the road.
              As previously discussed, the sources of noise in Ojai can be divided into two basic
              categories, transportation sources (primary traffic) and non-transportation sources.
              Local agencies have the responsibility to control the noise from the source, such
              as vehicle noise emission levels and enforcing the speed regulations to reduce
              vehicle noise.
              The most effective method the City has to mitigate transportation noise is through
              reducing the impact of the noise onto the community (i.e., noise barriers and site
              design review). Mitigation through the design and construction of a noise barrier
              (wall, berm, or combination wall/berm) is the most common way of
              alleviating traffic noise impacts. The effect of a noise barrier is critically
              dependent on the geometry between the noise source and the receiver. A noise
              barrier effect occurs when the "line of sight" between the source and receiver is
              penetrated by the barrier. The greater the penetration, the greater the noise
              reduction. Barriers should be required for residences where outdoor noise exceeds
              60 or 65 dB. Another noise reduction method would be for the City to provide
              retrofit incentives for residences that provide ventilation and better windows to
              reduce noise impacts.
              For existing residences, the following mitigation measures are possible: For
              outdoors, barriers (walls and berms), re-routing traffic, enhance speed limit
              enforcement, and maintaining auto exhausts in proper condition are methods to
              control noise. For indoors, ventilation modification (summer switch) to allow
              some windows to be kept closed, improvement ofseals on doors and windows, and
              relocation of vent openings to shielded sides of structures are some methods to
              control noise.
NOISE REGULATIONS
              The responsibility for the control of noise is divided among various levels of
              government and in tum divided among various agencies and departments at each
              governmental leveL Local agencies have several alternatives for the control of
              OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           18                  NOVEMBER 26, 1991
Noise Element
various noise generators. These include: enforcement of existing state and local
laws, creation oflocal ordinances and policies, adoption of Federal and State Noise
Standards, and the implementation of various land uses and site planning
techniques based on state and Federal planning guidelines. Some State and local
laws may include: Noise limits for on-highway motor vehicles for the state of
California, Noise limits for motorboats in or upon Inland Waters, Sound
Transmission Class (STC) and Impact Insulation Class (IIC) for non-single family
buildings for hwnan occupancy, noise limits for off-highway motor vehicles in the
State of California. These state laws can be innmerliately enforced by local and
builrling departments. In adrlition to state laws, local nuisance ordinances relating
to disturbing the peace and animal control can be enforced by local law
enforcement agencies and the County Department of Animal Control.
The second alternative mentioned is the creation of noise ordinances. Generally,
this includes the passage of new ordinances. In contrast to nuisance ordinances,
a noise ordinance attempts to provide noise level standards for reoccurring noise
generators or land use types. An ordinance should contain a well defmed, objective
noise standard for various land uses, based on an easy to calculate noise evaluation
scheme, maximwn noise levels, consideration for impulse and pure tone sounds,
appropriate reference pressure, and reference to a measurement procedure.
A local ordinance could also extend to the enforcement of Federal and State
product standards, to those products once purchased. According to the Noise
Control Act of 1972, the United States Environmental Protection Agency must
establish noise levels on new products including construction, transportation,
e1ectric/electronic equipment and any motor or engine. These product noise levels
could be adopted as a part of a noise ordinance by local entities to insure control
over specific noise sources which might otherwise be rlifficult to control.
Local jurisdictions could also adopt Federal and State regulations and guidelines for
local development. Three Federal and State regulations which are of particular
importance are: The Department of Transportation Design Noise Standards; The
Department of Housing and Urban Development (H. U.o.) Noise Standards; and
State Noise level Standards for various land uses. The H.U.o. noise guidelines are
used to help determine whether projects applying for H.U.D. or F.H.A. loans are
qualified on the basis of noise. The Department ofTransportation has established
noise standards and procedures to determine if particular roadways can qualify for
federally assisted noise abatement projects. State laws also establish standards
estimating adverse impacts of noise on various land uses. These standards could
be adopted as policy or ordinance by local entities locating the appropriate land
uses near noise sources. The advantage of using these standards, particularly the
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                            19                  NOVEMBER 26, 1991
Noise Element
H.UD. standards, is that they may have greater acceptability due to greater
resources available to State and Federal agencies. The disadvantage of these noise
standards is that they are inconsistent, individually they do not adequately measure
the noise conditions, and they may be too high to accurately reflect community
desires.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             20                 NOVEMBER 26, 1991
         Noise Element
         GOALS, POUCIES AND PROGRAMS
         This section of the Noise Element sets forth the Goals, Policies and Implementing
         Programs. They evolve out of the discussion issues and needs discussed in the
         previous section of the document (Noise Exposure and Noise ControQ.
GOALS
         (1) A City that maintains a quiet acoustical environment
         (2) A City whose residents are protected from unhealthful levels of noise
         (3) A City that is planned to minimize noise conflicts
POLICIES
         (1) The City shall enforce the State Uniform Building Code which specifies that the
             indoor noise levels for residential living spaces not exceed 45 dB dn/CNEL due
             to the combined effect of all noise sources. The state requires implementation
             of this standard when the outdoor noise levels exceed 60 dB Ldn/CNEL.
             However, the City should implement a 55 dB outdoor noise standard.
         (2) The City should establish standards that specify acceptable limits and hours of
             occurrence of noise for various land uses throughout the City.
         (3) The City shall incorporate noise reduction features during site planning to
             mitigate anticipated noise impacts on affected noise sensitive land uses. New
             development should be permitted only if appropriate mitigation measures are
             included such that the standards contained in this Element or adopted
             ordinances are met                            .
         (4) The City should encourage the use ofwalls, berms or "inward orientation" in
             the design of residential or other noise sensitive land uses that are adjacent to
             major roads, commercial or industrial areas.
         (5) The City should enhance efforts to enforce vehicle noise emission regulations
             and speed limits.
         (6) The City should discourage nighttime traffic, particularly truck traffic, on
             streets in residential areas and schedule trash pickups between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m.
             in residential areas.
         (7) The City should adopt a new comprehensive community noise ordinance to
         OJM GENERAL PLAN                               21                 NOVEMBER 26, 1991
         Noise Element
             ensure city residents are not exposed to excessive noise levels from existing and
             new stationary noise sources.
PROGRAMS
         (1) Investigate and, if possible, implement mitigation programs for existing
             residences when traffic noise exceeds 55 dB CNEL.
         (2) Strengthen enforcement of vehicle noise emissions regulations and vehicle
             speeds.
         (3) Restrict the hours of operation of street sweeper and private parking lot
             sweepers.
         (4) Restrict hours of operation ofleafblowers and other power gardening activities.
         (5) Restrict hours of operation and days of the week of construction activities.
         (6) Adopt a noise ordinance to control noise levels and hours of occurrence for
             various hind uses throughout the City.
         (J) The City should develop an educational program to inform residents of the
             negative effects of noise on human health.
         OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           22                   NOVEMBER 26, 1991
 City of Ojai
   2014 - 2021
HOUSING ELEMENT
        Adopted
    December 10, 2013
              Acknowledgements
                    City Council
                    Paul Blatz, Mayor
            Carlon Strobel, Mayor Pro Tem
                       Betsy Clapp
                       Severo Lara
                       Carol Smith
             Planning Commission
                Laurence Nicklin, Chair
                 John Mirk, Vice Chair
                       Troy Becker
                      Paul Crabtree
                      Steven Foster
                     Kathleen Nolan
                     Orval Osborne
                        City Staff
                Rob Clark, City Manager
Ann McLaughlin, Interim Community Development Director
     Shari Herbruck, Planning & Building Technician
                  Consulting Assistance:
               J.H. Douglas & Associates
                   John Douglas, AICP
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                              Contents
I.    Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 7
      A.      Purpose of the Housing Element ...............................................................................................7
      B.      Community Context ....................................................................................................................7
      C.      Public Participation ......................................................................................................................8
      D.      Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan .........................................................8
II.   Housing Needs Assessment ....................................................................................................... 11
      A.      Population Characteristics ...................................................................................................... 11
              1.    Population Growth Trends .................................................................................................... 11
              2.    Age ........................................................................................................................................... 12
              3.    Race and Ethnicity ................................................................................................................. 14
      B.      Household Characteristics ....................................................................................................... 15
              1.    Household Composition and Size ....................................................................................... 15
              2.    Housing Tenure........................................................................................................................ 15
              3.    Overcrowding ......................................................................................................................... 16
              4.    Household Income ................................................................................................................. 17
              5.    Overpayment.......................................................................................................................... 17
      C.      Employment ............................................................................................................................... 19
              1.    Current Employment Characteristics ................................................................................. 19
              2.    Projected Job Growth ........................................................................................................... 20
      D.      Housing Stock Characteristics................................................................................................. 21
              1.    Housing Type ........................................................................................................................... 22
              2.    Housing Age and Conditions ............................................................................................... 22
              3.    Vacancy .................................................................................................................................. 24
              4.    Housing Cost............................................................................................................................ 24
      E.      Special Needs ............................................................................................................................ 26
              1.    Persons with Disabilities .......................................................................................................... 27
              2.    Elderly........................................................................................................................................ 28
              3.    Large Households ................................................................................................................... 29
              4.    Female-Headed Households ............................................................................................... 29
              5.    Farm Workers ........................................................................................................................... 30
              6.    Homeless Persons.................................................................................................................... 32
      F.      Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion .................................................................................. 35
      G.      Future Growth Needs................................................................................................................ 35
              1.    Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment ................................................... 35
              2.    2014-2021 Ojai Growth Needs ............................................................................................. 36
III.  Resources and Opportunities ................................................................................................... 37
      A.      Land Resources.......................................................................................................................... 37
      B.      Financial and Administrative Resources ............................................................................... 37
              1.    State and Federal Resources ............................................................................................... 37
              2.    Local Resources ...................................................................................................................... 38
      C.      Energy Conservation Opportunities....................................................................................... 40
IV.   Constraints ................................................................................................................................... 43
      A.      Governmental Constraints ...................................................................................................... 43
              1.    Land Use Plans and Regulations.......................................................................................... 43
              2.    Residential Development Processing Procedures ........................................................... 50
              3.    Development Fees and Improvement Requirements ..................................................... 51
      B.      Non-Governmental Constraints.............................................................................................. 53
              1.    Environmental Constraints .................................................................................................... 53
              2.    Infrastructure Constraints ...................................................................................................... 53
                                                                         3                                                                 December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element
              3.    Land and Construction Costs .............................................................................................. 55
              4.    Cost and Availability of Financing ...................................................................................... 55
      C.      Fair Housing ................................................................................................................................. 56
V.    Housing Action Plan ................................................................................................................... 57
      A.      Goals and Policies...................................................................................................................... 57
      B.      Quantified Objectives ............................................................................................................... 71
Appendix A – Evaluation of the 2008-2014 Housing Element
Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
Appendix C – Public Participation Summary
                                                                      4                                                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                   List of Tables
Table II-1     Population Trends 1990-2012 ................................................................................................. 11
Table II-2     Age Distribution ........................................................................................................................ 13
Table II-3     Race/Ethnicity .......................................................................................................................... 14
Table II-4     Household Composition ......................................................................................................... 15
Table II-5     Household Tenure .................................................................................................................... 16
Table II-6     Overcrowding .......................................................................................................................... 16
Table II-7     Household Income Distribution ............................................................................................. 17
Table II-8     Overpayment by Income Category ................................................................................... 18
Table II-9     Labor Force: Ojai vs. Ventura County ................................................................................. 19
Table II-10    2008-2018 Industry Employment Projections Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura
               Metropolitan Statistical Area ................................................................................................. 21
Table II-11    Housing by Type - 2010 ........................................................................................................... 22
Table II-12    Age of Housing Stock.............................................................................................................. 23
Table II-13    Housing Conditions Survey Results........................................................................................ 23
Table II-14    Housing Vacancy Rates – Ventura County Jurisdictions ................................................. 24
Table II-15    Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs – Ventura County ........................ 25
Table II-16    Housing Sales Prices 2012 – Ventura County ...................................................................... 26
Table II-17    Elderly Households by Tenure ................................................................................................ 29
Table II-18    Household Size by Tenure ...................................................................................................... 29
Table II-19    Household Type by Tenure .................................................................................................... 30
Table II-20    Ventura County Farm Workers – 2000.................................................................................. 31
Table II-21    Agricultural Employment – Ojai and Ventura County ..................................................... 32
Table II-22    Ventura County Homeless Count: 2012 .............................................................................. 33
Table II-23    Ventura County Homeless Sub-Populations: 2012 ............................................................ 33
Table II-24    Assisted Affordable Housing Developments – Ojai ........................................................... 35
Table II-25    2014-2021 Regional Housing Growth Needs – Ojai ........................................................... 36
Table III-1    Land Inventory Summary ....................................................................................................... 37
Table III-2    State Housing Program Summary ......................................................................................... 39
Table IV-1     Residential Land Use Categories Ojai General Plan ........................................................ 44
Table IV-2     Residential Development Standards ................................................................................... 44
Table IV-3     Residential Parking Requirements ........................................................................................ 47
Table IV-4     Growth Management Allocations 2008-2013 .................................................................... 50
Table IV-5     Summary of Development Fees ........................................................................................... 52
Table V-1      Quantified Objectives 2013-2021 ......................................................................................... 71
                                                   List of Figures
Figure II-1    Ojai Population 2000-2012 ..................................................................................................... 12
Figure II-2    Ojai Age Distribution 2000-2012 ............................................................................................ 14
Figure II-3    Ventura County Agricultural Production Areas ................................................................. 31
                                                                  5                                                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element
This page intentionally left blank.
                                       6 December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                       I. Introduction
I.      INTRODUCTION
A.      Purpose of the Housing Element
Statutory Overview: All cities and counties in the State of California are required to
affirmatively further affordable housing opportunities within their respective jurisdictions.
Principal requirements of California Land Use Law include: adoption of Housing Elements
as part of each community’s General Plan; inducements to provide affordable housing
through density bonuses and secondary dwellings; limitations on local land use authority
to deny affordable projects or impose conditional use requirements on multifamily
housing; and prohibitions on down zoning or imposition of development standards that
prevent attainment of Housing Element goals.
Housing Element Law: Housing Element law is codified in Article 10.6 of the California
Government Code commencing with Section 65580. Under these statutes, all commu-
nities in California are required to have a Housing Element as part of their adopted
General Plan. These Elements are to be updated periodically. The law further stipulates
that Housing Elements consist of an identification and analysis of existing and projected
housing needs along with a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives, financial
resources, and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement, and
development of housing. In summary, the Housing Element is required to contain: (i) an
assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant to
the meeting of those needs; (ii) a statement of the community’s goals, quantified
objectives, and policies relative to the maintenance, preservation, improvement, and
development of housing; and (iii) a program that sets forth a schedule of actions to
implement relevant Housing Element policies and achieve stated goals. A cross
reference of relevant statutes to corresponding sec-tions of the Housing Element is
summarized in Table A.
Housing Element Contents:          The Housing Element consists of the following major
components:
      •      An analysis of the city’s demographic and housing characteristics and trends
             (Chapter II);
      •      An evaluation of land, financial, and administrative resources available to
             address the City’s housing goals (Chapter III); and
      •      A review of potential constraints, both governmental and non-governmental,
             to meeting Ojai’s identified housing needs (Chapter IV);
      •      The Housing Action Plan for addressing the City’s identified housing needs,
             including housing goals, policies and programs (Chapter V).
B.      Community Context
The City of Ojai is a community of 7,535 persons (as of 2012) located on US Highway 33 in
the Ojai Valley of Ventura County, approximately 12 miles north of the City of Ventura.
The City is a predominately low density residential community contained within four
                                                7                            December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                         I. Introduction
square miles and surrounded by a rural landscape of large lot large estates, orchards
and picturesque hillsides. The community has long been known as a haven for artists,
musicians and health enthusiasts: a “village” as locals call it. Its beauty gained fame
decades ago when the area was photographed to represent Shangri-La in the 1939
movie, The Lost Horizon. The community is built around a quaint downtown commercial
district filled with boutique shops, art galleries and a host of places to retreat from the
fast-paced lifestyle of more urbanized areas. A fundamental goal of the Housing Element
is to address the housing needs of current and future residents in ways that respect and
enhance the quality of life which is “only in Ojai.”
C.      Public Participation
Public participation is an important component of the planning process in Ojai, and this
update to the Housing Element has provided residents and other interested parties
numerous opportunities for involvement. Appendix C contains a summary of these
opportunities as well as a list of persons and organizations that were notified during the
Housing Element update process and a summary of comments and issues raised.
D.      Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan
State law requires that all portions of the General Plan be internally consistent. The City of
Ojai General Plan consists of nine elements: Land Use; Circulation; Housing; Air Quality;
Open Space; Conservation; Recreation; Noise; and Safety. This Housing Element builds
                                               8                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                       I. Introduction
upon the other elements and is consistent with the policies and proposals set forth by the
General Plan. Examples of inter-element consistency include: residential development
capacities established in the Land Use Element are incorporated within the Housing
Element, and the discussion of infrastructure and public services in the Housing Element is
consistent with the Land Use and Safety elements. As the General Plan is amended
through time, the City will review the Housing Element for internal consistency, and make
any necessary revisions.
SB 1087 of 2005 requires cities to provide a copy of their Housing Elements to local water
and sewer providers, and also requires that these agencies provide priority hookups for
developments with lower-income housing. The Housing Element will be provided to these
agencies immediately upon adoption.
                                              9                              December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element    I. Introduction
This page intentionally left blank.
                                       10 December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                     II. Housing Needs Assessment
II.     HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This chapter examines general population and household characteristics and trends,
such as age, race and ethnicity, employment, household composition and size,
household income, and special needs. Characteristics of the existing housing stock (e.g.,
number of units and type, tenure, age and condition, costs) are also addressed. Finally,
the city’s projected housing growth needs based on the latest Regional Housing Needs
Assessment (RHNA) are examined.
The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes the most recent data from the 2010 U.S. Census,
American Community Survey (ACS), California Department of Finance (DOF), California
Employment Development Department (EDD), Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG) and other relevant sources. Supplemental data was obtained
through field surveys and from private organizations. In addition, Ventura County’s
Consolidated Plan provides useful information for this update of the Housing Element. The
implications of these findings for the city’s housing policies and programs are also
discussed.
A.      Population Characteristics
        1.          Population Growth Trends
Ojai experienced modest growth during the 1990s, but its population has declined since
2000, to an estimated 7,535 in 2012(see Table II-1 and Figure II-1).
                                                                   Table II-1
                                                    Population Trends 1990-2012
                                                                                               Growth     Growth
              Jurisdiction                   1990            2000            2010   2012      1990-2000  2000-2012
        Ojai                                 7,613           7,862           7,461  7,535       3.3%       -4.2%
        Ventura County                     669,016          753,197        823,318 832,970      12.6%      10.6%
        Sources: U.S. Census; Calif. Dept. of Finance Table E-5 (2012); SCAG
                                                                          11                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                        II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                           Figure II-1
                                   Ojai Population 2000-2012
        2.      Age
Housing needs are influenced by the age characteristics of the population. Different age
groups have different housing needs based on lifestyles, family types, income levels, and
housing preference. Table II-2 provides a comparison of the city’s and county’s
population by age group in 2010. This table shows that the age distribution of the city’s
population is, overall, older than Ventura County as a whole (median age of 47.1 vs. 36.2
for the county). Children age 19 and under represent about 23% of the city’s population
compared to about 29% for the county as a whole. Ojai also has a larger percentage of
seniors (65+) compared to the county (19.3% city vs. 11.6% county). Figure II-2 shows the
trend in age distribution from 2000 to 2012.
                                               12                            December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                        II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                    Table II-2
                                                Age Distribution
                                                         Ojai      Ventura County
                             Age Group
                                                 Persons       %   Persons       %
                         Under 5 years                 342    4.6%    55,336    6.7%
                         5 to 9 years                  382    5.1%    56,970    6.9%
                         10 to 14 years                472    6.3%    60,390    7.3%
                         15 to 19 years                499    6.7%    64,407    7.8%
                         20 to 24 years                340    4.6%    56,183    6.8%
                         25 to 29 years                314    4.2%    54,253    6.6%
                         30 to 34 years                291    3.9%    51,207    6.2%
                         35 to 39 years                374    5.0%    53,448    6.5%
                         40 to 44 years                467    6.3%    57,635    7.0%
                         45 to 49 years                613    8.2%    62,731    7.6%
                         50 to 54 years                689    9.2%    60,973    7.4%
                         55 to 59 years                672    9.0%    51,164    6.2%
                         60 to 64 years                573    7.7%    42,312    5.1%
                         65 to 69 years                401    5.4%    29,834    3.6%
                         70 to 74 years                252    3.4%    21,562    2.6%
                         75 to 79 years                223    3.0%    17,443    2.1%
                         80 to 84 years                237    3.2%    13,427    1.6%
                         85+ years                     320    4.3%    14,043    1.7%
                         Total                       7,461    100%   823,318   100%
                         Median age                      47.1            36.2
                         Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
                                                           13                                December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                         II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                    Figure II-2
                                         Ojai Age Distribution 2000-2012
        3.        Race and Ethnicity
The racial and ethnic composition of Ojai differs from Ventura County in that a smaller
proportion of city residents are Hispanic/Latino. Approximately 18% of city residents
reported Hispanic/Latino ancestry, contrasted with about 40% for the County as a whole
(Table II-3).
                                                      Table II-3
                                                    Race/Ethnicity
                                                                  Ojai              Ventura County
                         Race/Ethnicity
                                                        Population     % Total   Population     % Total
         White                                                 6,555     87.9%       565,804       68.7%
         Black                                                    42      0.6%         15,163       1.8%
         American Indian                                          47      0.6%          8,068       1.0%
         Asian                                                   158      2.1%         55,446       6.7%
         Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander                1      0.0%          1,643       0.2%
         Other race                                              440      5.9%       140,253       17.0%
         2 or more races                                         218      2.9%         36,941       4.5%
         Total                                                 7,461    100.0%        823318     100.0%
         Hispanic                                              1,339     17.9%       331,567       40.3%
         Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
                                                          14                                     December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                           II. Housing Needs Assessment
B.      Household Characteristics
        1.         Household Composition and Size
Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size of housing
needed in a city. The Census defines a “household” as all persons occupying a housing
unit, which may include single persons living alone, families related through marriage or
blood, or unrelated persons sharing a single unit. Persons in group quarters such as
dormitories, retirement or convalescent homes, or other group living situations are
included in population totals, but are not considered households.
Table II-4 provides a comparison of households by type for the city and Ventura County
as a whole, as reported in the 2010 Census. Family households comprised approximately
61% of all households in the city, compared to about 74% for the county as a whole. The
city’s average household size is significantly smaller than Ventura County as a whole
(2.34 persons per household in the city vs. 3.04 persons per household in the county).
These statistics suggest that there is a lesser need for large units in Ojai than for some
other areas of Ventura County, and nearly one-third of households are persons living
alone.
                                                       Table II-4
                                                Household Composition
                                                                      Ojai               Ventura County
                            Household Type
                                                            Households       %       Households       %
         Family households:                                     1,890      60.8%       197,178      73.9%
            Husband-wife family                                 1,396      44.9%       150,512      56.4%
              With own children under 18 years                   549       17.6%       71,149       26.7%
            Male householder, no wife present                    128        4.1%       15,134        5.7%
              With own children under 18 years                    66        2.1%        7,302        2.7%
            Female householder, no husband present               366       11.8%       31,532       11.8%
              With own children under 18 years                   200        6.4%       15,632        5.9%
         Nonfamily households:                                  1,221      39.2%       69,742       26.1%
              Householder living alone                           992       31.9%       53,037       19.9%
         Households with individuals under 18 years              876       28.2%       106,457      39.9%
         Households with individuals 65 years and over          1,027      33.0%       69,982       26.2%
         Total households                                       3,111      100%        266,920       100%
         Average household size                                       2.34                     3.04
         Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
        2.         Housing Tenure
Housing tenure (owner vs. renter) is an important indicator of the housing market.
Communities need an adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in
order to accommodate a range of households with varying incomes, family sizes and
                                                           15                                       December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                               II. Housing Needs Assessment
composition, and lifestyles. Table II-5 provides a comparison of the number of owner-
occupied and renter-occupied units in the city in 2010 as compared to the county as a
whole. It reveals a lower level of homeownership in the city, approximately 10
percentage points lower than for the county as a whole (55% city vs. 65% county).
                                                       Table II-5
                                                  Household Tenure
                                                          Ojai               Ventura County
                                Tenure
                                                    Units         %         Units          %
                         Owner Occupied             1,717        55%       174,168        65%
                         Renter Occupied            1,394       45%         92,752        35%
                         Total occupied units       3,111       100%       266,920       100%
                         Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
        3.      Overcrowding
Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing. The
U.S. Census Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more than
one person per room, excluding bathrooms and kitchens, with severe overcrowding
when there are more than 1.5 occupants per room. Overcrowded households are
usually a reflection of the lack of affordable housing. Table II-6 indicates that
overcrowding in the City of Ojai is less prevalent than for Ventura County as a whole.
                                                       Table II-6
                                                     Overcrowding
                                                                   Ojai               Ventura County
                          Household Type
                                                          Households    Percent    Households   Percent
               Owner-Occupied                                1,720      100.0%       175,452     100.0%
                 Overcrowded (1.01 to 1.50)                    22        1.3%         4,640       2.6%
                 Severely overcrowded (1.51+)                  0         0.0%         1,178       0.7%
               Renter-Occupied                               1,248      100.0%       88,853      100.0%
                 Overcrowded (1.01 to 1.50)                    52        4.2%         7,351       8.3%
                 Severely overcrowded (1.51+)                  30        2.4%         3,080       3.5%
               Source: 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25014
According to Census Bureau estimates, overcrowding is more likely to affect renters;
about 4% of renter households in the city were overcrowded and an additional 2% were
severely overcrowded while only about 1% of owner households were overcrowded and
none was severely overcrowded.
                                                            16                                         December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                    II. Housing Needs Assessment
        4.        Household Income
Household income is a primary factor affecting housing needs in a community – the
ability of residents to afford housing is directly related to household income. According to
the Southern California Association of Governments, about 46% of households in Ojai fell
into the lower-income categories 1 compared to just 40% for Ventura County as a whole
(Table II-7).
                                                    Table II-7
                                        Household Income Distribution
                                                           Ojai             Ventura County
                       Income Group
                                                  Households    Percent Households       Percent
              Extremely Low Income                        424      14%       31,438         12%
              Very Low Income                             430      14%       28,717         11%
              Low Income                                  559      18%       42,348         17%
              Moderate Income                             470      15%       47,646         19%
              Above Moderate                            1,203      39%      106,004         41%
              Total                                     3,086     100%      256,154        100%
              Source: SCAG 2012, based on 2005-2009 ACS
        5.        Overpayment
According to State housing policy, overpaying occurs when housing costs exceed 30% of
gross household income. Table II-8 displays recent estimates for overpayment in Ojai for
owners and renters. It is estimated that 37% of owner households and 55% of renter
households were overpaying for housing.
Although homeowners enjoy income and property tax deductions and other benefits
that help to compensate for high housing costs, lower-income homeowners may need to
defer maintenance or repairs due to limited funds, which can lead to deterioration. For
lower-income renters, severe cost burden can require families to double up resulting in
overcrowding and related problems.
  Together, the extremely-low, very-low, and low income categories are considered “lower-income”
1
                                                          17                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                             II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                       Table II-8
                                   Overpayment by Income Category
                        % of Income Paid                 Owners               Renters
                            for Housing          Households     Percent Households     Percent
                       Less than 10%                      187    10.5%          11       0.8%
                       10 to 14.9%                        156     8.8%         102       7.8%
                       15 to 19.9%                        310    17.5%          92       7.1%
                       20 to 24.9%                        233    13.1%         207      15.9%
                       25 to 29.9%                        201    11.3%         175      13.4%
                       30 to 34.9%                        158     8.9%         146      11.2%
                       35 to 39.9%                          56    3.2%          21       1.6%
                       40 to 49.9%                          88    5.0%         136      10.4%
                       50% or more                        347    19.6%         291      22.3%
                       Not computed                         38    2.1%         122       9.4%
                       Total Households                 1,774     100%       1,303       100%
                       Source: SCAG based on the 2005-2009 ACS
Extremely Low Income Households
State law requires quantification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs of
extremely low-income (ELI) households. Extremely low income is defined as households
with income less than 30% of area median income. The 2013 area median income for
Ventura County was $89,300 (see Table II-15). For extremely-low-income households, this
means an income of $26,800 or less for a four-person household. Households with
extremely-low-income have a variety of housing needs.
        Existing Needs
According to SCAG estimates, extremely-low-income households represented about 14%
of all households in Ojai.
        Projected Needs
The projected housing need for extremely-low-income households is assumed to be 50%
of the very-low-income regional housing need of 87 units, or 44 extremely-low-income
units during the 2014-2021 period. The resources and programs to address this need are
similar to those for other low-income households and are discussed throughout the
Housing Element, including Chapter V, the Housing Action Plan. Because the needs of
extremely-low-income households overlap extensively with other special needs groups,
further analysis and resources for extremely-low-income households can be found in
Chapter II, Needs Assessment, Section E, Special Needs, and Chapter IV, Constraints,
Section A.g. Special Needs Housing.
                                                             18                                   December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                           II. Housing Needs Assessment
C.      Employment
Employment is an important factor affecting housing needs within a community. The jobs
available in each employment sector and the wages for these jobs affect the type and
size of housing residents can afford.
        1.      Current Employment Characteristics
Current employment and projected job growth have a significant influence on housing
needs during this planning period. Table II-9 shows that the city’s estimated labor
participation rate was approximately 63% of the working-age population, which is slightly
lower than the estimated 67% for the county as a whole.
                                                           Table II-9
                                       Labor Force: Ojai vs. Ventura County
                                                                       Ojai                     Ventura County
                          Labor Force Status                 Persons        Percent        Persons        Percent
                 Population 16 years and over                     6,023         100%          623,606        100%
                   In labor force                                 3,765        62.5%          419,563       67.3%
                     Civilian labor force                         3,746        62.2%          415,148       66.6%
                      Employed                                    3,443        91.9%          385,262       92.8%
                      Unemployed                                    303         8.1%            29,886        7.2%
                     Armed Forces                                    19         0.3%             4,415        0.7%
                   Not in labor force                             2,258        37.5%          204,043       32.7%
                 Source: Bureau of the Census, 2006-2010 American Community Survey, Table DP-3.
According to recent Employment Development Department data, the largest industry
sectors for city residents were education (27%) and leisure (21%) (Figure II-3). A substantial
proportion of the city’s working residents were also employed in the agriculture,
professional and retail sectors.
                                                                  19                                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                          Figure II-3
                                  Ojai Employment by Sectors
        2.      Projected Job Growth
Future housing needs are affected by the number and type of new jobs created during
this planning period. Table II-10 shows projected job growth by industry for the Oxnard-
Thousand Oaks-Ventura MSA (Ventura County) for the period 2008-2018. Total
employment in Ventura County is expected to grow by about 8% during this 10-year
period. The overall growth is expected to add 26,500 new jobs and bring the
employment of Ventura County to over 371,000 by 2018. The industries with the largest
projected job growth are Education/Health Care/Social Assistance, Leisure/Hospitality,
Professional and Business Services, and Accommodation/Food Services.
                                              20                            December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                             II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                                        Table II-10
                                           2008-2018 Industry Employment Projections
                             Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura Metropolitan Statistical Area
                                                                                                                     Annual Average            Employment
 NAICS                                                                                                                Employment                  Change
 Code            Industry Title                                                                                      2008         2018       Jobs Percent
                 Total Employment                                                                                 344,900 371,400           26,500             7.7
                 Self Employment (A)                                                                                 25,500      26,000         500            2.0
                 Unpaid Family Workers (B)                                                                              800          900        100           12.5
                 Private Household Workers (C)                                                                        2,200        2,600        400           18.2
                 Total Farm                                                                                          25,100      26,700       1,600            6.4
                 Total Nonfarm                                                                                    291,300 315,200           23,900             8.2
 1133,21          Mining and Logging                                                                                  1,200        1,300        100            8.3
 23               Construction                                                                                       16,700      18,000       1,300            7.8
 31-33            Manufacturing                                                                                      35,900      37,000       1,100            3.1
 22,48-49         Transportation, Warehousing, and Utilities                                                          6,000        6,500        500            8.3
 22                Utilities                                                                                          1,000        1,200        200           20.0
 48-49             Transportation and Warehousing                                                                     5,000        5,300        300            6.0
 51                Information                                                                                        5,600        5,700        100            1.8
 52-53             Financial Activities                                                                              21,100      21,700         600            2.8
 54-56            Professional and Business Services                                                                 38,300      41,900       3,600            9.4
 61-62            Education Services, Health Care, and Social Assistance                                             31,800      37,200       5,400           17.0
 71-72            Leisure and Hospitality                                                                            31,500      35,800       4,300           13.7
 71                Arts, entertainment, and Recreation                                                                5,100        5,800        700           13.7
 72                Accommodation and Food Services                                                                   26,500      30,000       3,500           13.2
 81                Other Services (excludes 814-Private Household Workers)                                           10,000      10,800         800            8.0
                  Government                                                                                         43,100      44,900       1,800            4.2
                    Federal Government                                                                                7,300        7,400        100            1.4
                    State and Local Government                                                                       35,800      37,500       1,700            4.7
 Notes:
 (A) Self-Employed persons work for profit or fees in their own business, profession, trade, or farm. Only the unincorporated self-employed are included in this
 category. The estimated and projected employment numbers include all workers who are primarily self-employed and wage and salary workers who hold a
 secondary job as a self-employed worker.
 (B) Unpaid family workers are those persons who work without pay for 15 or more hours per week on a farm or in a business operated by a member of the
 household to whom they are related by birth or marriage.
 (C) Private Household Workers are employed as domestic workers whose primary activities are to maintain the household.
     Industry employment is based on the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) program.
 Source: California Employment Development Department, March 2009 Benchmark
D.          Housing Stock Characteristics
This section presents an evaluation of the characteristics of the community’s housing
stock and helps in identifying and prioritizing needs. The factors evaluated include the
number and type of housing units, recent growth trends, age and condition, tenure,
vacancy, housing costs, affordability, and assisted affordable units at-risk of loss due to
conversion to market-rate. A housing unit is defined as a house, apartment, mobile
home, or group of rooms, occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters.
                                                                                21                                                        December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                            II. Housing Needs Assessment
        1.      Housing Type
As of 2010, the housing stock in Ojai was comprised mostly of single-family detached
homes, which made up over 68% of all units, while multi-family units comprised about 22%
of housing units. About 10% of units were single-family attached (condo) units. Table II-11
provides a breakdown of the housing stock by type in 2010.
                                                          Table II-11
                                                Housing by Type - 2010
                                                               Ojai          Ventura County
                           Structure Type
                                                         Units        %     Units         %
                     Single-family detached              2,317      68.5% 182,703      64.9%
                     Single-family attached               320        9.5%  30,893      11.0%
                     Multi-family 2-4 units               430       12.7%  15,000       5.3%
                     Multi-family 5+ units                315        9.3%  41,779      14.8%
                     Mobile Homes                          0         0.0%  11,320       4.0%
                     Total units                         3,382      100%  281,695      100%
                     Source: Department of Finance, 2013
        2.      Housing Age and Conditions
Housing age is often an important indicator of housing condition. Housing units built prior
to 1978 before stringent limits on the amount of lead in paint were imposed, may have
interior or exterior building components coated with lead-based paint. Housing units built
before 1970 are the most likely to need rehabilitation and to have lead-based paint in
deteriorated condition. Lead-based paint becomes hazardous to children under age six
and to pregnant women when it peels off walls or is pulverized by lead-based paint
coated windows and doors opening and closing.
Table II-12 shows the age distribution of the housing stock in Ojai as reported in the 2010
Census. This table shows that the majority of units were constructed prior to 1970. These
findings suggest that there may be strong need for maintenance and rehabilitation,
including remediation of lead-based paint, for a large proportion of the City’s housing
stock.
                                                               22                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                             II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                               Table II-12
                                                        Age of Housing Stock
                                             Year Built                   Units             % of Total
                                     2005 or later                         57                  1.7%
                                     2000-04                               86                  2.6%
                                     1990-99                               134                 4.1%
                                     1980-89                               355                10.8%
                                     1970-79                               753                23.0%
                                     1960-69                               394                12.0%
                                     1950-59                               775                23.7%
                                     1940-49                               287                 8.8%
                                     1939 or earlier                       435                13.3%
                                   Total Units                            3,276               100%
                                   Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-4
Independent field surveys by City Building and Planning staff were conducted during
2007 to better assess the condition of housing in Ojai. The results are depicted in Table 39
and suggest less overall need as opposed to data reported in the 2000 Census; 47 total
substandard units were identified in the surveys as opposed to 60 units using Census
definitions (i.e., lacking of plumbing, electrical and similar deficiencies). The survey data
also suggest that the majority of substandard conditions are largely cosmetic (i.e.,
deferred maintenance) as opposed to those needing major rehabilitation (Table II-13). In
sum total, 14 dwellings were identified as candidates for replacement (i.e., dilapidation
and functional obsolescence).
                                                               Table II-13
                                             Housing Conditions Survey Results
                                                     Single-Family                   Multi-Family                Total
                  Condition
                                                   Units           %           Units             %        Units        %
        Sound                                             0          0%                2             9%         2        4%
        Deferred Maintenance                             12         48%               15            68%       27        57%
        Deteriorated                                      4         16%                0             0%         4        9%
        Dilapidated                                       3         12%                5            23%         8       17%
        Functional Obsolescence                           6         24%                0             0%         6       13%
        Total                                            25        100%               22          100%        47       100%
        Source: Windshield Surveys, City of Ojai, Community Development Department, 2007.
                                                                      23                                             December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                               II. Housing Needs Assessment
        3.      Vacancy
According to the state Department of Finance, the housing vacancy rate in Ojai was
approximately 8% in 2012. For the county as a whole, the vacancy rate was estimated to
be just over 5% (Table II-14).
                                                  Table II-14
                                      Housing Vacancy Rates –
                                   Ventura County Jurisdictions
                                                                         Vacancy
                                  Jurisdiction                              Rate
                                  Camarillo                                  4.66%
                                  Fillmore                                   5.71%
                                  Moorpark                                   2.37%
                                  Ojai                                       7.99%
                                  Oxnard                                     5.64%
                                  Port Hueneme                             13.09%
                                  San Buenaventura                           5.58%
                                  Santa Paula                                4.59%
                                  Simi Valley                                2.99%
                                  Thousand Oaks                              3.50%
                                  Unincorporated Area                        8.76%
                                  County Total                               5.25%
                                  Source: Cal. Department of Finance Table E-5, 2012
        4.      Housing Cost
a.      Housing Affordability Criteria
State law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on
the area (i.e., county) median income (“AMI”): extremely-low (30% or less of AMI), very-
low (31-50% of AMI), low (51-80% of AMI), moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above
moderate (over 120% of AMI). Housing affordability is based on the relationship between
household income and housing expenses. According to HUD and the California
Department of Housing and Community Development, housing is considered
“affordable” if the monthly payment is no more than 30% of a household’s gross income.
In some areas (such as Ventura County), these income limits may be increased to adjust
for high housing costs.
Table II-15 shows 2013 affordable rent levels and estimated affordable purchase prices
for housing in Ventura County by income category. Based on state-adopted standards,
the maximum affordable monthly rent for extremely-low-income households is $670, while
the maximum affordable rent for very-low-income households is $1,116. The maximum
affordable rent for low-income households is $1,780, while the maximum for moderate-
income households is $2,679. These figures are based on a 4-person household and are
adjusted for different household sizes.
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage
interest rates and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments,
                                                         24                                         December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                        II. Housing Needs Assessment
homeowner association fees, property insurance rates, etc. With this caveat, the
maximum home purchase prices by income category shown in Table II-15 have been
estimated based on typical conditions.
                                                             Table II-15
                              Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs –
                                                          Ventura County
                                                                                                     Affordable Price
            2013 County Median Income = $89,300               Income Limits       Affordable Rent         (est.)
           Extremely Low (<30%)                                   $26,800              $670                 --
           Very Low (31-50%)                                      $44,650             $1,116                --
           Low (51-80%)                                           $71,200             $1,780            $250,000
           Moderate (81-120%)                                    $107,150             $2,679            $400,000
           Above moderate (120%+)                                $107,150+            $2,679+           $400,000+
           Assumptions:
           -Based on a family of 4
           -30% of gross income for rent or PITI
           -10% down payment, 4% interest, 1.25% taxes & insurance, $200 HOA dues
           Source: Cal. HCD; J.H. Douglas & Associates
b.      For-Sale Housing
Median housing sales price statistics for Ventura County during 2012 (Table II-16) show
that housing in Ojai is generally more expensive than most areas of the county. The
median single-family sales price was $445,000, while the median price for condos was
$280,000. Based on the estimated affordable purchase prices shown in Table II-15, very
few single-family homes or condos are likely to be affordable to low-income residents.
These data illustrate that public subsidies are required to reduce sales prices to a level
that is affordable to lower-income homebuyers.
                                                                     25                                          December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                        II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                Table II-16
                                        Housing Sales Prices 2012 –
                                             Ventura County
                                           Single Family Residences            Condominiums
              Jurisdiction     Zip Code   SFR       Price       % chg    Condos    Price    % chg
              Countywide                   7,234         $406       2.7%   2,469      $242    3.1%
              Camarillo         93010        417         $420       1.2%     123      $298    4.4%
              Camarillo         93012        331         $494       4.9%     276      $268   -2.5%
              Fillmore          93015        150         $261      -3.4%       12     $153   20.1%
              Moorpark          93021        374         $475      -3.4%       76     $218   -3.1%
              Newbury Park      91320        483         $528       1.5%     119      $320   20.6%
              Oak Park          91377        156         $635       1.8%       80     $328   -7.6%
              Oak View          93022         80         $300      -1.8%        1     $170      n/a
              Ojai              93023        255         $445       6.0%       17     $280    3.7%
              Oxnard            93030        332         $313      -2.8%       79     $240    1.3%
              Oxnard            93033        389         $246       2.3%       87     $159   -5.6%
              Oxnard            93035        336         $406      -3.2%     210      $320   -3.5%
              Oxnard            93036        317         $310       3.3%     110      $202   -5.6%
              Piru              93040          9         $190    -15.6%         0       n/a     n/a
              Port Hueneme      93041        103         $250      -3.8%     209      $169   -1.7%
              Santa Paula       93060        152         $269       7.7%       44     $114   18.8%
              Simi Valley       93063        549         $380       1.3%     147      $215    0.0%
              Simi Valley       93065        844         $390       2.6%     197      $260    0.0%
              Somis             93066         26         $775     12.2%         0       n/a     n/a
              Thousand Oaks     91360        455         $461      -0.9%       88     $235    6.8%
              Thousand Oaks     91362        367         $690       0.7%     256      $330    6.1%
              Ventura           93001        251         $377     14.0%        68     $209   -3.7%
              Ventura           93003        376         $403       3.2%     178      $182    3.7%
              Ventura           93004        257         $379      -1.6%       30     $258   -2.8%
              Westlake Village  91361        168         $885       9.3%     213      $459   -2.0%
c.       Rental Housing
An internet search of available rental units in Ojai during August 2013 found rents ranging
from $895 to over $2,500 per month 2, with those units at the upper end of the range
being single-family homes.
When market rents are compared to the amounts lower-income households can afford
to pay (Table II-15), it is clear that extremely-low and very-low-income households have
difficulty finding rental housing without overpaying. However, most rental units fall within
the affordable range for low- and moderate-income households.
E.       Special Needs
Certain groups have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing due to
special circumstances. Such circumstances may be related to one’s employment and
  http://www.trulia.com/for_rent/Ojai,CA/
2
                                                      26                                       December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                               II. Housing Needs Assessment
income, family characteristics, disability, or other conditions. As a result, some Ojai
residents may experience a higher prevalence of overpayment, overcrowding, or other
housing problems.
State Housing Element law defines “special needs” groups to include persons with
disabilities, the elderly, large households, female-headed households with children,
homeless people, and farm workers. This section contains a discussion of the housing
needs facing each of these groups.
        1.      Persons with Disabilities
Disabilities may include sensory difficulties (vision, hearing, etc.), cognitive difficulties,
mobility difficulties or self-care difficulties. Such issues may make independent living
problematic.
Due to Ojai’s small population, disability data was not reported in the most recent ACS.
Housing opportunities for persons with disabilities can be expanded through housing
assistance programs and providing universal design features such as widened doorways,
ramps, lowered countertops, single-level units and ground floor units. During the prior
planning period the City amended the Municipal Code to establish procedures to
ensure reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities pursuant to Government
Code Sec. 65008 and 65583 (SB 520).
Developmentally Disabled
As defined by federal law, “developmental disability” means a severe, chronic disability
of an individual that:
           •    Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental
                and physical impairments;
           •    Is manifested before the individual attains age 22;
           •    Is likely to continue indefinitely;
           •    Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the following
                areas of major life activity: a) self-care; b) receptive and expressive
                language; c) learning; d) mobility; e) self-direction; f) capacity for
                independent living; or g) economic self-sufficiency;
           •    Reflects the individual’s need for a combination and sequence of special,
                interdisciplinary, or generic services, individualized supports, or other forms
                of assistance that are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually
                planned and coordinated.
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According to the U.S.
Administration on Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage
of the population that can be defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. Many
developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a
conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group
living environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals
                                                  27                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                            II. Housing Needs Assessment
may require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy
are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in
supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s
living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-
based services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and
their families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental
centers, and two community-based facilities. Ojai is served by the Tri-Counties Regional
Center 3 (TCRC) which is based in Santa Barbara and operates a field office in Oxnard. As
of 2011 the Center served approximately 11,300 clients and had 280 staff persons. TCRC
reported that it assisted 144 Ojai residents in 2012. Any resident who has a developmental
disability that originated before age 18 is eligible for services. Services are offered to
people with developmental disabilities based on Individual Program Plans and may
include: Adult day programs; advocacy; assessment/consultation; behavior
management programs; diagnosis and evaluation; independent living services; infant
development programs; information and referrals; mobility training; prenatal diagnosis;
residential care; respite care; physical and occupational therapy; transportation;
consumer, family vendor training; and vocational training. TCRC also coordinates the
state-mandated Early Start program, which provides services for children under age
three who have or are at substantial risk of having a developmental disability.
         2.      Elderly
According to ACS estimates, approximately 32% of owner households and 18% of renter
households in Ojai were headed by someone age 65 or older (Table II-17). Many elderly
persons are dependent on fixed incomes and many have disabilities. Elderly
homeowners may be physically unable to maintain their homes or cope with living alone.
The housing needs of this group can be partially addressed through smaller units, second
units on lots with existing homes, shared living arrangements, congregate housing and
housing assistance programs.
  www.tri-counties.org
3
                                               28                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                          Table II-17
                                            Elderly Households by Tenure
                                                               Owner                     Renter
                      Householder Age               Households           %   Households            %
                   Under 65 years                       1,167           68%     1,024             82%
                   65 to 74 years                        248            14%        73             6%
                   75 to 84 years                        171            10%        75             6%
                   85 years and over                     134            8%         76             6%
                Total Households                        1,720          100%     1,248            100%
                Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25007
        3.      Large Households
Household size is an indicator of need for large units. Large households are defined as
those with five or more members. Recent ACS data reported that about 8% of owner
households and about 15% of renter households had five or more members (Table II-18).
This distribution indicates a relatively low need for large units with four or more bedrooms,
and there are significantly more small households with one or two persons in Ojai.
                                                          Table II-18
                                              Household Size by Tenure
                                                               Owners                Renters
                           Household Size
                                                     Households          %  Households          %
                    1 person                              298         17.3%    561           45.0%
                    2 persons                             783         45.5%    343           27.5%
                    3 persons                             251         14.6%    101            8.1%
                    4 persons                             242         14.1%     62            5.0%
                    5 persons                              83         4.8%     129           10.3%
                    6 persons                              41          2.4%     52            4.2%
                    7+ persons                             22         1.3%       0            0.0%
                    Total households                     1,720        100%    1,248           100%
                    Source: 2006-2010 ACS Table B25009
        4.      Female-Headed Households
According to ACS estimates, about 11% of owner households and 18% of renter
households were headed by a female (Table II-19). While female-headed households
represent a relatively small portion of all households, they often have special challenges
                                                                29                                    December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                       II. Housing Needs Assessment
of balancing work and childcare responsibilities. All of the City’s efforts to increase the
supply of affordable housing respond to the needs of female-headed households.
                                                   Table II-19
                                             Household Type by Tenure
                                                               Owners                 Renters
                           Household Type
                                                        Households       %     Households        %
            Married couple family                          1,505       50.7%       255         20.4%
            Male householder, no wife present               165        5.6%        127         10.2%
            Female householder, no husband present          336       11.3%        221         17.7%
            Non-family households                           962        32.4%       645         51.7%
            Total households                               2,968      100.0%      1,248       100.0%
            Source: 2006-2010 ACS Table B11012
         5.       Farm Workers
Unlike most areas of the Southern California metropolitan area, agriculture is still a
significant component of the economy in Ventura County, with a total annual crop
value of over $1.8 billion in 2011 4. There is strong public sentiment for retaining agricultural
production, as reflected in the SOAR (Save Open Space and Agricultural Resources)
initiatives that have been approved by voters. Figure II-3 illustrates the wide variety of
crops produced in the county.
    Ventura County Agricultural Commissioner, 2011 Crop Report
4
                                                        30                                      December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                              II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                            Figure II-3
                                  Ventura County Agricultural Production Areas
Accurate statistics regarding agricultural workers in Ventura County, especially migrant
workers, are difficult to obtain. One source of data for the Ventura County farmworker
population is the Migrant Health Program, housed in the federal Bureau of Primary Health
Care, Health Resources and Services Administration 5. In their most recent study (2000),
MHP researchers estimated the number of farm workers in several categories: total
number of farm workers, the number of seasonal farm workers, and the number of
migrant farm workers (those who establish temporary residences in connection with their
work), as well as the total number of people living in farm worker households (Table II-20).
                                                              Table II-20
                                         Ventura County Farm Workers – 2000
                                                                                                          Farmer Workers +
                                                             Migrant Farm                                 Other Household
                                    Farm Workers               Workers            Seasonal Workers            Members
             Totals                     35,181                   16,289                 18,892                 62,605
             Source: Bureau of Primary Health Care, Health Resources and Services Administration, 2000
As part of its technical assistance to member jurisdictions for the 2013 Housing Element
Cycle, the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) compiled a variety of
demographic and employment statistics 6 that included information related to farm
workers. According to SCAG, about 11,000 persons living in Ventura County are
5   Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers Enumeration Profile Study: California,” Alice C. Larsen, Ph. D., Migrant
    Health Program, Bureau of Primary Health Care, Health Resources and Services Administration. September
    2000.
  http://rtpscs.scag.ca.gov/Pages/Housing-Elements-2012.aspx
6
                                                                     31                                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                    II. Housing Needs Assessment
employed in agricultural occupations (Table II-21). Of these, 30 reported Ojai as their
place of residence (0.3% of the county total).
                                                      Table II-21
                                          Agricultural Employment –
                                           Ojai and Ventura County
                                                                          % of County
                                    Farm Workers                  Workers     Total
                      Farm workers living in Ventura County        11,091    100%
                      Farm workers who live in Ojai                  30       0.3%
                      Source: SCAG based on 2005-2009 ACS
With its mild climate, agriculture is a year-round activity in Ventura County, and most
farm laborers are permanent non-migrant and seasonal laborers. As such, the housing
needs of farmworkers are primarily addressed through the provision of permanent
affordable housing, such as lower-cost apartments and single-family homes. In
compliance with the Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5
and 17021.6), the Municipal Code allows farmworker housing for up to 12 units or 36
persons by-right (i.e., without a CUP or other discretionary approval) in zones allowing
agricultural uses.
        6.      Homeless Persons
Homelessness is a continuing national problem that persists within local cities and
communities including Ventura County. During the past two decades, an increasing
number of single persons have remained homeless year after year and have become
the most visible of all homeless persons. Other persons (particularly families) have
experienced shorter periods of homelessness. However, they are often replaced by other
families and individuals in a seemingly endless cycle of homelessness.
The homeless count conducted by the Ventura County Homeless and Housing Coalition
(VCHHC) in January 2012 reported 41 homeless persons in Ojai, which represents about
2% of the county total (Table II-22). The most recent survey by VCHHC identified a
number of sub-populations of the homeless, as shown in Table II-23. These include families
that might be displaced through evictions, women and children displaced through
abusive family life, persons with substance abuse problems, or personssuffering from
mental illness.
                                                           32                            December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                    II. Housing Needs Assessment
                                                        Table II-22
                                 Ventura County Homeless Count: 2012
                                                                                     % of
                                             Jurisdiction               Number
                                                                                    Total
                                  Camarillo                                30       1.5%
                                  Fillmore                                 16       0.8%
                                  Moorpark                                  5       0.3%
                                  Ojai                                     41       2.1%
                                  Oxnard                                   522     27.0%
                                  Port Hueneme                             12       0.6%
                                  Santa Paula                              60       3.1%
                                  Simi Valley                              284     14.7%
                                  Thousand Oaks                            90       4.6%
                                  Ventura                                  701     36.2%
                                  Unincorporated County                    175      9.0%
                                  Total                                   1,936     100%
                                  Source: County of Ventura 2012 Homeless Count
                                  http://www.vchhc.org/images/PDFs/2012_Ventura_HomelessCo
                                  unt_Report.pdf
                                                        Table II-23
                          Ventura County Homeless Sub-Populations: 2012
                                            Sub-Population                           % of Total
                         Chronic Homeless Persons                                       56%
                         Men                                                            75%
                         Persons with a Developmental Disability                        20%
                         Persons with a Physical Disability                             42%
                         Persons with HIV/AIDS                                           4%
                         Persons with Mental Illness                                    28%
                         Substance Abusers                                              26%
                         Veterans                                                       13%
                         Victims of Domestic Violence                                   22%
                         Women                                                          25%
                         Youth Ages 18 - 24                                              7%
                       Source: 2012 Ventura County Homeless Survey
                       http://www.vchhc.org/images/PDFs/2012_VenturaSurvey.pdf
Although there are myriad causes of homelessness, among the most common causes
are the following:
      •      Substance Abuse and Alcohol
            The 2012 Ventura County survey found that more than one-quarter of
            homeless persons reported problems with alcohol or other substance abuse.
            The Ventura County Housing and Homeless Coalition has identified a need for
            additional treatment facilities with supportive housing. They also recommend
            that a treatment facility be established for youth with drug and alcohol
            addiction.
                                                               33                                        December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                             II. Housing Needs Assessment
            The State of California Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs licenses
            residential facilities and/or certified alcohol and drug programs in Ventura
            County. There are eleven residential facilities and two residential detoxification
            facilities in the county.
      •      Domestic Violence
            Nearly one-quarter of homeless persons in Ventura County reported being
            victims of domestic violence. The Ventura County Housing and Homeless
            Coalition has identified a need for additional shelters for battered women and
            runaway youth. These individuals also require counseling and assistance to
            become self-sufficient or return to their families. Victims of household violence
            can become homeless as a result of escaping abusive living environments.
            They also suffer physical and psychological trauma as a result of the abuse.
            Many of these persons (almost exclusively women) are ill equipped to fend for
            themselves and their children. Without access to low-income housing, reliable
            transportation and supportive counseling they are at a greater disadvantage
            and create special homeless needs. Common issues faced by battered
            women are lack of jobs, lack of child care, lack of affordable housing,
            underemployment, codependent substance abuse, and a need for
            marketable skills.
      •      Mental Illness
            Persons who are homeless and mentally ill have special needs that may not be
            served in traditional homeless shelters. Many are at risk in the community,
            frequently being victimized and often suffering from physical and mental
            illnesses due to lack of proper nourishment and shelter. Many of the homeless
            mentally ill do not avail themselves of services or cannot be served by
            traditional services due to their untreated psychiatric symptoms, active
            substance abuse, histories of abusive behaviors.
            The 2012 survey reported that 28% of homeless persons in Ventura County
            suffered from some form of mental illness. Ojai, as part of the Ventura County
            service area, receives assistance with the homeless mentally ill from the
            Ventura County Behavioral Health Department.
Although there are currently no emergency shelters within the City of Ojai, there are
services for the homeless and year-round shelters located in the larger population
centers of Ventura and Oxnard, where most homeless persons congregate. Senate Bill
(SB) 2 of 2007 amended Government Code Secs. 65582, 65583 and 65589.5 to strengthen
the planning requirements for emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing. SB
2 requires that shelters be allowed “by-right” (i.e., without a conditional use permit or
other discretionary approval) in at least one zoning district. In accordance with SB 2, the
City amended the Municipal Code during the previous planning period to allow
emergency shelters in the Business Professional Commercial (BP) zone.
                                                34                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                               II. Housing Needs Assessment
F.          Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion
As part of the Housing Element, jurisdictions must evaluate the potential for deed-
restricted low-income housing units to convert from affordable to market rate status
within the ten-year period 2013-2023. The inventory includes all multi-family rental units
assisted under federal, state and/or local programs including federal and state grants,
bond programs, redevelopment projects, local in-lieu fees, housing trusts funds,
inclusionary housing and density bonuses. The inventory covers all units that are eligible
for conversion to market rate housing due to termination of subsidy contracts, mortgage
prepayment, or expiring use restrictions. This inventory was compiled through City staff,
Ventura County Area Housing Authority and California Housing Partnership Corporation.
There are four assisted projects in the City: Whispering Oaks (a 101-unit senior rental
project owned and managed by the Ventura County Area Housing Authority);
Montgomery Oaks (a 21-unit family rental project owned and managed by Cabrillo
Economic Development Corporation); and two Section 8 property-based family rental
projects totaling 15 units (owned and managed by the Ventura County Area Housing
Authority). None of the properties is at risk of conversion within the 2023 time horizon
(Table II-24).
                                                         Table II-24
                                      Assisted Affordable Housing Developments –
                                                             Ojai
                                                       Property    Assisted                                  Program
          Project                      Address                               Target Group       Expiration
                                                        Owner       Units                                      Type
                                                                              V. L. and Low                   Public
 Whispering Oaks                 999 E. Ojai Avenue    VCAHA         101                          None
                                                                            Income Seniors                   Housing
                                                                                                           Tax Credits
                                                                              V.L and Low
 Montgomery Oaks                 508 Montgomery St.     CEDC          21                          2063       and Tax
                                                                             Income Family
                                                                                                            Increment
                                                                                                                Tax
                                                                              V.L and Low
 Project Based Section 8         211 Summer Street     VCAHA          15                          2043     Increment &
                                                                             Income Family
                                                                                                             Section 8
                                                                                                           Tax Credits
                                                                              V.L and Low
 Sycamore Homes                 107-213 Olive Mill Ln.  CEDC          25                          2033       and Tax
                                                                             Income Family
                                                                                                            Increment
 Source: City of Ojai, 2013.
 Notes:
 VCAHA = Ventura County Area Housing Authority
 CEDC = Cabrillo Economic Development Corporation
G.          Future Growth Needs
            1.           Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to
plan for anticipated growth. The latest RHNA was adopted by the Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG) in October 2012 and covers the projection period of
January 2014 to October 2021. The future need for housing is determined primarily by the
forecasted growth in households in a community. Each new household, created by a
                                                               35                                     December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                II. Housing Needs Assessment
child moving out of a parent's home, by a family moving to a community for
employment, and so forth, creates the need for a housing unit. The housing need for new
households is then adjusted to maintain a desirable level of vacancy to promote housing
choice and mobility. An adjustment is also made to account for units expected to be lost
due to demolition, natural disaster, or conversion to non-housing uses. The sum of these
factors – household growth, vacancy need, and replacement need – determines the
construction need for a community. Total housing need is then distributed among four
income categories 7 on the basis of the county’s income distribution, with adjustments to
avoid an over-concentration of lower-income households in any community.
          2.      2014-2021 Ojai Growth Needs
The total housing growth need for the City of Ojai during the 2014-2021 projection period
is 371 units. This total is distributed by income category as shown in Table II-25.
                                                          Table II-25
                                2014-2021 Regional Housing Growth Needs –
                                                               Ojai
                           Very Low*            Low          Moderate       Above Mod    Total
                               87**              59              70             155       371
                             23.5%             15.9%           18.9%           41.8%    100%
                          Source: SCAG 2012
                          Notes:
                          *Includes the Extremely-Low Category
                          **144 of these are assumed to be Extremely-Low units
A discussion of the City’s resources for addressing this growth need is provided in Chapter
III.
7    Although AB 2634 requires Housing Elements to consider the needs of extremely-low-income households,
     the RHNA does not quantify the need for this category. State law allows individual jurisdictions to establish
     the extremely-low-income need as one-half of the very-low-income RHNA allocation.
                                                                 36                                  December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                   III. Resources and Opportunities
III.     RESOURCES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A.       Land Resources
Section 65583(a)(3) of the Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an
“inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites
having potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and
public facilities and services to these sites.” A detailed analysis of sites with potential for
housing development is provided in Appendix B. The results of this analysis are
summarized in Table III-1, below. The table shows that the city’s land inventory exceeds
the RHNA allocation for the 2014-2021 period. The Housing Action Plan (Chapter V)
contains programs to encourage and facilitate development of housing for all economic
segments of the community.
                                                        Table III-1
                                                 Land Inventory Summary
                                                                          Income Category
                                   Category                        Lower Mod         Above    Total
     SPO Overlay Zone (Table B-2)                                   176    -            -      176
     Other vacant and underutilized land (Table B-3)                 -   >70          >155    >225
     Potential second units & home splits                            8     8            2      18
     Total Potential Units                                          184  >70          >155    >371
     RHNA 2014-2021                                                 146   70           155     371
     Adequate Sites?                                                Yes  Yes          Yes      Yes
     Source: City of Ojai Planning Dept., 2013
A discussion of public facilities and infrastructure needed to serve future development is
contained in Section IV.B, Non-Governmental Constraints. There are currently no known
service limitations that would preclude the level of development described in the RHNA,
although developers will be required to pay fees or construct public improvements prior
to or concurrent with development.
B.       Financial and Administrative Resources
         1.           State and Federal Resources
Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG) - The City of Ojai is eligible to
receive federal Community Development Block Grant funding annually through the its
“small cities” association with the Cities of Fillmore, Moorpark, Port Hueneme, Santa
Paula, and the County of Ventura. These funds are available for affordable housing
projects and public facilities serving low income residents, including new housing
construction, ownership and rental rehabilitation, infrastructure improvements and the
provision of public facilities and services for low income residents. The balance of this
funding can be utilized for economic development and planning activities. These funds
are allocated on a formula basis with Ojai’s share being 3.2% of the annual allocation.
                                                            37                             December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       III. Resources and Opportunities
Based on the most recent funding cycle, and allowing for a modest 2% annual increase
in totally funding, it is expected that Ojai may receive approximately $500,000 during the
forthcoming Housing Element cycle.
HOME Investment Partnership Program (HOME) - Federal HOME funds can be used for a
variety of activities that promote affordable rental housing and homeownership for low-
and very-low-income households. Funds may be used for building acquisition, new
construction, reconstruction, moderate or substantial rehabilitation, first-time homebuyer
assistance, and tenant-based assistance. Grant recipients must provide a local match
ranging between 25% and 50% depending on program activity. Unlike CDBG monies that
are allocated by formula, HOME funds are channeled through the County of Ventura
and are available on a competitive basis.
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program - The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)
Program was created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 to provide an alternate method of
funding low-and moderate-income housing. Each state receives a tax credit, based
upon population, toward funding housing that meets program guidelines. The tax credits
are then used to leverage private capital into new construction or acquisition and
rehabilitation of affordable housing. Limitations on projects funded under the LIHTC
program include minimum requirements that a certain percentage of units remain rent-
restricted, based upon median income.
Other State and Federal Resources – A wide variety of state programs provide funding
assistance for housing, as summarized in Table III-2.
        2.      Local Resources
Ojai Redevelopment Agency - Prior to 2012, State law required that redevelopment
agencies set aside no less than 20% of all tax increment revenue derived within
designated project areas for activities that increase, improve or preserve the supply of
housing affordable to persons of low- and moderate-income. Statutes then in effect also
required that 15% of all new privately developed housing and 30% of Agency-assisted
housing within the Project Area must be made affordable to persons and families of low-
and moderate-income. However, as a consequence of the state legislature’s approval
of AB 1x26 and subsequent rulings of the California Supreme Court, redevelopment
agencies in California were dissolved in 2012 and this source of funding for affordable
housing is no longer available.
                                              38                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                       III. Resources and Opportunities
                                                             Table III-2
                                             State Housing Program Summary
                    Program                                                            Description
                Rental Programs
                                                  Low-interest loans for development of affordable rental housing, disabled persons,
      Multifamily Housing Program (MHP)
                                                  low income students and supporting services.
       Local Housing Trust Fund Program           Matching grants to local agencies who operate local housing trust funds.
    Affordable Housing Innovation Program         Acquisition financing for the development or preservation of affordable housing.
  Construction Liability Insurance Reform Pilot
                                                  Predevelopment grants to reduce insurance rates for condominium development.
                Program (CLIRPP)
          Homeownership Programs
                                                  Grants and loans by HCD to local public agencies and non-profits to fund local
                    CalHome
                                                  homeownership programs and developments.
                                                  Grants by HCD to local public agencies that adopt measures to encourage
 Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods
                                                  affordable housing. Grant funds must be used for downpayment assistance for low
                     (BEGIN)
                                                  and moderate income homebuyers.
                                                  Grants to organizations to assist low and moderate income households who build
    CalHome: Self-Help Housing Set Aside
                                                  their own homes.
    Mobile Home Park Resident Ownership           Low interest loans to assist residents to acquire resident organization, non-profit
                Program (MPROP)                   sponsor or local public agency to purchase a mobilehome park.
      Innovative Homeownership Program            Special financing to increase homeowership.
            Special Needs Housing
   Joe Serna Jr. Farmworker Housing Grant
                                                  Grants and loans for development of rental and ownership housing for farmworkers.
         Program (JSJFWHG) - General
   Emergency Housing Assistance Program
                                                  Grants for development of emergency shelters (no operating subsidy).
               (EHAP & EHAPCD)
     California Homebuyer's Downpayment          Deferred payment down payment assistance loans for first-time moderate income
         Assistance Program (CHDAP)              homebuyers.
                                                 Short term low interest loans to local government agencies for site acquisition and
    Residential Development Loan Program
                                                 predevelopment related to infill and owner-occupied housing.
 Homeownership in Revitalized Areas Program      Downpayment assistance targeted to first-time low income homebuyers purchasing in
                     (HIRAP)                     revitalization areas.
 School Facility Fee Downpayment Assistance
                                                 Downpayment assistance grants for homebuyers of newly constructed homes.
                     Program
               Mortgage Insurance                Insurance for home mortgages.
    Extra Credit Teacher's Home Purchase         Provides up to 100% financing to eligible teachers, administrators and staff members
  Assistance (Extra Credit Teacher Program)      working in low performing schools.
                                                 Supplemental financing for “at-risk" subsidized rental developments receiving bond
       Preservation Opportunity Program
                                                 financing from CalHFA.
   Source: State of California, January 2009
Non-Profit Housing Organizations - In addition to direct funding, Ojai has access to
indirect resources through alliances with local non-profit housing organizations. The
organizations most active in Ventura County include: (i) Area Housing Authority of
Ventura County, a political subdivision of the State responsible for providing affordable
housing through rent subsidy programs or by occupancy in one of its housing
developments; (ii) Peoples’ Self-Help Housing Corporation (PSHHC), a private non-profit
housing developer providing design, implementation, technical assistance and property
management of low-income ownership and rental housing; and (iii) Cabrillo Economic
Development Corporation (CEDC), offering construction, property management,
homeownership, counseling and community building services.
                                                                    39                                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                          III. Resources and Opportunities
C.       Energy Conservation Opportunities
Energy efficiency is important not only for conserving natural resources, it has the added
benefit of keeping incidental housing costs in check. It also has public policy
ramifications relative to underwriting the cost of providing affordable housing. As noted
in Section III and codified in Title 25, Section 6920 of the California Code of Regulations,
utility expenses are part of the formula used in computing of maximum rents and sales
prices that may be charged for housing that is made available to target income groups.
High utility costs translate to lower the rent and price thresholds, which in turn result in
larger financial gaps between market rate and affordable housing. Simply put, as
residential energy costs rise, housing affordability declines. As such, it is in the shared
interest of the consumer and City to promote energy conservation. In this regard, there
are three principal means by which to promote efficient use of energy resources: (i)
building regulation; (ii) land use practice; and (iii) education and inducement.
Building Regulation. The City is subject to the California Building Code (“CBC”) that
establishes minimum standards for all classes of construction. A component of the state
Building Code is Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that prescribes minimum
energy conservation features and requires the adoption of energy budgets for all new
development. Beyond the requirements of Code (particularly in regard to existing
homes), the City has the opportunity to promote energy conservation as a condition of
receiving financial assistance for housing rehabilitation programs it may choose to
underwrite. One such approach would be to employ the standards prescribed in the
Code of Federal Regulations (24 CFR 39.7). Property improvements undertaken pursuant
to 24 CFR 39.7 encompass: (i) exterior weatherization consisting of weather-stripping,
caulking and water heater insulation blankets; (ii) interior weatherization consisting of
attic insulation, duct wrap and flow restrictors for showerheads and sink aerators; (iii)
energy-efficient retrofit consisting of water saver toilets, wall insulation, floor insulation,
space conditioning equipment, set back thermostats, pipe insulation, electronic ignition
of forced air furnaces and gas cooking appliances; and (iv) energy-efficient lighting.
Land Use Practices. The goal of promoting compact development and resulting
efficiencies is very relevant in the Housing Element update, in particular, mixed-use
development policies that foster smart growth principles by: (i) creating affordable
housing near employment, thereby reducing automobile dependency; and (ii)
concentrating growth in existing urbanized areas, thereby maximizing existing
infrastructure. In the prior Housing Element cycle, the City advanced these principals by
revamping the Village Mixed Use zone district to induce infill development. A companion
effort is presently underway to develop Green Building Guidelines that promote
sustainable designs and environmentally responsible construction. It is anticipated that
the Guidelines will embody the principals of LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design) that promotes a whole-building approach to sustainability by
recognizing performance in five key areas of human and environmental health:
sustainable site development, water savings, energy efficiency, materials selection, and
indoor environmental quality.
Education and Inducement. According to Southern California Edison, 44% of residential
energy costs are attributed to heating and cooling systems, 33% is attributed to lighting
and appliances, 14% is attributed to water heaters and 9% is attributed to refrigerators.
                                               40                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       III. Resources and Opportunities
SCE further notes that residential consumers can realize significant savings by a variety of
relatively simple practices including insulating water pipes, weather stripping, cleaning
refrigerator coils, using compact fluorescent light bulbs, repairing leaky faucets, sealing
heating and cooling ducts, servicing furnace filters and installing programmable
thermostats. To both assist and incentivize consumers to conserve, SCE offers a variety of
programs; most notable, energy audits, performance incentives, equipment rebates,
design and construction assistance, and technical advice. With the recent advent of the
Green Building initiative, the City has the opportunity to affirmatively further energy
conservation education and avail its residents of programs available though SCE. In
addition, the City can better leverage its own resources by including SCE incentives in
housing rehabilitation programs it may choose to underwrite.
                                             41                                December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element    III. Resources and Opportunities
This page intentionally left blank.
                                       42                   December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                        IV. Constraints
IV. CONSTRAINTS
In planning for the provision of housing, constraints to the development, maintenance
and improvement of housing must be recognized, and jurisdictions must take
appropriate steps to mitigate them where feasible. Local government cannot control
many of these constraints, such as those related to general economic and market
conditions, but others can be addressed. Potential constraints to housing are discussed
below, and include governmental constraints and non-governmental constraints.
A.      Governmental Constraints
Governmental regulations, while intentionally controlling the quality of development in
the community can also, unintentionally, increase the cost of development and thus the
cost of housing. These governmental constraints include land use controls, building codes
and their enforcement, site improvements, fees and other exactions required of
developers, and local development processing and permit procedures.
Land use controls may limit the amount or density of development, thus increasing the
cost per unit. On-site and off-site improvements such as roads, traffic signals on adjacent
streets, or sewer systems may increase an individual project’s costs of development.
Processing and permit requirements may delay construction, increasing financing and/or
overhead costs of a development. The following describes potential governmental
constraints, which may affect the supply and cost of housing in Ojai.
        1.      Land Use Plans and Regulations
a.      General Plan
Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General
Plan to guide its future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic
land uses and density of development within the various areas of the city. Under state
law, the General Plan elements must be internally consistent and the City’s zoning must
be consistent with the General Plan. Thus, the land use plan must provide suitable
locations and densities to implement the policies of the Housing Element.
The Land Use Element provides for five residential land use designations and three flexible
designations, as shown in Table IV-1. The Special Housing Overlay (SPL) designation
accommodates very-low- and low-income housing, as described in the following
discussion of zoning regulations and in Program 6 in the Housing Action Plan (Chapter V).
                                             43                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                          IV. Constraints
                                                          Table IV-1
                                             Residential Land Use Categories
                                                       Ojai General Plan
                                                                              Maximum
                                             Designation                        Density1
                                 Very Low Density Residential                  1 du/acre
                                 Low Density Residential                       2 du/acre
                                 Medium Density Residential                    4 du/acre
                                 Medium High Density Residential               8 du/acre
                                 High Density Residential                     15 du/acre
                                 Village Mixed Use                             8 du/acre
                                 Special Housing Overlay                     No maximum
                                 Specific Plan                           Determined individually
b.       Zoning Designations and Development Standards
As is typical for most California jurisdictions, Ojai has adopted a variety of development
standards for all of its zone districts. These standards are codified in Title 10 of the Ojai
Municipal Code and include requirements for lot area, off-street parking, lot coverage,
density, building height and setbacks. Standards particular to residential construction are set
forth in Table IV-2. With the exception of density and height limits (discussed below), the
City’s development standards are not dissimilar to those imposed in other Ventura County
jurisdictions. Of the ten principal zone districts that allow residential construction, the Village
Mixed Use (VMU) district provides the most flexibility.
                                                          Table IV-2
                                          Residential Development Standards
                             Minimum                          Intensity                Maximum
          Zoning                              Building
                             Lot      Area                    Lot                      Density            Height Limit
          District                            Setbacks                    FAR
                             (Sq.Ft.)                         Coverage                 (units/acre)
          R-O-4                 174,240           Varies         None       None            0.25            Two Stories
          R-O-2                 87,120            Varies         None       None             0.5            Two Stories
          R-O-1                 43,560            Varies         None       None              1             Two Stories
          R-O-1/2               20,000            Varies         35%        None              2             Two Stories
          R-O                   12,000            Varies         35%        None              3             Two Stories
          R-1                   10,000            Varies         35%        None              4             Two Stories
          R-2                   10,000            Varies         35%        None             8.7            Two Stories
          R-3                    9,600            Varies         60%        None            14.5            Two Stories
          R-S                    9,600            Varies         60%        None            14.5            Two Stories
          VMU                    8,500            Varies       35%-70% 0.35-1.00              8               35 Feet
                                                                No limit   No limit
          SPL Overlay             n/a             Varies                                      20           Two Stories1
                                                               specified  specified
          Source: City of Ojai, Community Development Department, Title 10 (Zoning) of the Ojai Municipal Code.
          Notes:
          1. Reflects proposed Code amendment (see Program 6 in Chapter V, Housing Action Plan)
                                                                 44                                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                           IV. Constraints
As shown in Table IV-2, height limits in the City’s multiple-family zones are limited to two-
story construction except in the VMU zone. Currently the zones other than VMU are also
subject to a 30 foot height limit. The City is considering lowering the basic height limit to
25 feet, except for architectural features up to 30 feet, which may be approved through
a design review process if determined to fit the neighborhood and not adversely impact
adjoining properties. VMU is the only zone district that allows residential units and does
not expressly limit the number of building stories. As noted in Program 6 (Chapter V),
consultation with non-profit housing developers confirmed that affordable housing is
feasible in Ojai within a two-story building envelope, therefore a two-story height limit
would not pose an unreasonable constraint to meeting the City’s affordable housing
needs.
c.      Provision of Housing for Lower-Income Households
Low-income housing can be accommodated in all zones permitting residential use,
provided they meet site development standards. These may include multi-family units in
residential or mixed-use zones, or second residential units that are permitted within all of
the single-family residential zones. In order to expand opportunities for lower-income
housing, the Special Housing Overlay (SPL) regulations were amended in the previous
planning period to allow multi-family development by-right at a minimum density of 20
units/acre for sites within the SPL overlay (see also the sites inventory presented in
Appendix B).
d.      Special Needs Housing
Persons with special needs include those in residential care facilities, persons with
disabilities, farm workers, persons needing emergency shelter or transitional living
arrangements, and single room occupancy units. Many of these groups also fall under
the category of extremely low-income households. The City’s provisions for these housing
types are discussed below.
      •      Residential Care Facilities – As defined in Section 10-2.3602 of the Ojai
             Municipal Code, the term “residential care home” means: “…a dwelling
             unit…which provides twenty-four (24) hour nonmedical care of unrelated
             persons who are in need of personal services…” and expressly include
             “…children’s homes; transitional houses; orphanages; rehabilitation centers;
             and self-help group homes.” While the City’s Zoning Ordinance does not make
             expressed reference to shared living arrangements for disabled persons, such
             arrangements are clearly embodied within the definition of residential care
             homes. The Municipal Code allows residential care facilities for six persons or
             less as a permitted use in any residential zone in conformance with state law.
             Residential care facilities for seven or more persons are conditionally permitted
             in the R2 and R3 zones.
      •      Housing for Persons with Disabilities – Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the
             California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose an affirmative duty on
             local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. modifications
             or exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations when such
                                                 45                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                               IV. Constraints
               accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal
               opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The Building Codes adopted by the
               City of Ojai incorporate accessibility standards contained in Title 24 of the
               California Administrative Code. For example, apartment complexes of three or
               more units and condominium complexes of four or more units must be
               designed to accessibility standards. A Reasonable Accommodation
               Ordinance was also adopted in 2013 in conformance with state law.
       •       Farm Worker Housing –Housing for agricultural employees occurs in two types
               of settings: housing accommodations located on farmland that is exclusively
               for farmworkers; or traditional housing that is intended for lower-income
               households but is not restricted to farmworkers.
               The majority of farm laborers in Ventura County are permanent non-migrant
               and seasonal workers. As such, the housing needs of farmworkers are primarily
               addressed through the provision of permanent affordable housing, such as
               apartments, lower-cost single-family homes, and mobile homes.
              The state Employee Housing Act 8 regulates farmworker housing and generally
              requires that facilities with no more than 36 beds (as group quarters) or 12
              separate units be treated as an agricultural land use that is not subject to any
              conditional use permit that is not required of other agricultural uses in the same
              zone. In accordance with state law, the Municipal Code was amended in the
              previous planning period to permit agricultural employee housing by-right in
              the Agriculture and Open Space zoning districts.
       •       Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing – An emergency
               shelter is a facility that provides shelter to homeless families and/or homeless
               individuals on a limited short-term basis. Transitional housing is temporary (often
               six months to two years) housing for a homeless individual or family who is
               transitioning to permanent housing. Supportive housing has no limit on length
               of stay and includes a supportive services component (e.g. job skills training,
               rehabilitation counseling, etc.) to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in
               support of independent living.
               SB 2 of 2007 strengthened the requirements for local government regulations
               regarding emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing. Unless a
               city has sufficient existing shelter facilities to accommodate its need, land use
               regulations must identify at least one zoning district where shelters are a
               permitted use (i.e., do not require a conditional use permit or other
               discretionary review). The Municipal Code was amended in the previous
               planning period to allow emergency shelters with up to 27 beds by-right in the
               Business Professional (BP) zone. This zone designation is the best suited to
               accommodate homeless facilities by virtue of the mixed uses it allows and its
               proximity to complimentary health care facilities. In addition, the BP zone
               allows the most intense development of all zone districts within the City with an
               allowable Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 1.50 and overall lot coverage of 70%.
  California Health and Safety Code Sec. 17021.5 and 17021.6
8
                                                    46                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                        IV. Constraints
             Additional shelter beds may be permitted in the BP subject to a conditional
             use permit. Small emergency shelters for up to six persons are permitted by-
             right in any residential zone.
             The Municipal Code also specifies that transitional and supportive housing are
             residential uses subject to only those requirements that apply to other
             residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
Off-Street Parking Requirements
As shown in Table IV-3, required off-street parking within multiple family zone districts
range from two to three spaces per dwelling. Particularly noteworthy are the standards
applicable to higher density rental units (I.e., 9+ units per acre) which require as many as
two and one-half spaces per dwelling. In order to reduce potential constraints on
affordable housing and housing for persons with special needs, the Municipal Code was
amended in the previous planning period to allow reduced parking requirements for
projects that include off-setting considerations such as restrictions on the number of
vehicles that occupants may own, senior projects with alternative transportation options,
etc.
                                                         Table IV-3
                                        Residential Parking Requirements
                                                                            Zoning District
                Unit Type
                                                  R-2              R-3               R-S               VMU
             Duplex                                  2 covered spaces for each unit.                    n.a.
             Triplex                                 2 covered spaces for each unit.                    n.a.
                                                2 covered spaces plus 1 uncovered guest
             Condominiums                                                                               n.a.
                                                  parking space for each dwelling unit.
                                                 2 covered spaces for each unit, plus 0.5
             Multiple Units (4-8)                uncovered guest parking space for each                 n.a.
                                                             dwelling unit.
                                             1.5 covered spaces for each dwelling unit plus
                                             0.5 uncovered guest parking space for each 1
             Multiple Units (9+)              bedroom unit and 1 uncovered guest parking                n.a.
                                               space for each dwelling unit containing 2 or
                                                            more bedrooms.
                                                                                               Determined by Design
             Mixed Use                                             n.a.
                                                                                                  Review Permit
                                                1 space for each unit with half the spaces
             Senior Projects                  covered, plus 1 guest parking space for each              n.a.
                                                               10 units.
          Source: City of Ojai, Community Development Department, Title 10 (Zoning) of the Ojai Municipal Code.
e.       Second Units
Second units are attached or detached dwelling units that provide complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, cooking and sanitation, located on the same lot as the primary structure.
The City permits the development of second units in all single-family residential zones. In
order to encourage construction of additional second units, in the previous planning
                                                               47                                              December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                       IV. Constraints
period the Municipal Code was amended to eliminate the Design Review Permit
requirement for new second units that do not involve two-story construction or the
alteration of the second story of an existing two-story residence. In addition, the
construction of second units is exempt from the requirements of the City’s Growth
Management regulations. The Code was also amended to allow Home Splits, the division
of a single-family home of at least 2,000 square feet into two separate units without a
Design Review Permit when the project does not involve two-story construction or the
alteration of the second story of an existing two-story residence.
In 2013 the Code was also amended to create a program by which unpermitted units
that existed prior to 2006 may obtain legal non-conforming status. These provisions will
sunset on June 30, 2014.
f.      Mobile Homes and Manufactured Housing
There is an economy of scale in manufacturing homes in a plant rather than on site,
thereby reducing cost. State law precludes local governments from prohibiting the
installation of mobile homes on permanent foundations on single-family lots. It also
declares a mobile home park to be a permitted land use on any land planned and
zoned for residential use, and prohibits requiring the average density in a new mobile
home park to be less than that permitted by the Municipal Code.
The Municipal Code allows mobile homes and manufactured housing on permanent
foundations as a single-family residential use in any zone where single-family homes are
permitted. Mobile homes not on permanent foundations are permitted in the R-1 zone.
Mobile home parks are a conditionally permitted use in all residential zones.
g.      Density Bonus
Pursuant to state law (Government Code Sec. 65915 et seq.), cities and counties must
provide a density increase up to 35% over the otherwise maximum allowable residential
density under the zoning regulations and the Land Use Element of the General Plan (or
bonuses of equivalent financial value) when builders agree to construct housing
developments with units affordable to low- or moderate-income households. The
Municipal Code was amended in conformance with state density bonus law in 2013.
h.      Growth Management Ordinance
The City’s Growth Management Ordinance (GMO) regulates residential construction
through an annual permit allocation process. Similar traffic management-related policies
are embodied in the Air Quality Element and Circulation Element of the City’s General
Plan and limit the amount and intensity of future development through the establishment
of minimum acceptable traffic volumes. In 2013, the GMO was amended to exempt
second units and home splits from the program. The GMO was also amended to
eliminate the differentiation between single-family and multi-family allocation categories
by consolidating these into a single permit allocation pool, and to establish a special
pool to allow future use of unallocated units.
                                              48                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                            IV. Constraints
Current County policy passed in 1988 prohibits discretionary development that may add
any unmitigable traffic on State Highway 33 through Casitas Springs during critical
weekday commuter peak travel periods. This roadway segment has experienced
unacceptable roadway service levels (Level of Service F) for several years and continues
to worsen. Companion traffic management policies are embodied in the Circulation
Element of the City’s General Plan. Policies 1, 2 and 3 have direct impact on residential
growth by limiting the amount and intensity of future development through the
establishment of minimum acceptable traffic volumes. Separate yet related policies
appear in the City’s Air Quality Element and are translated in the form of a Growth
Management Program.
        (i)     Residential Permit Allocations. Under the residential component of the
Growth Management Program and enabling ordinances, residential construction is
regulated through an annual permit allocation process. As shown in Table IV-4, annual
allocations have consistently exceeded actual construction, resulting in a cumulative
unused balance of 62 units. It is further noted that second dwellings and affordable
housing projects are expressly exempt from the allocation process. Together, these
factors provide evidence that the GMO does not impede housing production.
        (ii)    Permit Allocation Process. The process by which annual permit allocations
are made is dictated by criteria specified in the City’s Municipal Code. First and
foremost, all projects for which GMO permits are sought must meet the following
thresholds: (i) consistency with the City’s General Plan and Zoning Ordinance; and (ii)
availability of adequate public services and infrastructure. For projects meeting these
baseline thresholds, the Planning Director is delegated authority to issue permits for
single-family dwellings, while the Planning Commission is responsible for issuance of
multiple-family permits. Single family permits are issued on a “first come, first served” basis,
while multiple-family permits are allocated on a quarterly basis. When more projects are
proposed than there are permit allocations available, the Municipal Code specifies
preferences that guide the Planning Commission’s allotments (e.g., infill development,
project readiness, social balance, design excellence and environmental compatibility).
Decisions of the Planning Director and Planning Commission are appealable to the City
Council.
        (iii)   Project Exemptions. As previously noted, second dwellings and affordable
housing projects are expressly exempt from the allocation process. This includes projects
that qualify for a density bonus in accordance with Government Code Section 65915
and applicable regulations of the City (per Section 10-6.401(e) of the Zoning Ordinance).
                                              49                                   December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                          IV. Constraints
                                                              Table IV-4
                                 Growth Management Allocations 2008-2013
                                          Allocations                           Construction                          Balance
                  Year
                                 Total            S.F.      M.F.         S.F.       M.F.          Exempt           S.F.        M.F.
                 2008              16              11         5            8          0               0             3            5
                 2009              16              11         5            4          0               0             7            5
                 2010              16              11         5            4          0               0             7            5
                 2011              16              11         5            6          0               0             5            5
                 2012              16              11         5            4          2               0             7            3
                 2013              16              11         5            6          0               0             5            5
                 Total             96              66        30            32         2               0             34          28
             Sources:
                  1.   Dwelling Unit Allocations: State Department of Finance, State of California, Population and Housing Estimates
                       1998-2005. Unit tabulations are based on Growth Management Ordinance formulas.
                  2.   Actual Construction: Building Records, City of Ojai
i.      Building Codes
State law prohibits the imposition of building standards that are not necessitated by local
geographic, climatic or topographic conditions and requires that local governments
making changes or modifications in building standards must report such charges to the
Department of Housing and Community Development and file an expressed finding that
the change is needed.
The City's building codes are based upon the California Building, Plumbing, Fire,
Mechanical, Electrical, Housing, Building Conservation and Energy Codes, and the
International Property Maintenance Code. These are considered the minimum necessary
to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. Although minor amendments have
been incorporated to address local conditions, no additional regulations have been
imposed by the city that would unnecessarily add to housing costs.
        2.        Residential Development Processing Procedures
State Planning and Zoning Law provides permit processing requirements for residential
development. Within the framework of state requirements, the City has structured its
development review process in order to minimize the time required to obtain permits
while ensuring that projects receive careful review.
The City’s permit process is codified in Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code and provides, in
regard to residential projects, three levels of governmental review: (i) approvals by the
Planning Director for Zoning Clearances and Minor Use Permits; (ii) approvals by the
Planning Commission for Design Review and Conditional Use Permits; and (iii) approvals
by the City Council when projects entail tentative maps, zone changes or other
legislative acts. With the limited exception of single-family dwellings within the RO and R1
zone districts, all projects, at a minimum, are subject to Design Review.
                                                                       50                                                        December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                       IV. Constraints
Design Review – The City’s Design Guidelines are codified in Article 20 of the Zoning
Ordinance and provide objective and measurable criteria by which to evaluate
projects. The Planning Commission is charged with the responsibility for administering the
Design Guidelines and issuing relevant permits for all but the following types of
development: (i) single-family dwellings limited to one story (including second units); and
(ii) routine maintenance to all structures. The Design Review process entails discretion in
the application of prescribed standards; however, decision-making authority is expressly
limited to physical attributes of design as opposed to use or occupancy considerations.
This intent is reinforced with measures included in Program 17.
Permit Processing Time - The time required to process discretionary land use applications
has ranged from one to 33 months depending upon complexity, with an overall average
of 19 months. The types of discretionary approvals vary from project to project but are
typically processed concurrently, thereby improving overall time efficiency.
         3.      Development Fees and Improvement Requirements
State law limits fees charged for development permit processing to the reasonable cost
of providing the service for which the fee is charged. Various fees and off-site
improvement requirements are levied by the City (as well as other agencies) to cover
processing costs, provide services and construct facilities such as utilities, schools and
supporting infrastructure. These fees and public improvements are assessed through a
pro rata share system based on the magnitude of the project’s impact or the extent of
benefit that will be derived. Table IV-5 summaries typical fee assessments and exactions
for a hypothetical 20-unit apartment project. Fees and exactions imposed on housing
projects in Ojai are comparable to those charged elsewhere within the county.
                                              51                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                            IV. Constraints
                                                                 Table IV-5
                                               Summary of Development Fees
             Impact Fees                                                               Unit Cost                    Total Cost
                   Ojai Unified School District                                        $3.20/sft                      $54,600
                   Traffic impact fees                                                 $430/unit                       $7,660
                   Flood Control Fees                                                 $2,400/Acre                      $2,400
                   Park Fees                                                         $70/Bedroom                       $2,800
                   Will Serve (Sanitary)                                              $15,500/unit                    $76,620
                   Will Serve (Water)                                           Determined by District
                   Public Improv. Fees                                                 $571/unit                      $11,420
                   Drainage Fees                                                      $1,052/unit                     $21,040
                   New Address Request                                                  $90/unit                        $240
                   In-Lieu Parking Fees                                                $668/unit                      $13,360
             City Permit Fees
                   CEQA review (Mitigated Negative Declaration)                          $3,570                        $3,570
                   Design review                                                        Included                      Included
                   Building allocation                                                  $90/unit                        $920
                   Zoning clearance                                                       $ 90                          $32
                   Building & Grading Permits                                         $5,606/unit                    $112,120
                   Staff costs                                                           $1,309                       $26,180
             Total Estimated Fees (including all non-City fees)
             Estimated Total Cost                                                       $16,650                      $333,000
             Assumptions:
                   20-unit apartment project that is consistent with zoning and development standards (avg. 2 bd., 1,000 sf/unit)
             Source: City of Ojai, 2013
The total development fees identified in Table IV-5 represent the estimated fees to
process and build a 20-unit apartment project. The City periodically evaluates the actual
cost of processing the development permits when revising its fee schedule.
After the passage of Proposition 13 and its limitation on local governments’ property tax
revenues, cities and counties have faced increasing difficulty in providing public services
and facilities to serve their residents. One of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has
been the shift in funding of new infrastructure from general tax revenues to development
impact fees and improvement requirements on land developers. The City requires
developers to provide on-site and off-site improvements necessary to serve their projects.
Such improvements may include water, sewer and other utility extensions, street
construction and traffic control device installation that are reasonably related to the
project. Dedication of land or in-lieu fees may also be required of a project for rights-of-
way, recreational facilities and school sites, consistent with the Subdivision Map Act.
City standards for new streets and highways are as follows:
        40 feet (curb-to-curb)
        60 feet (total right of way)
The City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) contains a schedule of public improve-
ments including streets and other public works projects to facilitate the continued build-
                                                                          52                                                       December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                               IV. Constraints
out of the City’s General Plan. The CIP helps to ensure that construction of public
improvements is coordinated with private development.
Although development fees and improvement requirements increase the cost of
housing, cities have little choice in establishing such requirements due to the limitations
on property taxes and other revenue sources needed to fund public improvements.
B.       Non-Governmental Constraints
         1.      Environmental Constraints
Environmental constraints include physical features such as steep slopes, fault zones,
floodplains, sensitive biological habitat, and agricultural lands. In many cases,
development of these areas is constrained by state and federal laws (e.g., FEMA
floodplain regulations, the Clean Water Act and the Endangered Species Act, and the
state Fish and Game Code and Alquist-Priolo Act). The City’s land use plans have been
designed to protect sensitive areas from development, and to protect public safety by
avoiding development in hazardous areas. While these policies constrain residential
development to some extent, they are necessary to support other public policies. The
assumptions regarding future capacity for housing development described in Chapter III
and Appendix B take these limitations into account.
         2.      Infrastructure Constraints
The infrastructure issues that most directly affect future housing development are water
supply, wastewater treatment and roadway capacity. These issues are discussed below.
a.       Water
Like all jurisdictions in Southern California, water supply is a serious concern in Ojai.
According to the Ventura County Watershed Protection District, water demand in
Ventura County has nearly tripled over the last 25 years, and is expected to double
again by 2050. In addition, according to the U.S. Drought Monitor data provided by
NOAA, the Ojai Valley is currently in a multi-year severe drought and has received only
43% of its average annual rainfall for this current water year.
Groundwater is the largest single source of water in Ventura County, and provides about
67% of the locally utilized water in the County. Agricultural demand accounts for 68% of
the total demand for groundwater in the County 9. Imported water from the State Water
Project represents about one-quarter of Ventura County’s total water supply, but under
normal circumstances is only available in the southern and eastern portions of the county
and does not contribute to water supplies in the City of Ojai.
The Golden State Water District (“GSWD”) is an investor-owned public utility and operates
the water system for the City of Ojai, part of the unincorporated area east of Ventura
9
   http://portal.countyofventura.org/portal/page/portal/PUBLIC_WORKS/Watershed_Protection_District/Abo
   ut_Us/VCWPD_Divisions/Water_and_Environmental_Resources/Groundwater_Resources
                                                   53                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                          IV. Constraints
and part of the Meiners Oaks community west of Ojai. In 2010, the total water supply
conveyed by GSWC through the system to its customers was approximately 1,778 ac-
ft/yr. (compared to 2,710 ac-ft/yr in 2005). Of this amount, 87% was from local water well
extractions from the Ojai Valley Water Basin (“Ojai Basin”) and the balance was
purchased from Casitas Municipal Water District (“CMWD”).
The EIR prepared in 2012 for the City’s 2006-2014 Housing Element concluded that
anticipated water supplies are adequate to serve the projected level of growth.
However, continuation of the current drought could result in the need for additional
measures to ensure adequate domestic water supply. It should be recognized that the
City’s obligations under state Housing Element law are to (1) provide adequate capacity
in its land use plans and zoning regulations to accommodate residential development
commensurate with the RHNA allocation; (2) analyze infrastructure limitations that could
hinder development; and (3) identify potential methods for removing infrastructure
constraints. Since other agencies have the primary authority for providing water, the
City’s power to address this issue is limited. Under state law, the RHNA allocations for the
current (2014-2021) period are final and not subject to revision or further review. Program
1 in the Housing Action Plan (Chapter V) includes a commitment to work cooperatively
with regional planning agencies in the preparation of future growth forecasts to ensure
that the City’s assigned share of housing need for the next planning cycle (expected to
cover the 2021-2029 period) reflects infrastructure and resource limitations such as water
supply.
b.       Wastewater
Wastewater collection and treatment is provided to City residents by the Ojai Valley
Sanitary District (“OVSD”). OVSD operates a sewage treatment plant with a rated
capacity of 3.0 million gallons per day average dry weather flow (“GPD”). The EIR
prepared in 2012 for the City’s 2006-2014 Housing Element, which had a 17% higher total
4th Cycle RHNA allocation over the current (5th Cycle) RHNA of 371 units, concluded that
the additional demand for wastewater treatment to serve the projected level of new
housing development would not exceed OVSD’s current capacity.
c.       Transportation
Access to the Ojai Valley is severely constrained by the limited number of routes
connecting the valley to surrounding areas, as well as the poor levels of service on State
Highway 33, the main route in and out of the Ojai Valley, and significant physical and
financial impediments to improving segments of this route. The EIR prepared in 2012 for
the City’s 2006-2014 Housing Element concluded that the additional traffic that would be
generated by the projected level of new housing development would not exceed
roadway capacity within the City of Ojai, but would cause a significant impact on SR-33
in the unincorporated Casitas Springs area to the southwest of the City. Under traffic-
related policies in the City’s General Plan, this situation poses a constraint on market-rate
development. However, affordable housing projects, second units and special needs
housing are expressly exempt from the City’s traffic impact-related policies.
d.       Summary
Water availability and roadway capacity pose the most significant potential
impediments to future housing production in Ojai. While there are various strategies and
                                               54                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                         IV. Constraints
capital improvements that can help to mitigate these conditions, the cost and
jurisdictional means of implementing these actions are not wholly within the City’s
control. This suggests a blended approach that matches capacity with low-impact
development and programs that maximize opportunities through existing housing, while
at the same time pursuing projects and partnerships that provide requisite capacity for
managed growth. Toward that end, the following actions are included in Program 18 of
the Housing Action Plan (Chapter V):
        •   Facilitate RHNA objectives through new construction projects in which the City
            retains a financial and/or real property interest to best control design,
            development and occupancy; gear housing production toward small unit sizes
            and transit-oriented occupants; institute job-based occupancy preferences to
            minimize commute traffic; promote programs that achieve affordability
            through existing housing.
        •   Work in partnership with GSWC, OBGMA, CMWD and the County of Ventura
            on the following initiatives: (i) develop a detailed hydrological model to more
            accurately predict the effects of drought, increased pumping, and new wells
            in the Ojai Basin; and (ii) participate in an inter-agency watershed
            management plan for the Ventura River Watershed to achieve an accurate
            accounting of supply and demand.
        •   Work in partnership with Caltrans and the County of Ventura on the following
            initiatives: (i) conduct updated traffic counts and create a new model for
            evaluating future growth impacts and mitigation measures that includes
            entirety of SR-33 within Ojai Valley; (ii) develop a fully integrated traffic
            management program with consistent policy application; and (iii) implement
            roadway improvements to improve traffic flow on SR-33 throughout the Ojai
            Valley.
        3.       Land and Construction Costs
Land represents one of the most significant components of the cost of new housing.
Changes in land prices reflect the cyclical nature of the residential real estate market.
The housing market is now in a downturn similar to previous cycles in the early 1980s and
early 1990s, and it is expected that recovery will occur and land prices will again rise,
although the timing cannot be predicted with certainty. Current (2013) estimates of
residential land cost range from $300,000 to $375,000 per acre.
Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor, development standards
and general market conditions. The City has no influence over materials and labor costs,
and the building codes and development standards in Ojai are not substantially different
from most other cities in Ventura County. The City’s Building and Safety Department
estimates current (2013) construction costs to be approximately $139 to $167 per square
foot for residential construction.
        4.       Cost and Availability of Financing
Ojai is similar to most other communities with regard to private sector home financing
programs. The recent crisis in the mortgage industry has affected the availability of real
                                                 55                             December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                              IV. Constraints
estate loans, although for those homebuyers who can qualify, interest rates are at historic
lows. Under state law, it is illegal for real estate lending institutions to discriminate against
entire neighborhoods in lending practices because of the physical or economic
conditions in the area (“redlining”). In monitoring new construction sales, re-sales of
existing homes, and permits for remodeling, it does not appear that redlining is practiced
in any area of the city.
C.      Fair Housing
The California Fair Employment and Housing Act: (i) prohibits discrimination and
harassment in all aspects of housing including; (ii) requires housing providers to make
reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities; and (iii) prohibits retaliation
against any person who has filed a complaint with the State. In furtherance of these
provisions and anti-discriminatory practices in general, the City participates in fair
housing initiatives including continued financial support of the Housing Rights Center;
promotes equal opportunity for all residents; and provides, to the extent legally
permissible, preferences to persons and households currently residing or employed in Ojai
in regard to occupying new affordable housing.
                                                 56                                  December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                  V. Housing Action Plan
V.      HOUSING ACTION PLAN
A.      Goals and Policies
Chapters II, III and IV of the Housing Element evaluate the City’s housing needs,
opportunities and constraints, while Appendix A presents a review of the previous
element. This Housing Action Plan sets forth the City’s goals, policies, and programs to
address the identified housing needs and issues for the 2014-2021 planning period.
Quantified Objectives for new construction, rehabilitation and conservation are also
identified for this planning period.
The goals and policies that guide the City’s housing programs and activities are as
follows:
Adequate Housing Sites
        GOAL 1         Dovetail the provision of affordable housing with overarching
                       community objectives: low impact development, integration with
                       community context and linking jobs with housing.
        Policies:
        H-1            The City shall facilitate production of new affordable housing
                       through direct involvement in the design-development process to
                       best accomplish low-impact development principles.
        H-2            The City shall promote the preservation, conservation and
                       conversion of existing housing as a means to satisfy existing and
                       future housing needs through the inventory of housing that currently
                       exists.
        H-3            The City shall work in partnership with water and transportation
                       stakeholders to develop reliable data baselines, modeling
                       methodologies, mitigation measures and policy parameters to
                       maximum resource capacities.
        Programs:
            1. General Plan Update.
            General Plan law requires that all component elements, whether mandatory or
            optional, must be consistent with one another. A review of the current
            adopted General Plan reveals that baseline data relevant to air quality, water
            resources and traffic are outdated. If funding is available, the City will pursue a
            comprehensive General Plan update that addresses development constraints
            resulting from regional air quality, water quality, water supply and
            transportation issues. The City will also work cooperatively with regional
            planning agencies, including the Southern California Association of
            Governments, Ventura County Association of Governments, and the South
                                               57                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                   V. Housing Action Plan
            Coast Air Quality Management District, to ensure that future growth forecasts
            and housing needs assessments fairly reflect these environmental constraints.
            2. Affordable Housing Covenants.
            The conversion of market rate units into affordable housing through a
            combination of acquisition, Section 8 property-based assistance and purchase
            of affordability covenants is expressly allowed by State Housing Element law for
            rental properties containing three or more units. In the 2000-2005 Housing
            Element cycle, the City helped finance the purchase of 15 units at a cost of
            $300,000. According to preliminary analysis, there are 37 candidate properties
            totaling 279 multiple family units for which the purchase of affordable
            covenants and provision of project-based Section 8 rental assistance (in
            partnership with the Areawide Housing Authority) may be possible. Of this total,
            eight properties (50 total dwellings) consist of apartments between four and
            nine dwellings; 11 properties (157 total dwellings) consist of apartments with 10
            or more dwellings; and 18 properties (72 total dwellings) consist of mixed-use
            projects. Housing Element law requires that the purchase of affordability
            covenants must be accomplished within the first two years of the Housing
            Element planning period. The City will explore the purchase of affordability
            covenants during the planning period commencing in October 2013, if funding
            is available.
            3. Increase the Supply of Second Units.
            Second units provide an efficient method of expanding the supply of
            affordable housing for individuals and small families. The City will pursue a two-
            part strategy to encourage the development of new second units, as well as
            facilitate legalization of existing unpermitted second units.
            A. New Second Units. The City has the land base to accommodate
            approximately 759 second dwellings under existing zoning and development
            standards. The existing baseline of second dwellings is unknown, but the
            untapped potential appears significant. Second units are deemed affordable
            to moderate-income households by design; as such, affordability covenants
            would not be required. Furthermore, second units are exempt from Growth
            Management and traffic impact policies. The objective for this program
            corresponds to the number of second dwellings that were constructed during
            the previous Housing Element cycle.
            During the previous planning period, regulations were amended to exempt
            conforming second units from the Design Review Permit requirement. During
            the new planning period the City will consider additional amendments to
            second unit regulations to encourage construction of second units.
            B. Second Unit Compliance. During the previous planning period, a numeric
            disparity in statistics was noted between the Ventura County Assessor and
            State Department of Finance, suggesting an undercounting of unpermitted
            dwellings in the City totaling more than 300 units. This anomaly was affirmed by
            members of the Housing Element Task Force and Ojai Board of Realtors, and
                                                 58                              December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                     V. Housing Action Plan
            subsequently corroborated by the Ojai Valley Sanitary District (“OVSD”). In a
            one-year period ending June 30, 2011, OVSD identified 70 candidate
            properties within the City having second units connected to the sewer system
            without benefit of permits. Through an amnesty program implemented wholly
            independent of the City, OVSD legalized sewer connections for 52 residential
            dwellings. Drawing upon the experience of OVSD, in 2013 the City established
            a second unit compliance process by which owners of unpermitted second
            dwellings and guest houses can bring the units into legal non-conforming
            status, making such properties more marketable in exchange for counting the
            units against the City’s RHNA goals.The program includes the following
            components:
                 a.      Incentivize participation by reducing or eliminating City fees, seeking
                 fee concessions from other stakeholder agencies, and applying penalties
                 after the compliance due date.
                 b.      The City will work, in coordination with other stakeholder agencies, to
                 establish programs that promote code compliance and maintenance of
                 the existing housing stock.
                 c.      Establish a period of participation in multiple phases of at least two
                 years.
            In order to encourage the provision of legal second units to the maximum
            extent feasible, it is the City’s intent to make garage conversions eligible for
            legalization when all applicable requirements are met.
            4. Home Split Program.
            According to preliminary analysis, there are 264 candidate properties which
            may be suited for an internal division of space where the resulting
            configuration yields two dwelling units, each exceeding 640 square feet (which
            is the existing limit for conventional second units). These candidates consist of
            properties containing at least 1/2 acre, with an existing building footprint of at
            least 2,000 square feet and an underlying zone designation of R-0-1/2, R-0-1, R-
            0-2, and R-0-4. Home split units, like second units, are deemed affordable to
            moderate-income households by design.
            During the previous planning period, regulations were amended to exempt
            conforming home splits from the Design Review Permit requirement and allow
            additions to accommodate additional kitchen and bathroom facilities, and
            established that home splits are exempt from the City’s Growth Management
            Ordinance.
            5. VMU Mixed Use Zoning.
            Within the Village Mixed Use (“VMU”) zone district, the City has the land base
            to accommodate between 91 and 345 additional residential dwellings. The
            low end of this range represents what can be accomplished under current
            zoning (taking into account a communitywide development intensity of 63%),
            while the higher number reflects density at 100% of the current permitted
                                                  59                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                  V. Housing Action Plan
            amount (taking into account proposed adjustments in development standards
            that would maximize development potential). VMU dwellings are deemed
            affordable to moderate-income households by design; as such, affordability
            covenants are not deemed necessary.
            During the previous planning period, VMU regulations were amended to
            provide less restrictive requirements for lot coverage and floor-area ratios
            (FARs) and flexible development standards including parking requirements. The
            implementing ordinance also included design guidelines for VMU projects.
            6. Facilitate Affordable Housing Development.
            During the previous planning period, a Special Housing (SPL) zoning overlay
            was applied to eight sites comprising 14.23 net acres. The SPL Overlay allows
            affordable housing projects at a density of up to 20 du/acre through a
            ministerial design review permit process. Four of the eight properties are City-
            owned, and the City has been in discussions with People’s Self-Help Housing
            regarding the feasibility of development of affordable housing on one or more
            of the City-owned sites. People’s Self-Help Housing is particularly interested in
            assisting with the development of a housing project on Site 11, which is a City-
            owned property adjacent to the City’s Public Works Department offices and
            equipment yard. City staff also encouraged the participation of the owners of
            the private properties considered for the SPL Overlay, and the privately-owned
            parcels in the SPL Overlay were included with the support of the property
            owners.
            In discussions with both for-profit and non-profit developers, particular attention
            has been paid to the appropriate height limit required to facilitate affordable
            housing at a density of 20 units/acre. Conceptual plans for several projects
            presented to City staff and decision-makers indicate that multi-family
            development at this density can be accommodated within a two-story limit
            and would result in better compatibility with the existing fabric of the
            community. Two-story projects would also be less likely to generate community
            opposition, thereby enhancing the overall feasibility of affordable housing
            development over the long term.
            During the planning period, the City will continue to work with housing
            developers to facilitate affordable housing development on SPL sites, and
            amend zoning regulations to facilitate development within a two-story building
            envelope. As part of the implementation of amendments to this program, City
            staff will also reassess the acreage and combination of SPL Overlay sites and
            make adjustments that may be appropriate to meet the goals of this program.
            For example, the net developable acreage for Site 11 was noted in the SPL
            Overlay as 0.87 acres because of potential slope and vegetation constraints;
            however, People’s Self-Help Housing has evaluated this slope and believes that
            the developable acreage is closer to the property’s gross acreage of 1.74
            acres. As such, it would be appropriate to adjust upward the acreage of the
            SPL Overlay for this site. In addition, downward adjustments on other sites may
            also be appropriate while ensuring that the goals of this program are met in
                                                 60                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                     V. Housing Action Plan
            conformance with the City’s RHNA allocation. Specific objectives regarding
            the SPL regulations include the following:
                •   Revise Table 2-10 of Sec. 10-2.704 to more accurately reflect the net
                    developable acreage for each site
                •   Revise SPL development standards to establish a two-story building
                    envelope
                •   Amend Sec. 10-2.704(g)(2) to reflect applicable state density bonus law
                •   Incorporate the No Net Loss provisions of Government Code Sec. 65863
                •   Amend SPL development standards to provide an additional 5% bonus
                    density incentive when parcels totaling at least 1 acre are consolidated
                    into a single building site
                •   Revise the affordability provisions (currently 15% extremely low, 15% very
                    low, 15% low and 20% moderate, with 30-50% senior) to 10% very low,
                    10% low and 5% moderate.
            7. Commercial Mixed Use
            A number of commercially-zoned parcels in the City are underutilized or
            blighted. As a stimulus to revitalization of these parcels, the City will pursue the
            creation of a new overlay district (outside of the Village Mixed Use district) to
            expand development options for these properties to include mixed-use and
            live/work projects. In addition to its economic benefits, such an overlay would
            create additional opportunities for workforce housing.
           8. Mortgage Assistance.
            The City will pursue state and federal mortgage assistance funding, to the
            extent assistance is available, to assist low- and moderate-income homebuyers
            or existing property owners to prevent foreclosure. Information will be provided
            on the City website and through flyers at other public locations.
Affordable Housing Supply
        GOAL 2          To provide a continuing supply of affordable housing to meet the
                        needs of existing and future Ojai residents in all income categories.
        Policies:
        H-4             The City shall adopt policies, programs and procedures to facilitate
                        attainment of RHNA goals, with particular emphasis placed on the
                        needs of persons and families of low and very-low income.
        H-5             The City shall actively seek and formulate partnerships with for-profit
                        and non-profit developers to produce affordable housing and
                        provide assistance in support of project applications to achieve
                        development objectives.
                                                 61                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                 V. Housing Action Plan
        H-6            The City shall continue to support the Area Housing Authority of
                       Ventura County in the provision of Section 8 rental assistance and
                       shall seek to broaden the program to compliment other affordable
                       housing initiatives (e.g., secondary dwelling production, project-
                       based tenant assistance, etc.
        Programs:
           9. Inclusionary Housing.
            Inclusionary housing involves the reservation of a prescribed percentage of
            market rate dwelling units for target income households at affordable cost (or
            payment of affordable housing fees in lieu of on-site construction).
            Approximately one-third of all localities in the State employ local inclusionary
            policies.
            It is recognized that the courts have imposed restrictions on some aspects of
            inclusionary zoning regulations (e.g., the Palmer and Patterson decisions), and
            that the state legislature may consider amendments to existing law in response
            to court rulings; therefore, it is the intent of this program to comply with
            applicable law as may be in effect at the time such an ordinance is proposed.
            During the planning period, the City will consider adoption of an amendment
            to the Zoning Ordinance to establish a 15% inclusionary requirement on new
            residential construction. This percentage is consistent with requirements
            typically employed in other jurisdictions with inclusionary policies; and assures
            the production of affordable housing regardless of density. In addition, all
            inclusionary units would be subject to the occupancy preference
            requirements. To moderate the effect inclusionary requirements might have on
            overall housing production, the following actions shall be implemented: (i)
            exempt second units, split home units, small VMU mixed-use units (with a
            maximum of 640 square feet) and single-family homes developed on a single
            parcel of record; (ii) provide for density bonuses in accordance with the City’s
            density bonus regulations; and (iii) exempt all inclusionary affordable housing
            units from growth and traffic management requirements which are
            constructed on-site.
           10. Capacity Preservation.
            In order to preserve the City’s future capacity for residential development, the
            City will continue to enforce the Zoning Ordinance adopted in the prior
            planning period requiring that existing residential development potential be
            preserved by prohibiting downzoning or requiring the payment of in-lieu fees
            based on an inclusionary housing factor of 15%.
           11. Density Bonus.
            As an inducement to produce housing that is affordable to low- and
            moderate-income groups, the City will continue to implement density bonus
            provisions consistent with State law.
                                                62                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                   V. Housing Action Plan
           12. Public-Private Partnerships.
            The development of affordable housing, particularly for extremely-low- and
            very-low-income households, as well as populations with special needs,
            generally requires collaboration among multiple parties (e.g., developers, non-
            profit housing sponsors, local government, etc.). In this regard, the City’s
            contribution can take a number of forms: (i) assisting in the review and
            preparation of concept drawings; (ii) analyzing development proformas and
            identifying gap financing; (iii) fast-tracking the environmental review and
            entitlement permit process; (iv) utilizing the City’s police powers to provide
            appropriate land use and zoning; (v) supporting applications submitted to
            funding agencies; and (vi) providing direct financial or development
            assistance when feasible. Recognizing the collaborative nature of affordable
            housing development, the City shall undertake the following actions:
                   a. Proactive Participation. The City shall continue its participation in
                       the County CDBG Program and similar collaborative efforts to
                       affirmatively further emergency shelter, transitional housing, single
                       room occupancy units, shared living arrangements, supportive
                       services and congregate housing needs outlined in the
                       Consolidated Plan; actively engage non-profit housing sponsors
                       and private property owners in implementing affordable housing
                       strategies outlined under “Adequate Housing Sites;” notify and offer
                       all reasonable assistance to facilitate the development of
                       affordable housing consistent with the General Plan and Housing
                       Element, with particular emphasis on the needs of extremely-low-
                       and very-low-income households and associated special needs
                       population segments (e.g., farmworkers, disabled, etc.).
                   b. Resource Development. To augment local funding sources, the
                       City shall: (i) actively pursue grant and loan funding to finance the
                       various housing initiatives listed in the Housing Element; (ii) work
                       cooperatively with for-profit and non-profit housing sponsors to
                       leverage resources (e.g., State and Federal tax credits); (iii)
                       continue participation in the HOME Consortium and CDBG Urban
                       County programs and actively pursue funding for projects; (iii) assist
                       with site identification and support applications for funding for
                       farmworker housing such as the Joe Serna Jr. Farmworker Housing
                       Grant Program; and (v) evaluate and implement other local
                       funding options if deemed feasible. Funding assistance and
                       regulatory incentives will prioritize multi-family and supportive
                       housing developments that include units for extremely-low-income
                       households.
                   c. Public Outreach. No less often than once each year, the City shall
                       conduct a noticed meeting to assess housing performance in
                       connection with the planning report required by California
                       Government Code Section 65400. As part of the annual review
                       process, the City shall promote the availability of housing assistance
                                                 63                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                     V. Housing Action Plan
                         programs and notify non-profit housing sponsors and private
                         developers of opportunities in implementing affordable housing
                         strategies outlined under “Adequate Housing Sites." Notice, at a
                         minimum, shall be furnished to the People’s Self Help, Cabrillo
                         Economic Development Corporation (CEDC), Area Housing
                         Authority of Ventura County, Ventura County Tri-Counties Regional
                         Center. No less than once a year, the meeting and relevant
                         programs will be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation
                         and posted on the City’s official website.
Housing Impediments
        GOAL 3           To remove impediments to the provision of affordable housing and
                         provide reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities.
        Policies:
        H-7              The City shall accommodate the full spectrum of housing types in its
                         land use regulations including, but not limited to, mixed-use
                         developments, rental and co-op housing, secondary dwellings, in-fill
                         development and special needs housing (e.g., SROs, group homes
                         and congregate living).
        H-8              The City shall periodically evaluate and adjust its regulations,
                         ordinances and development fees to ensure that they do not unduly
                         constrain housing production; new regulatory proposals shall be
                         evaluated for compliance with this policy in advance of adoption.
        H-9              The City shall encourage the construction or conversion of
                         emergency shelters, transitional housing and single room occupancy
                         units to meet the needs of the homeless population and shall
                         likewise facilitate development of group homes, congregate care
                         facilities and independent living units for persons with disabilities.
        Programs:
        13. Housing for Persons with Special Needs.
            Certain segments of the population have traditionally experienced a more
            difficult time finding decent, affordable housing due to special circumstances
            particular to these groups. Those segments possessing special needs, as
            defined in California Government Code Section 65583(a)(6), consist of “…the
            elderly; persons with disabilities, including a developmental disability, as
            defined in Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code; large families;
            farmworkers; families with female heads of households; and families and
            persons in need of emergency shelter.”
            The City will continue to implement land use regulations as amended during
            the previous planning period to minimize potential constraints to special needs
            housing. The City will seek state and federal grants as they become available,
            offer regulatory incentives, contact supportive housing developers and partner
                                                 64                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                    V. Housing Action Plan
            with the Tri-Counties Regional Center to facilitate development of supportive
            housing for persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
        14. Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities.
            At the request of a person with a disability, local jurisdictions and housing
            providers must make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices
            or services when these accommodations may be necessary to afford a
            disabled person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. A housing
            provider must allow a person with a disability (at the tenant’s expense) to
            reasonably modify existing premises if the modifications are necessary to afford
            the disabled person full enjoyment of the premises. The Zoning Ordinance was
            amended during the prior planning period to establish procedures for
            reviewing and approving requests for reasonable accommodation. The City
            will continue to enforce the provisions of the ordinance, including: (i) an
            abbreviated ministerial procedure with minimal processing fee, expressly
            designed to accommodate reasonable exceptions in zoning and land use for
            housing for persons with disabilities; (ii) information on the rights of the disabled
            shall be disseminated on the website and in public places; and (iii) the
            adaptive retrofit program to underwrite the expense of modifying dwellings to
            accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities, to the extent grant funds
            are available.
        15. Homeless Population.
            In conformance with Senate Bill 2 of 2007, the City will continue to implement
            Zoning Ordinance provisions as amended during the previous planning period
            to facilitate the provision of emergency shelters, transitional housing and
            supportive housing consistent with the California Health and Safety Code,
            including: (i) acknowledge that transitional and supportive housing are
            considered a residential use of property subject only to those restrictions that
            apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone; (ii)
            allow residential care homes (inclusive of emergency and transitional shelters)
            serving six or fewer clients as a permitted use in all residential zone districts; (iii)
            allow residential care homes (inclusive of emergency and transitional shelters)
            serving more than seven clients within medium- and high-density residential
            zones (R-2 and R-3) by Conditional Use Permit; (iv) enforce objective
            management and development standards consistent with the provisions of
            Government Code Section 65583(a)(4); and (v) maintain the Emergency
            Shelter Overlay Zone (“ESOZ”) on all commercially zoned land with a BP
            (Business Professional Commercial) designation.
        16. Growth Management Ordinance.
            The City’s Growth Management Ordinance (GMO) addresses air quality as a
            resource constraint and regulates residential construction through an annual
            permit allocation process. Companion traffic management policies are
            embodied in the Circulation Element of the City’s General Plan and limit the
            amount and intensity of future development through the establishment of
            minimum acceptable traffic volumes.The City will continue to implement the
                                                65                                  December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                   V. Housing Action Plan
            provisions of the GMO, which was amended during the previous planning
            period to: (i) broaden the list of exemptions to include split homes and small
            VMU units; (ii) remove the differentiation between single-family and multi-family
            permit allocation categories and consolidate these into a single permit
            allocation pool; (iii) create a Special Project Pool into which unallocated
            annual permits are allowed to accumulate and be applied toward projects
            designated by the City Council; (iv) make explicit that project exemptions
            include housing for persons and families of moderate income; (v) remove
            ambiguity (insofar as possible) in the criteria used in the award of allocations
            for multiple-family housing; and (vi) clarify that preferences will only used to
            rank order competing applications for multiple-family allotments and not as a
            basis of project denial.
        17. Resource Constraints.
            Water availability and roadway capacity pose potential impediments to
            housing production. In conjunction with updating the General Plan, the City’s
            Environmental (CEQA) Guidelines shall be revised to impose a significance
            threshold that is linked to the Growth Management Ordinance. The
            environmental threshold shall apply to all non-exempt discretionary projects
            which entail the construction of new residential units in excess of the
            cumulative unused allocation of permits under the Growth Management
            Ordinance during the planning horizon of the Housing Element commencing in
            2014 and ending in 2021. Exempt projects are expressly limited to dwellings for
            which permits and approvals are lawfully obtained. All other non-exempt
            discretionary projects shall be subject to the following provisions:
                    a. An initial study and requisite environmental documentation shall be
                        prepared to determine the availability of sufficient water resources
                        and roadway capacity to accommodate the project within safe
                        yields and acceptable levels of service.
                    b. In the absence of conclusive evidence that adequate water
                        resources and road capacity are available to accommodate the
                        project, a Water and Traffic Management Plan shall be required for
                        each such project that fully mitigates the impacts upon water and
                        roadway capacity.
                    c. Where resource impacts cannot be mitigated through reasonable
                        and feasible measures, the resulting impact shall be deemed to be
                        significant and unavoidable. In such cases, the project shall either
                        be denied or the City may override the impact, at its discretion,
                        with overriding considerations.
            In order to minimize the impact of water supply and roadway capacity
            constraints on future housing supply, the City will take the following actions:
            •   Facilitate RHNA objectives through new construction projects in which the
                City retains a financial and/or real property interest to best control design,
                development and occupancy; gear housing production toward small unit
                sizes and transit-oriented occupants; institute job-based occupancy
                                               66                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                   V. Housing Action Plan
                preferences to minimize commute traffic; promote programs that achieve
                affordability through existing housing.
            •   Work in partnership with GSWC, OBGMA, CMWD and the County of
                Ventura on the following initiatives: (i) develop a detailed hydrological
                model to more accurately predict the effects of drought, increased
                pumping, and new wells in the Ojai Basin; and (ii) participate in an inter-
                agency watershed management plan for the Ventura River Watershed to
                achieve an accurate accounting of supply and demand.
            •   Work in partnership with Caltrans and the County of Ventura on the
                following initiatives: (i) conduct updated traffic counts and create a new
                model for evaluating future growth impacts and mitigation measures that
                includes entirety of SR-33 within Ojai Valley; (ii) develop a fully integrated
                traffic management program with consistent policy application; and (iii)
                implement roadway improvements to improve traffic flow on SR-33
                throughout the Ojai Valley.
        18. Design Review.
            Design guidelines are codified in Article 20 of the City’s Zoning Ordinance and
            provide objective and measurable criteria by which to evaluate projects. The
            Planning Commission is charged with the responsibility for administering the
            Design Guidelines and issuing relevant permits for all but the following types of
            development: (i) single-family dwellings limited to one-story (including second
            units); and (ii) routine maintenance to all structures. The Design Review process
            entails discretion in the application of prescribed standards; however,
            decision-making authority is expressly limited to physical attributes of design as
            opposed to use or occupancy considerations. During the previous planning
            period, the City amended the Municipal Code to provide more definitive
            criteria by which to objectively evaluate and render decisions. Examples
            include graphics to illustrate the intent behind the Guidelines such as
            compatibility with the scale as shown below:
                                                67                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                               V. Housing Action Plan
Conservation and Rehabilitation
        GOAL 4         To maintain and enhance the quality of existing housing and
                       residential neighborhoods in Ojai.
        Policies:
        H-10           The City shall promote the cooperative repair, rehabilitation and
                       improvement of residential structures that are substandard or in
                       disrepair; resources shall be targeted to facilitate attainment of
                       Housing Element goals and address properties and occupants of
                       greatest need.
        H-11           The City shall require replacement of dwellings that are occupied
                       by, and affordable to, target income groups and removed from the
                       housing inventory due to demolition or conversion; exceptions shall
                       be granted for owner-occupied dwellings and non-conforming uses.
                                               68                            December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                    V. Housing Action Plan
        H-12            The City shall encourage energy efficient construction in all new and
                        rehabilitated dwelling units and actively promote sustainable
                        construction.
        Programs:
        19. Retention of Affordable Units.
            Preservation of existing affordable housing is a high priority for the City,
            particularly rental units that encompass the majority of substandard housing. To
            facilitate the preservation and improvement of these units, the following
            actions shall be implemented: (1) continue the City’s housing rehabilitation
            loan program but selectively target assistance to dovetail with code
            compliance efforts; (ii) continue participation and support of the Section 8
            Rental Assistance (Voucher) Program administered through the Area Housing
            Authority of Ventura County; and (iii) continue financial support of the
            Community Assistance Program-Rental Subsidy Lease Assistance Loan and
            Grant Program administered by Help of Ojai.
        20. Anti-Displacement.
            Previous studies of development trends within the City’s Village Mixed Use
            district noted that the majority of new projects entailed the reuse, recycling or
            expansion of existing developed properties, resulting in the loss of dwelling
            units. To moderate these trends and the consequence of displacement, the
            City’s Zoning Ordinance was amended in 2013 to institute a replacement
            housing requirement for the demolition, removal or conversion of housing that
            is occupied by and affordable to target income households with the following
            exceptions: (i) exempt the removal/demolition of single family homes on a
            single parcel of record; and (ii) exempt the removal/demolition of non-
            conforming uses. The City will continue to enforce these provisions in order to
            facilitate the preservation of existing housing.
        21. Sustainability.
            Energy efficiency is important not only for conserving natural resources, it has
            the added benefit of keeping incidental housing costs in check. It also has
            public policy ramifications relative to underwriting the cost of providing
            affordable housing. High utility costs translate to lower the rent and price
            thresholds, which in turn result in larger financial gaps between market rate
            and affordable housing. Simply put, as residential energy costs rise, housing
            affordability declines. As such, it is in the shared interest of the consumer and
            City to promote energy conservation. In furtherance of these objectives, the
            following actions shall be implemented: (i) continue to collect, maintain and
            disseminate information from the Southern California Edison Company (“SCE”)
            to encourage existing residents to participate in energy efficiency retrofit and
            rebate programs; (ii) incorporate energy conservation measures and financial
            incentives from SCE into the City’s housing rehabilitation assistance program;
            (iii) continue to implement “Green Building” guidelines, embodying LEED (The
            Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) and “Complete Streets”
                                                 69                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                  V. Housing Action Plan
            principles that promote sustainable designs and environmentally responsible
            construction; and (iv) devise incentives, in consultation with stakeholders, to
            encourage compliance with the “Green Building” guidelines.
Equal Housing Opportunities
        GOAL 5          To affirmatively further fair housing and assure equal access to
                        sound, affordable housing for all persons regardless of race, creed,
                        age or sex.
        Policies:
        H-13            The City declares that all persons regardless of race, creed, age,
                        physical disability or sex shall have equal access to sound and
                        affordable housing pursuant to State and Federal laws.
        H-14            The City will actively promote enforcement of fair housing laws and
                        continue its support of non-profit organizations that provide housing
                        and other assistance to special needs groups in Ojai (e.g., homeless,
                        disabled, etc.) and
        H-15            The City shall promote integration of all economic and population
                        segments in each residential project; however, it is recognized that
                        scales of economy and management efficiencies require that
                        certain projects are made exclusive to target groups.
        Programs:
        22. Fair Housing.
            The California Fair Employment and Housing Act: (i) prohibits discrimination
            and harassment in all aspects of housing including; (ii) requires housing
            providers to make reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities;
            and (iii) prohibits retaliation against any person who has filed a complaint with
            the State. In furtherance of these provisions and anti-discriminatory practices in
            general, the following actions shall be implemented: (i) continue regional
            participation in fair housing initiatives including continued financial support of
            the Housing Rights Center; (ii) promote equal opportunity for all residents and
            embody affirmative marketing and anti-discrimination clauses in all affordable
            housing agreements; and (iii) provide, to the extent legally permissible,
            preferences to persons and households currently residing or employed in Ojai
            in regard to occupying new affordable housing.
        23. Information and Referral.
            The California Government Code expressly requires that diligent efforts be
            made to engage the public in the process of preparing and adopting Housing
            Elements. In furtherance of this mandate, the following actions shall be
            implemented: (i) continue to collect, maintain and disseminate information
            from the County, Housing Authority and State Department of Equal Housing
            and Employment regarding housing and tenant rights; and (ii) notify the
                                                 70                             December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                   V. Housing Action Plan
              California Department of Housing and Community Development, People’s Self
              Help, Cabrillo Economic Development Corporation (CEDC), Area Housing
              Authority of Ventura County, Ventura County Tri-Counties Regional Center and
              all others expressly requesting to receive notice prior to amending or updating
              the Housing Element.
B.      Quantified Objectives
The City’s quantified objectives for new construction, rehabilitation and conservation are
presented in Table V-1.
                                                                  Table V-1
                                                Quantified Objectives 2013-2021
                                                                                 Income Category
                                       Ex. Low            V. Low               Low                Mod  Upper      Totals
        New Construction                   44                43                 59                 70   155        371
        Rehabilitation                              TBD based on funding availability                    -         TBD
        Conservation*                       -                 -                   -                 -    -          -
        * As discussed in Chapter II, there are no assisted units at risk during this planning period.
                                                                           71                                    December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element    V. Housing Action Plan
This page intentionally left blank.
                                       72         December 2013
City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                            Appendix A – Evaluation
                                       Appendix A
                   Evaluation of the 2008-2014 Housing Element
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the
effectiveness of the existing Housing Element, the appropriateness of goals, objectives
and policies, and the progress in implementing programs for the previous planning
period. This appendix contains a review the housing goals, policies, and programs of the
previous housing element and evaluates the degree to which these programs have
been implemented during the previous planning period. The findings from this evaluation
have been instrumental in determining the City’s 2014-2021 Housing Action Plan (Chapter
V).
Table A-1 summarizes the programs contained in the previous Housing Element along
with the source of funding, program objectives, and accomplishments.
Table A-2 presents the City’s progress in meeting the quantified objectives from the
previous Housing Element.
                                          A-1                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                     Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                              Table A-1
                                                         Housing Element Program Evaluation 2008-2013
              Program         Program Objectives           Schedule        Funding Source    Responsible Entity                    Accomplishments
     1. General Plan Update Amend General Plan Land    2012-2013      State Planning &      Community Development The City adopted the 2006-2014 Housing Element
                            Use Element & Zoning                      Infrastructure Grants Department            on October 9, 2012. No other elements have been
                            Ordinance                                                                             updated. City staff are ensuring that new
                                                                                                                  development and redevelopment comply with the
                                                                                                                  applicable regulations and performance criteria set
                                                                                                                  forth in NPDES Permit No. CAS004002, Order No.
                                                                                                                  09-0057.
     2. Affordable Housing  Identify Sites and Explore 2012-2013      Tax Increment Housing Community Development The City adopted the 2006-2014 Housing Element
     Covenants              Replacement Funds to                      Set-aside Funds (If   Department            on October 9, 2012. Due to the date of this
                            Supplement Tax Increment                  Available)                                  adoption, the City was unable to utilize this program
                                                                                                                  in the 2006-2014 Housing Element cycle. However,
                                                                                                                  the 2006-2014 Housing Element retained this
                                                                                                                  program, discussed candidate properties for this
                                                                                                                  program, and noted that the purchase of
                                                                                                                  affordability covenants would occur during the 2014-
                                                                                                                  2012 Housing Element planning period.
     3. Second Units        Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund          Community Development This program was implemented through a revision
                                                                                            Department            to the City’s Zoning Code. Ordinance No. 826,
                                                                                                                  which was adopted by the City Council on May 28,
                                                                                                                  2013. The implementing Ordinance set forth design
                                                                                                                  standards, which when met, provided for an
                                                                                                                  exemption from a Design Review Permit
                                                                                                                  requirement. The Ordinance and companion
                                                                                                                  resolution (City Council Resolution 13-14) set forth
                                                                                                                  the City’s Second Unit Amnesty Program, which
                                                                                                                  provided for modifications to the City’s development
                                                                                                                  standards for second residential units as well as
                                                                                                                  reduced fees. Since implementation of this
                                                                                                                  program, the City has received substantial interest
                                                                                                                  from applications in the program and has
                                                                                                                  approximately 6 interested parties. The City is also
                                                                                                                  in the process of establishing an ombudsman
                                                                                                                  program to assist applicants in determining if they
                                                                                                                  would be eligible for this program and generating an
                                                                                                                  estimate of the costs involved in bringing the second
                                                                                                                  units up to the applicable code requirements.
     4. Home Split          Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund          Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
                                                                                            Department            No. 826, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                 A-2                                                                      December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                    Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                                     Table A-1
                                                             Housing Element Program Evaluation 2008-2013
            Program             Program Objectives             Schedule            Funding Source           Responsible Entity                     Accomplishments
                                                                                                                                 May 28, 2013. The implementing Ordinance set
                                                                                                                                 forth design standards, which when met, provided
                                                                                                                                 for an exemption from a Design Review Permit
                                                                                                                                 requirement. The implementation program also
                                                                                                                                 provided for additions to accommodate additional
                                                                                                                                 kitchen and bathroom facilities, and established that
                                                                                                                                 home splits are exempt from the City’s Growth
                                                                                                                                 Management Ordinance.
     5. VMU Mixed Use Zoning   Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013            Tax Increment Housing       Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
                                                                               Set-aside Funds (If         Department            No. 826, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                               Available) and General                            May 28, 2013. The implementing Ordinance
                                                                               Fund                                              provided for less restrictive requirements for lot
                                                                                                                                 coverage and floor-area ratios (FARs) and flexible
                                                                                                                                 development standards including parking
                                                                                                                                 requirements. The implementing ordinance also
                                                                                                                                 included design guidelines for VMU projects.
     6. Demonstration Projects Actively Engage in Design- 2012-2013            Tax Increment Housing       City Manager’s Office This program and the related Program 7 were
                               Development Process,       (Complete Rezoning   Set-aside Funds (If                               implemented through a revision to the City’s Zoning
                               Rezone Priority Sites and  of Priority Sites by Available) and State Grants                       Code. Ordinance No. 827, which was adopted by
                               Develop Projects           12-31-12)                                                              the City Council on May 28, 2013, applied the
                                                                                                                                 Special Housing (SPL) Overlay to eight sites
                                                                                                                                 comprising 14.23 acres. The SPL Overlay allows
                                                                                                                                 affordable housing projects at a density of up to 20
                                                                                                                                 du/acre to be considered through a ministerial
                                                                                                                                 permit process, as long as certain design standards
                                                                                                                                 are met. Four of the eight properties are City-
                                                                                                                                 owned, and the City has been in discussion with
                                                                                                                                 People’s Self-Help Housing regarding the potential
                                                                                                                                 development of affordable housing on one or more
                                                                                                                                 of the City-owned sites. People’s Self-Help Housing
                                                                                                                                 is particularly interested in assisting with the
                                                                                                                                 development of a housing project on Site 11, which
                                                                                                                                 is a City-owned property adjacent to the City’s
                                                                                                                                 Public Works Department offices and equipment
                                                                                                                                 yard. City staff also encouraged the participation of
                                                                                                                                 the owners of the private properties considered for
                                                                                                                                 the SPL Overlay, and the privately-owned parcels in
                                                                                                                                 the SPL Overlay were included with the support of
                                                                                                                                 the property owners.
                                                                                          A-3                                                                             December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                   Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                                      Table A-1
                                                             Housing Element Program Evaluation 2008-2013
              Program            Program Objectives            Schedule            Funding Source          Responsible Entity                    Accomplishments
     7. Senior Housing         Engage in Design-          2012-2013            Tax Increment Housing      City Manager’s Office Combined with Program 6. Refer to the
                               Development Process,       (Complete Rezoning   Set-aside Funds (If                              accomplishments discussion for Program 6, above.
                               Rezone Priority Sites      of Priority Sites by Available) State/Federal
                                                          12-31-12)            Sources
     8. Mortgage Assistance    Research Legislation, Seek 2012-2013            Tax Increment Housing      City Manager’s Office Due to the loss of Redevelopment Housing funds,
                               Grant Funds and Develop                         Set-aside Funds (If                              the City was unable to utilize this program thus far in
                               Program                                         Available) State/Federal                         the 2006-2014 Housing Element cycle. However,
                                                                               Sources                                          the 2014-2021 Housing Element Update retains this
                                                                                                                                program and anticipates pursuing funds for
                                                                                                                                mortgage assistances during the 2014-2012
                                                                                                                                Housing Element cycle.
     9. Amnesty Program        Finalize and Implement     2012-2013            CDBG, HOME and Tax         City Manager’s Office Discussed above under the accomplishments of
                               Program Guidelines in                           Increment Housing Set-                           Program 3.
                               Consultation with                               aside Funds (If Available)
                               Stakeholder Agencies
     10. Inclusionary Housing  Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013            General Fund               Community Development This program will remain in the 2014-2021 Housing
                                                                                                          Department            Element update, and implementation will be
                                                                                                                                undertaken following the adoption of the update.
                                                                                                                                Work on the implementation of this program was
                                                                                                                                deferred to allow staff and the 2014-2021 Housing
                                                                                                                                Element consultant to address concerns raised by
                                                                                                                                the public regarding inclusionary requirements for
                                                                                                                                rental housing outside of the Redevelopment Area,
                                                                                                                                given recent case law including the Palmer decision
                                                                                                                                (Palmer/sixth Street Properties, L.P. v. City of Los
                                                                                                                                Angeles (2009).
     11. Capacity Preservation Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013            General Fund               Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
                                                                                                          Department            No. 828, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                                                                June 11, 2013. The implementing Ordinance set
                                                                                                                                forth replacement housing requirements to preserve
                                                                                                                                residential development potential.
     12. Density Bonus         Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013            General Fund               Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
                                                                                                          Department            No. 828, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                                                                June 11, 2013. The implementing Ordinance
                                                                                                                                updated the City’s Density Bonus provisions to
                                                                                                                                reflect current State Density Bonus law
                                                                                                                                requirements and provisions.
     13. Public-Private        Formulate Partnerships to  Ongoing              General Fund               City Manager’s Office This is an on-going effort. As discussed under the
                                                                                          A-4                                                                           December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                   Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                            Table A-1
                                                          Housing Element Program Evaluation 2008-2013
               Program        Program Objectives            Schedule      Funding Source    Responsible Entity                    Accomplishments
     Partnerships            Facilitate Goal Attainment                                                          accomplishments for Program 6 above, the City
                                                                                                                 applied the SPL Overlay to four City-owned parcels,
                                                                                                                 and has been in discussion with People’s Self-Help
                                                                                                                 Housing regarding public-private partnerships for
                                                                                                                 affordable housing developments on one or more of
                                                                                                                 the City-owned sites. Public outreach efforts and
                                                                                                                 outreach to housing agencies and advocacy groups
                                                                                                                 has been maintained through notices of upcoming
                                                                                                                 workshops on the 2014-2021 Housing Element
                                                                                                                 update.
     14. Housing             Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
     Accommodation                                                                         Department            No. 828, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                                                 June 11, 2013. The implementing Ordinance
                                                                                                                 updated the City’s regulations and permit
                                                                                                                 requirements for special needs housing projects to
                                                                                                                 be consistent with State law.
     15. Persons with        Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
     Disabilities                                                                          Department            No. 828, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                                                 June 11, 2013. The implementing Ordinance
                                                                                                                 updated the City’s regulations and permit
                                                                                                                 requirements for housing projects for the disabled
                                                                                                                 including establishing provisions for reasonable
                                                                                                                 accommodations to be made.
     16. Homeless Population Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
                                                                                           Department            No. 828, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                                                 June 11, 2013. The implementing Ordinance
                                                                                                                 updated the City’s regulations and permit
                                                                                                                 requirements for the homeless population, including
                                                                                                                 provisions for emergency shelters, residential care
                                                                                                                 homes, and transitional and supportive housing.
     17. Growth Management   Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
     Ordinance                                                                             Department            No. 828, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                                                 June 11, 2013. The implementing Ordinance
                                                                                                                 updated the City’s regulations regarding its
                                                                                                                 residential growth management ordinance to
                                                                                                                 broaden the list of exemptions to include split
                                                                                                                 homes and small Village Mixed Use (VMU) units, to
                                                                                                                 remove the differentiation between single-family and
                                                                                                                 multi-family allocations, and to create a special
                                                                                A-5                                                                      December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                     Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                             Table A-1
                                                           Housing Element Program Evaluation 2008-2013
              Program           Program Objectives           Schedule      Funding Source    Responsible Entity                    Accomplishments
                                                                                                                  carry-over pool for unused allocations.
     18. Resource Constraints Amend CEQA Guidelines      2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development This is an on-going effort with implementation tied to
                                                                                            Department            additional resource and constraints studies and a
                                                                                                                  future update of the City’s General Plan. In the
                                                                                                                  meantime, projects will continue to be reviewed with
                                                                                                                  respect to supporting studies of traffic and water
                                                                                                                  resources.
     19. Design Review        Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development Additional guidance for design review has been
                                                                                            Department            included as design guidelines for new residential
                                                                                                                  projects. Design guidelines were included in both
                                                                                                                  Ordinance No. 826 and Ordinance No. 827, which
                                                                                                                  were adopted by the City Council on June 11, 2013.
     20. Retention            Continue Financial Support Ongoing        CDBG & HOME         City Manager’s Office This is an on-going effort. The City will continue to
                              of Housing Rehabilitation                                                           cooperate with the Area Housing Authority of
                              Loan Program                                                                        Ventura County and Help of Ojai to make funding
                                                                                                                  for housing rehabilitation and community assistance
                                                                                                                  available.
     21. Anti-Displacement    Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development This program was implemented through Ordinance
                                                                                            Department            No. 828, which was adopted by the City Council on
                                                                                                                  June 11, 2013. The implementing Ordinance
                                                                                                                  updated the Zoning Code to provide provisions for
                                                                                                                  replacement housing in the event of displacement.
     22. Sustain-ability      Amend Zoning Ordinance     2012-2013      General Fund        Community Development Ordinance No. 828, which was adopted by the City
                                                                                            Department            Council on June 11, 2013, included new guidance
                                                                                                                  for incorporation of green (Complete) streets
                                                                                                                  features. Ordinance No. 827, adopted by the City
                                                                                                                  Council on June 11, 2013, required green building
                                                                                                                  features for housing projects.
     23. Fair Housing         Continue Financial Support Ongoing        CDBG                City Manager’s Office This is an on-going effort. The City will continue its
                              of Regional Fair Housing                                                            participation in fair housing initiatives and promotion
                              Program                                                                             of equal opportunity and anti-discrimination
                                                                                                                  practices.
     24. Information and      Outreach and Public        Ongoing        General Fund        Community Development This is an on-going effort. Public outreach efforts
     Referral                 Participation                                                 Department            and outreach to housing agencies and advocacy
                                                                                                                  groups has been maintained through notices of
                                                                                                                  upcoming workshops on the 2014-2021 Housing
                                                                                                                  Element update.
                                                                                 A-6                                                                        December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                   Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                         Table A-2
                       Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives 2008-2013
                                                                     Quantified
                                Program Category                                              Progress
                                                                     Objective
                       New Construction*
                         Extremely Low                                    45                        0
                         Very Low                                         45                        0
                         Low                                              64                        5
                         Moderate                                         77                        21
                         Above Moderate                                   49                        12
                         Total                                           279                        38
                       *Quantified objective and progress for new construction reflect units built 2006-
                       2012, per the previous RHNA cycle
                       Source: City of Ojai, 2013
                                                               A-7                                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element     Appendix A – Evaluation
This page intentionally left blank.
                                       A-8          December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                  Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                       Appendix B
                               Residential Land Inventory
State law requires the Housing Element to include an inventory of vacant or underutilized
sites with the potential for residential development during the planning period. The
assumptions and methodology for the residential land inventory are provided below and
summarized in Tables B-1 through B-3.
1.      Vacant and Underutilized Sites
Tables B-2 and B-3 summarize vacant and underutilized parcels designated for residential
development. During the previous planning period, the Municipal Code was amended
to apply an “SPL Overlay” to eight sites listed in Table B-2 and shown in Figure B-1. The SPL
overlay allows multi-family development by-right at a density of 20 units/acre. The
estimated realistic capacity of the SPL sites is 176 units, which are allocated to the lower-
income categories based on the state “default density.” Of the eight sites, four are City-
owned, and the City has been actively exploring affordable housing development
opportunities on these sites with developers.
Table B-3 shows other residential sites with potential for development of moderate- and
above-moderate-income housing during the current planning period. The capacity of
these sites exceeds the RHNA allocation in the moderate and above-moderate
categories.
2.      Second Residential Units and Home Splits
The Municipal Code allows 2nd units in single-family residential districts, pursuant to state
law. During the previous Housing Element cycle approximately seven second units were
approved. In 2013 the Municipal Code was amended to establish a Second Unit
Compliance Program that provides an opportunity for property owners to legalize
unpermitted second units. It is anticipated that this program will encourage owners of
unpermitted second units to upgrade non-conforming units thereby providing additional
affordable housing opportunities in the planning period.
The Municipal Code was also amended to implement a “Home Split” program, which
allows owners of single-family dwellings of at least 2,000 square feet on lots of at least
one-half acre to divide the home into two units without discretionary review.
It is anticipated that these programs will result in at least 9 additional 2nd units and 9
home splits during the 2014-2021 planning period, of which a total of 8 units would be
expected to be affordable to lower-income persons.
3.      Land Inventory Summary
The results of the land inventory analysis are summarized as follows:
                                              B-1                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                  Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                                          Table B-1
                                                   Land Inventory Summary
                                                                               Income Category
                                    Category                       Lower      Mod         Above      Total
      SPL Overlay Zone (Table B-2)                                  176         -            -        176
      Other vacant and underutilized land (Table B-3)                -        >70          >155      >225
      Potential second units & home splits                           8          8            2        18
      Total Potential Units                                         184       >70          >155      >371
      RHNA 2014-2021                                                146        70           155       371
      Adequate Sites?                                               Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes
      Source: City of Ojai Planning Dept., 2013
This analysis demonstrates that the City’s land inventory exceeds the RHNA allocation in
all income categories for the current planning period.
SPL Overlay
During the preparation of the City’s 2006-2014 Housing Element, the inventory of
residential sites identified insufficient capacity to accommodate the City’s RHNA
allocation in the very-low and low income categories. As a result, Program 6
(Demonstration Projects) called for the application of an “SPL Overlay” to sufficient sites
for multi-family housing at a density of 20 units/acre to accommodate the RHNA. The
2006-2014 Housing Element reviewed candidate SPL sites and identified priority sites that
appeared to have the greatest immediate potential for affordable housing
development.
After adoption of the 2006-2014 Housing Element, the City commenced the
implementation phase of the SPL Overlay. Additional public meetings were held to
review and refine the site analysis and identify the most appropriate parcels for rezoning
to SPL. The parcels that were ultimately designated for the SPL Overlay are shown in
Table B-2. These parcels represent the results of an extensive public participation process
over a period of many months and many meetings with the Planning Commission and
City Council.
Analysis of Unaccommodated Need
Table B-2 shows the eight sites that the SPL Overlay was applied to in the previous
planning period. The SPL designation allows a density of 20 units/acre by-right, consistent
with state law. These sites have a realistic capacity of 179 units, compared to the
rezoning program requirement of 113 lower-income units. Although some of the SPL sites
have an estimated realistic capacity of less than 16 units, the realistic capacity of the
larger sites (i.e., Sites 6, 10, 17 and 21) totals 146 units, which exceeds the rezoning
requirement. In addition, pursuant to Government Code 65863, the City will ensure no
net loss of capacity to accommodate the lower-income RHNA throughout the planning
period. Therefore the rezoning program requirements were satisfied, and no carryover of
unaccommodated need is applicable pursuant to Government Code Section 65584.09.
                                                             B-2                                  December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                          Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                                                                             Table B-2
                                                                                         SPL Overlay Sites
      PARCEL I.D.                                    ATTRIBUTES                                                                   SUITABILITY                               POTENTIAL (Units)
           Assessor
 Map #                                        Current Status                               Zoning                         Constraints                        Net Acres     Maximum   Realistic
           Parcel #
                    Site #6 is owned by the Ojai Unified School District, which has
                    identified the property for possible residential reuse as part of
                    the District’s consolidation of facilities resulting from a dramatic             Building Mass and Scale Must be Integrated with
   6*     220140010 downturn in student enrollment. The site is occupied by                 P-L      Surrounding Predominately One- and Two-Story                    4.00        80         50
                    administration buuildings and the City has conducted                             Construction
                    exploratory discussions with the District on possible
                    partnership opportunities.
                    Site #7 is a wedge-shaped parcel that protrudes into a
                    residential neighborhood. The only building improvement on
                                                                                                     Frontage of Ojai Avenue Must be Commercial or            0.69 (Only
                    the site is a small abandoned former retail structure that
                                                                                                     Vertical Mixed Use with Commercial at Street Level;    applies to the
    7     220140480 occupies the commercial frontage along Ojai Avenue. These               C-1                                                                                  13           9
                                                                                                     Balance of Site May Be Mixed Use or Stand-Alone           rear of the
                    characteristics make the site ideal for mixed use
                                                                                                     Residential                                                property)
                    redevelopment with commercial on the street frontage and
                    residential on the balance.
          230072010                                                                                  Building Mass and Scale Must be Integrate with
    9               Vacant                                                                  P-L      Surrounding Predominately One and Two Story                     0.77        15         10
          230072070
                                                                                                     Construction
                    Site #10 is owned by the City of Ojai and is part of a civic                     Clustered Development, Taking Into Account Site
                    center complex. Approximately 75% of the site is vacant or                       Constraints and Environmental Setting; Building Mass
                    void of significant improvements. The City’s ownership makes                     and Scale Must be Integrate with Surrounding
   10     230090010                                                                         P-L                                                                      4.40        88         55
                    the site an ideal Demonstration Project candidate. Vegetative                    Predominately One and Two Story Construction;
                    and slope constraints on a portion of the site are expected to                   Access Shall be Provided to Santa Ana Street and
                    result in a potential development capacity of 55 units.                          Ventura Street (B)
                                                                                                     Clustered Development, Taking Into Account Site
                                                                                                     Constraints and Environmental Setting; Building Mass
                                                                                                     and Scale Must be Integrate with Surrounding
   11     230120020 Vacant                                                                  P-L                                                                      0.87        17         11
                                                                                                     Predominately One and Two Story Construction;
                                                                                                     Access Shall be Provided to South Signal Street, South
                                                                                                     Montgomery Street, and South Ventura Street (B)
                                                                                                     Primary Access Should be Provided from Whispering
   17     230172065 Vacant                                                                  M-1                                                                      2.00        40         25
                                                                                                     Oaks With Emergency Exiting at Bryant Street.
                    Site #21 is an abandoned bowling alley that has residential
                    frontage on two sides. The building has been vacant for a                        Frontage of Ojai Avenue Must be Commercial or            1.30 (Only
                    number of years and its potential for adaptive reuse is                          Vertical Mixed Use with Commercial at Street Level;    applies to the
   21     280073010                                                                         C-1                                                                                  26         16
                    impaired by its “build to suit” configuration. The property is                   Balance of Site May Be Mixed Use or Stand-Alone           rear of the
                    located within a former Redevelopment Project Area and is                        Residential.                                               property)
                    considered extremely blighted, thereby making it an ideal
                                                                                                  B-3                                                                         December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                  Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                              candidate for redevelopment.
                                                                                                            Building Mass and Scale Must be Integrate with
   23        210092010        Vacant                                                            R-2         Surrounding Predominately One and Two Story                             0.20             4             3
                                                                                                            Construction
 Totals                                                                                                                                                                            14.23          283           179
 Sources: County of Ventura, Assessor’s Office, Parcel Data Base, Rolls for 2006. City of Ojai, Community Development Department, Ordinance No. 827.
 Notes:
 B = Slope and Vegetation Constraint. Net Acres reflect reduction to account for these constraints.
 Maximum Potential reflects development minimum required density of 20 units/acre.
 Realistic Potential reflects development potential at a maximum allowed density of 20 units/acre, utilizing a development intensity factor of 63% reflective of the pattern of existing developed properties within
 Ojai.
                                                                                                        B-4                                                                                     December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                   Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                          Figure B-1
                                       SPL Overlay Sites
                                              B-5                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    100070130    AG       AG       8.58 $  103,294     $      4,445       4%   U       0    1    1
    100070140    AG       AG       3.63 $  427,002     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    220210010    AG       AG       7.33 $  132,277     $    13,364        9%   U       0    1    1
    220210020    AG       AG       10.5 $  278,986     $     92,888      25%   D       0    2    0
    220210090   MR        AG       0.85 $   28,097     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    220210120    AG       AG       6.55 $   88,536     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    220210140    AG       AG       8.98 $  127,872     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    220210210    AG       AG          1 $   84,515     $   311,593       79%   D       1    1    1
    220210245    AG       AG       8.36 $  420,573     $   459,310       52%   D       1    1    1
    280080060    AG       AG       20.2 $   51,106     $         -        0%   V       0    3    3
    280111020    AG       AG       3.16 $       -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    190081050   GC       B-P          1 $   39,796     $   187,228       82%   D       1    1    1
    190092010   GC       B-P       0.25 $  225,000     $   125,000       36%   D       0    0    0
    190092030   GC       B-P       1.71 $  551,108     $   183,348       25%   U       1    1    1
    190092170   GC       B-P       0.86 $  336,567     $   262,519       44%   D       1    1    1
    190092180   GC       B-P       0.14 $   59,684     $      1,763       3%   U       0    0    0
    190092190   GC       B-P       0.16 $   70,376     $   212,769       75%   D       0    0    0
    190092200   GC       B-P       0.12 $   95,000     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190100160   GC       B-P       0.33 $   98,862     $   450,406       82%   D       0    0    0
    190100190   GC       B-P       0.52 $  229,500     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190100200   GC       B-P       0.33 $  118,910     $   232,418       66%   D       0    0    0
    190110260   GC       B-P       1.46 $  579,527     $   822,557       59%   D       0    0    0
    190110380   GC       B-P       0.36 $   90,313     $   202,844       69%   D       0    0    0
    190110410   GC       B-P       0.05 $    9,192     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190110420   GC       B-P       0.52 $   85,508     $   240,321       74%   D       0    0    0
    190110470   GC       B-P        1.8 $  715,063     $  1,212,806      63%   D       0    0    0
    190180050   GC       B-P       3.16 $       -      $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190180060   GC       B-P       0.73 $   42,585     $   141,292       77%   D       0    0    0
    190180070   GC       B-P       0.51 $  326,591     $   121,000       27%   U       0    0    0
    190180080   GC       B-P       2.59 $  849,176     $  2,455,251      74%   D       0    0    0
    190220015   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220025   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220035   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220045   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220055   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220065   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220075   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220085   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220095   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220105   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220115   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    190220125   GC       B-P          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V       0    0    0
    200181070   GC       B-P       0.37 $  610,881     $     89,383      13%   U       0    0    0
    200181080   GC       B-P       0.58 $  336,569     $   381,105       53%   D       0    0    0
                                                  B-6                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200181090   GC       B-P       0.89 $  308,967     $  1,023,043      77%   D       0    0    0
    200181110   GC       B-P       0.45 $  529,910     $   672,987       56%   D       0    0    0
    200181120   GC       B-P       0.25 $  247,169     $   652,270       73%   D       7    7    7
    200181160   GC       B-P       0.58 $  242,326     $  1,406,874      85%   D       0    0    0
    230061040   GC       B-P       0.16 $  134,365     $   116,841       47%   D       0    0    0
    230061050   GC       B-P       0.17 $   11,813     $     98,033      89%   D       1    1    1
    230061080   MR       B-P       0.13 $    9,848     $     24,200      71%   D       1    1    1
    230061160   GC       B-P       0.15 $  300,000     $   200,000       40%   D       0    0    0
    230061170   GC       B-P       0.16 $  183,546     $     67,682      27%   U       1    1    1
    230061210   GC       B-P       0.17 $  102,942     $   300,431       74%   D       0    0    0
    230061230   GC       B-P       0.28 $  281,065     $   232,418       45%   D       0    0    0
    230061270   GC       B-P       0.16 $  123,394     $   306,342       71%   D       0    0    0
    230061280   GC       B-P       0.33 $  302,685     $    98,128       24%   U       0    0    0
    170301115   GC        C-1      0.42 $  148,916     $   460,500       76%   D       0    1    0
    170302105   GC        C-1      2.31 $  237,696     $  1,682,811      88%   D       0    1    0
    170304145   GC        C-1      4.21 $  493,319     $  1,334,752      73%   D       0    1    0
    200230015   GC        C-1      0.03 $   57,537     $   172,630       75%   D       1    1    1
    200230025   GC        C-1      0.03 $  124,318     $   186,478       60%   D       1    1    1
    200230035   GC        C-1      0.03 $   85,787     $   128,680       60%   D       1    1    1
    200230045   GC        C-1      0.03 $  260,073     $   260,073       50%   D       1    1    1
    200230055   GC        C-1      0.03 $  221,085     $   221,085       50%   D       1    1    1
    200230065   GC        C-1      0.03 $  267,903     $   267,903       50%   D       1    1    1
    200230075   GC        C-1      0.03 $   52,492     $   157,501       75%   D       1    1    1
    200230085   GC        C-1      0.03 $  123,808     $   185,713       60%   D       1    1    1
    200230095   GC        C-1      0.03 $   33,654     $   143,417       81%   D       1    1    1
    210081040   GC        C-1      0.23 $  126,404     $     74,644      37%   D       1    1    1
    210081050   GC        C-1      0.23 $  459,000     $   147,000       24%   U       0    1    1
    210081070   GC        C-1      0.37 $  148,370     $   844,000       85%   D       0    1    0
    210081200   GC        C-1      0.23 $  450,000     $   270,000       38%   D       0    1    0
    210081220   GC        C-1      0.23 $  499,800     $     61,200      11%   U       1    1    1
    210081230   GC        C-1      0.22 $  116,841     $   175,263       60%   D       1    1    1
    210081410   GC        C-1      0.69 $  519,200     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210081420   GC        C-1      0.08 $  150,000     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210081430   GC        C-1      0.32 $  600,000     $   270,000       31%   D       0    1    0
    210082010   GC        C-1      0.09 $  291,312     $     62,424      18%   U       2    2    2
    210082020   GC        C-1      0.09 $  249,057     $     30,733      11%   U       1    1    1
    210082030   GC        C-1      0.07 $   74,565     $     34,412      32%   D       0    1    0
    210082130   GC        C-1      0.19 $   95,341     $     83,423      47%   D       1    1    1
    210082140   GC        C-1      0.17 $  126,856     $   112,123       47%   D       1    1    1
    210082150   GC        C-1      0.18 $   14,347     $     73,517      84%   D       2    2    2
    210092100   GC        C-1      0.27 $  378,356     $   212,958       36%   D       3    3    3
    210102060   GC        C-1       0.3 $   17,922     $     18,446      51%   D       1    1    1
    210102070   GC        C-1       0.4 $  890,000     $   360,000       29%   D       0    1    0
    210102110   GC        C-1      0.36 $  810,000     $   440,000       35%   D       0    1    0
    210104070    DC       C-1      0.17 $       -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
                                                  B-7                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210104080    DC       C-1      0.34 $  841,500      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210104090    DC       C-1       0.6 $ 1,336,200     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210106100    DC       C-1      0.51 $  237,117      $     78,726      25%   U       0    1    1
    210112020    DC       C-1      2.01 $ 1,928,679     $  1,980,114      51%   D       0    1    0
    210140010    DC       C-1      0.29 $        -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210140020    DC       C-1      0.17 $  151,043      $   528,681       78%   D       0    1    0
    210140130    DC       C-1      0.05 $    10,741     $        873       8%   U       0    1    1
    210140140    DC       C-1      0.05 $    11,639     $     17,922      61%   D       0    1    0
    210140150    DC       C-1      0.08 $    83,423     $   137,054       62%   D       0    1    0
    210140160    DC       C-1      0.61 $  330,790      $     80,409      20%   U       0    1    1
    210140170    DC       C-1      0.13 $    24,840     $   143,869       85%   D       0    1    0
    210140180    DC       C-1      0.12 $    76,551     $   596,448       89%   D       0    1    0
    210140190    DC       C-1      0.19 $  118,312      $   369,965       76%   D       0    1    0
    210140205    DC       C-1       0.1 $    22,468     $   382,343       94%   D       0    1    0
    210140210    DC       C-1      0.16 $    37,323     $   395,799       91%   D       0    1    0
    210140220    DC       C-1      0.19 $    25,432     $   104,414       80%   D       0    1    0
    210140230    DC       C-1      0.04 $        -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210140240    DC       C-1      0.04 $    50,962     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210140250    DC       C-1      1.22 $        -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210140260    DC       C-1      0.09 $  165,716      $   767,199       82%   D       0    1    0
    210140330    DC       C-1      0.15 $  218,655      $   406,084       65%   D       0    1    0
    210140340    DC       C-1      0.22 $  269,250      $   594,699       69%   D       0    1    0
    210140360    DC       C-1      0.07 $    17,017     $     24,197      59%   D       0    1    0
    210140370    DC       C-1      0.06 $    12,554     $     29,184      70%   D       0    1    0
    210140380    DC       C-1      0.06 $    12,534     $     17,767      59%   D       0    1    0
    210140400    DC       C-1      0.05 $  510,000      $   255,000       33%   D       0    1    0
    210140410    DC       C-1      0.03 $    64,985     $   136,394       68%   D       0    1    0
    210140420    DC       C-1      0.09 $  174,687      $   532,265       75%   D       0    1    0
    210140430    DC       C-1      0.01 $    20,355     $     14,959      42%   D       0    1    0
    210140440    DC       C-1      0.13 $    31,894     $     60,668      66%   D       0    1    0
    210140450    DC       C-1      0.06 $  139,542      $   400,834       74%   D       0    1    0
    210140460    DC       C-1      0.04 $    88,795     $   204,974       70%   D       0    1    0
    210140480    DC       C-1      0.05 $        -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    210140490    DC       C-1      0.02 $    33,434     $     33,381      50%   D       0    1    0
    210140500   GC        C-1       0.5 $    85,903     $   379,087       82%   D       0    1    0
    210140510   GC        C-1      0.35 $    59,453     $   109,319       65%   D       0    1    0
    220140460   GC        C-1      0.41 $  131,143      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    220140470   GC        C-1       0.2 $  176,421      $   189,393       52%   D       1    1    1
    220140480   GC        C-1      1.18 $  326,239      $     53,470      14%   U       0    1    1
    220140590   GC        C-1      0.21 $  163,232      $     56,211      26%   U       0    1    1
    220140600   GC        C-1       0.2 $  161,070      $     10,808       6%   U       0    1    1
    220151010   GC        C-1      0.42 $  156,123      $     86,402      36%   D       0    1    0
    220151360   GC        C-1      0.21 $    74,570     $   110,138       60%   D       0    1    0
    220151370   MR        C-1       0.1 $    38,729     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    220152010   GC        C-1      0.48 $    94,792     $   290,254       75%   D       0    1    0
                                                   B-8                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                        Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                               Table B-3
                   Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres     Land Value      Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220152020   GC        C-1      0.17  $    62,462     $     42,937      41%   D       1    1    1
    220152300   GC        C-1      0.26  $  101,996      $   244,542       71%   D       0    1    0
    220152310   GC        C-1      0.27  $  149,230      $     99,483      40%   D       0    1    0
    220161330   GC        C-1      0.33  $  213,688      $   236,184       53%   D       0    1    0
    220161340   GC        C-1      0.16  $    26,180     $     26,522      50%   D       0    1    0
    220161350   GC        C-1      0.16  $  346,800      $   204,000       37%   D       0    1    0
    220161360   GC        C-1      0.16  $    32,249     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    220161370   GC        C-1      0.14  $    85,090     $   210,777       71%   D       0    1    0
    220161380   GC        C-1      0.17  $    68,625     $   261,331       79%   D       0    1    0
    220161390   GC        C-1      0.53  $  364,140      $   717,876       66%   D       0    1    0
    220161415   GC        C-1      0.44  $  206,360      $     63,357      23%   U       0    1    1
    220162145   GC        C-1      0.45  $  322,487      $   390,257       55%   D       0    1    0
    230010130   GC        C-1      4.16  $ 1,481,529     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230030020   GC        C-1      0.35  $  302,685      $   108,101       26%   U       1    1    1
    230030030   GC        C-1      0.35  $  416,160      $     98,838      19%   U       1    1    1
    230030040   GC        C-1      1.12  $  780,300      $   926,476       54%   D       0    1    0
    230030050   GC        C-1      1.05  $  194,497      $   103,326       35%   D       1    1    1
    230030060   GC        C-1      0.55  $    50,542     $     17,406      26%   U       1    1    1
    230030140   GC        C-1      0.26  $  204,473      $   321,316       61%   D       0    1    0
    230030150   GC        C-1      0.35  $  330,790      $   622,991       65%   D      12   12   12
    230030180   GC        C-1      0.75  $  146,240      $   295,464       67%   D       0    1    0
    230030190   GC        C-1       0.3  $  126,794      $     31,391      20%   U       0    1    1
    230063140   GC        C-1      0.61  $  430,194      $   240,907       36%   D       0    1    0
    230063170   GC        C-1      0.58  $  377,145      $   455,695       55%   D       0    1    0
    230063190   GC        C-1      0.16  $  108,721      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230063200   GC        C-1      0.12  $    43,239     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230063210   GC        C-1      0.39  $  675,000      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230063230   GC        C-1      0.36  $  246,991      $   231,593       48%   D       0    1    0
    230074030    DC       C-1      0.34  $  287,093      $   433,970       60%   D       0    1    0
    230076020    DC       C-1      1.99  $  619,977      $   940,923       60%   D       0    1    0
    230077040   GC        C-1      0.66  $  107,330      $     52,864      33%   D       1    1    1
    230077050    DC       C-1      0.18  $  151,601      $   586,734       79%   D       0    1    0
    230077070    DC       C-1      0.49  $  257,053      $   122,846       32%   D       0    1    0
    230077080     P       C-1      0.04  $  135,655      $   156,323       54%   D       0    1    0
    230077090    DC       C-1      0.04  $        -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230100020    DC       C-1      0.12  $    59,513     $     12,395      17%   U       0    1    1
    230100040    DC       C-1      0.08  $  133,612      $   183,772       58%   D       0    1    0
    230100050    DC       C-1      0.09  $    51,368     $   164,020       76%   D       0    1    0
    230100060    DC       C-1      0.25  $    46,624     $     48,139      51%   D       0    1    0
    230100230    DC       C-1      0.17  $    70,025     $   210,091       75%   D       0    1    0
    230100240    DC       C-1      0.29  $  149,949      $  1,209,737      89%   D       0    1    0
    230100250   GC        C-1      0.11  $  163,665      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230110080   GC        C-1      0.12  $  375,000      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230110110   GC        C-1       0.4  $    64,554     $      3,562       5%   U       0    1    1
    230110120   GC        C-1      0.17  $    75,796     $   144,019       66%   D       0    1    0
                                                    B-9                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                   Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres     Land Value     Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230110130    DC       C-1      0.21  $   79,252     $   108,428       58%   D       0    1    0
    230110400    DC       C-1      0.17  $  243,228     $   352,411       59%   D       0    1    0
    230110410    DC       C-1      0.42  $  367,902     $   547,159       60%   D       0    1    0
    230110420    DC       C-1      0.02  $   60,000     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230110440   GC        C-1      0.25  $  610,000     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230110450   GC        C-1      0.55  $  400,000     $   450,000       53%   D       0    1    0
    230141140   GC        C-1      0.33  $  149,161     $   137,439       48%   D       0    1    0
    230141340   GC        C-1      0.55  $  413,489     $   341,168       45%   D       0    1    0
    230142100   GC        C-1      0.75  $  101,421     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230142170   GC        C-1      1.05  $  651,530     $   218,281       25%   U       0    1    1
    230150060   GC        C-1      0.22  $  260,100     $   234,090       47%   D       0    1    0
    230150070   GC        C-1      0.82  $       -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230150085   GC        C-1      0.12  $   43,708     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230150250   GC        C-1      0.22  $  134,365     $     75,945      36%   D       0    1    0
    230150315   GC        C-1      1.63  $  604,172     $   344,024       36%   D       0    1    0
    230150345   CM        C-1      0.32  $  192,321     $     66,354      26%   U       0    1    1
    230150405   CM        C-1        0.3 $  175,258     $      5,837       3%   U       0    1    1
    230150435   CM        C-1      0.13  $   44,689     $   342,004       88%   D       0    1    0
    230150445   CM        C-1      0.09  $   29,563     $      2,002       6%   U       0    1    1
    230160095   CM        C-1        0.5 $   75,264     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230160105   GC        C-1      0.27  $  118,910     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    230160115   GC        C-1      0.27  $  111,280     $      5,297       5%   U       0    1    1
    240010090   GC        C-1      1.74  $  520,200     $  1,352,520      72%   D       0    1    0
    240020010   GC        C-1      0.87  $   74,435     $      8,050      10%   U       0    1    1
    240020090   GC        C-1      2.12  $  755,330     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    240020100   GC        C-1        1.8 $  141,710     $     85,663      38%   D       0    1    0
    240071025   GC        C-1      0.89  $  116,762     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    240072015   GC        C-1      0.45  $   56,861     $    48,733       46%   D       1    1    1
    240072025   GC        C-1        0.9 $   74,570     $     24,840      25%   U       1    1    1
    240072035   GC        C-1        0.5 $  156,179     $     76,392      33%   D       0    1    0
    280072270   GC        C-1      0.95  $  540,600     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    280072280   GC        C-1      1.19  $  663,000     $   479,400       42%   D       0    1    0
    280072290   GC        C-1      1.02  $  438,137     $  1,278,246      74%   D       0    1    0
    280072300   GC        C-1      0.69  $   35,272     $     13,549      28%   U       0    1    1
    280072310     P       C-1      1.14  $  810,764     $  1,635,583      67%   D       0    1    0
    280073010     P       C-1      1.64  $  521,854     $     40,487       7%   U       0    1    1
    280073020   GC        C-1      0.89  $       -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    280073030   GC        C-1      0.34  $       -      $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    280073040   GC        C-1      1.14  $  850,000     $  1,670,000      66%   D       0    1    0
    280073050   GC        C-1      2.48  $  338,006     $         -        0%   V       0    1    1
    170290020    IR      I-R-2     39.5  $       -      $         -        0%   V       0   20    0
    180050120    IR      I-R-3      116  $  847,230     $  1,359,236      62%   D            0    0
    180050130   MHR      I-R-3     3.64  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    190100225    IR      I-R-1       2.8 $  145,297     $   633,687       81%   D       0    1    0
    190100240    IR      I-R-1         2 $   66,282     $  1,392,916      95%   D       0    1    0
                                                   B-10                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                               Table B-3
                   Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres     Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    190110040    IR      I-R-1     2.47  $ 634,016       $        -        0%   V       0    1    0
    190110335    IR      I-R-1     1.74  $ 468,620       $ 705,689        60%   D       0    1    0
    190110345    IR      I-R-1     3.77  $ 992,375       $ 540,291        35%   D       0    1    0
    190110360    IR      I-R-1     1.52  $ 107,621       $ 417,400        80%   D       0    1    0
    230010090    IR      I-R-3     5.15  $ 507,715       $ 307,958        38%   U            1    1
    230020180    IR      I-R-3     0.37  $ 129,055       $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230210025    IR      I-R-3           $ 499,800       $ 499,800        50%   D       1    2    1
    240010010     P      I-R-3     1.85  $        -      $        -        0%   V            1    1
    240010100    IR      I-R-3     1.32  $        -      $        -        0%   V            1    1
    240010110    IR      I-R-3      183  $14,045,400     $54,665,101      80%   D           29    0
    240031130    IR      I-R-3       3.7 $ 364,140       $ 45,778         11%   U            1    1
    230150030   CM        M-1      0.41  $ 17,160        $ 36,146         68%   D            1    0
    230150040   CM        M-1      0.16  $ 22,348        $ 80,367         78%   D       1    1    1
    230150050   CM        M-1        0.3 $ 14,319        $ 22,389         61%   D       1    1    1
    230150175   CM        M-1      0.58  $ 213,282       $ 46,818         18%   U       1    1    1
    230150205   CM        M-1      0.64  $ 61,204        $     3,394       5%   U            1    1
    230150285   CM        M-1      0.45  $ 32,487        $ 40,609         56%   D            1    0
    230150295   CM        M-1      0.89  $ 24,995        $ 138,277        85%   D            1    0
    230150415   CM        M-1        0.1 $     3,297     $ 25,229         88%   D            1    0
    230150425   CM        M-1      0.48  $ 52,187        $ 165,733        76%   D            1    0
    230150455   CM        M-1        0.1 $ 52,020        $ 187,272        78%   D            1    0
    230150475   CM        M-1          0 $ 395,352       $ 1,555,500      80%   D            1    0
    230150480   CM        M-1      0.82  $ 134,633       $ 102,025        43%   D       1    1    1
    230150490   CM        M-1      0.23  $ 37,717        $ 56,704         60%   D       1    1    1
    230150500   CM        M-1      0.23  $ 36,979        $ 55,023         60%   D       1    1    1
    230150510   CM        M-1      0.86  $ 151,129       $ 257,140        63%   D            1    0
    230160015   CM        M-1      3.91  $ 435,540       $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230160025   CM        M-1        1.7 $ 46,610        $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230160075   CM        M-1      0.31  $ 51,534        $ 175,671        77%   D            1    0
    230160085   CM        M-1      0.23  $     8,940     $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230160125   CM        M-1      0.44  $ 108,643       $     3,821       3%   U            1    1
    230160195   CM        M-1      0.13  $     6,211     $     9,863      61%   D            1    0
    230160205   CM        M-1      0.13  $ 40,908        $ 39,591         49%   D            1    0
    230160255   CM        M-1        0.3 $ 10,121        $ 111,316        92%   D            1    0
    230160285   CM        M-1      0.55  $ 229,500       $ 280,500        55%   D            1    0
    230160305   CM        M-1      0.13  $        -      $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230160315   CM        M-1      0.83  $ 23,288        $ 37,642         62%   D            1    0
    230160335   CM        M-1      0.97  $ 31,250        $ 51,715         62%   D            1    0
    230160345   CM        M-1      0.36  $ 11,616        $ 74,452         87%   D            1    0
    230160355   CM        M-1      0.61  $ 233,160       $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230160365   CM        M-1      0.26  $ 82,696        $ 523,752        86%   D            1    0
    230171060   CM        M-1      3.13  $ 217,263       $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230172055   CM        M-1      4.87  $ 733,031       $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230172065   CM        M-1          2 $ 297,168       $        -        0%   V            1    1
    230173020   CM        M-1        0.2 $ 39,995        $        -        0%   V            1    1
                                                    B-11                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                   Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.     GP     Zoning   Acres     Land Value     Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230173030    CM      M-1         0.7 $  137,287     $     11,890       8%   U            1    1
    230190060    CM      M-1       1.47  $  261,728     $   647,719       71%   D            1    0
    230200290    CM      M-1       0.22  $  115,970     $   195,493       63%   D            1    0
    240090210    CM      M-1       2.44  $   35,337     $   253,761       88%   D            1    0
    240120105   MPD      M-1       2.56  $  478,604     $  2,273,349      83%   D            1    0
    240120145   MPD      M-1       2.38  $  115,264     $   605,140       84%   D            1    0
    240120155   MPD      M-1       1.18  $  263,966     $   640,000       71%   D            1    0
    240120165   MPD      M-1         1.2 $  182,779     $   885,507       83%   D            1    0
    240120175   MPD      M-1       1.46  $  286,110     $         -        0%   V            1    1
    240120205   MPD      M-1       2.36  $  602,391     $         -        0%   V            1    1
    240120225   MPD      M-1       2.08  $  544,000     $  1,456,000      73%   D            1    0
    240120235   MPD      M-1         0.1 $   18,560     $         -        0%   V            1    1
    240120265   MPD      M-1       0.15  $   34,994     $         -        0%   V            1    1
    240120285   MPD      M-1       1.79  $  324,017     $  1,641,087      84%   D            1    0
    240120295   MPD      M-1       2.03  $  365,783     $  2,820,304      89%   D            1    0
    240151015   MPD      M-1       0.04  $   51,887     $   121,072       70%   D            1    0
    240151025   MPD      M-1       0.03  $   57,494     $   106,776       65%   D            1    0
    240151035   MPD      M-1       0.03  $   37,675     $     87,910      70%   D            1    0
    240151045   MPD      M-1       0.03  $   38,428     $     96,028      71%   D            1    0
    240151055   MPD      M-1       0.04  $   51,887     $   121,072       70%   D            1    0
    240151065   MPD      M-1       0.04  $   43,475     $   101,294       70%   D            1    0
    240151075   MPD      M-1       0.04  $   84,150     $   196,350       70%   D            1    0
    240151085   MPD      M-1       0.03  $   44,829     $   104,603       70%   D            1    0
    240151095   MPD      M-1       0.03  $   34,077     $     89,872      73%   D            1    0
    240151105   MPD      M-1       0.03  $   37,293     $     87,020      70%   D            1    0
    240151115   MPD      M-1       0.03  $   42,542     $     78,887      65%   D            1    0
    100070120   OSRE      OS        195  $  385,573     $     11,680       3%   D       0    1    0
    170280050   OSRE      OS       31.8  $  449,876     $         -        0%   V       0    1    0
    190082240     P       P-L      0.17  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    190091010     P       P-L        2.7 $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    190091020     P       P-L        0.1 $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    190091030     P       P-L      0.29  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    190220135     P       P-L          0 $   19,340     $         -        0%   V            1    0
    200160010     P       P-L      12.7  $  592,013     $  3,492,591      86%   D            1    0
    200170010     P       P-L      16.6  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    200182040     P       P-L      0.54  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    200192100     P       P-L      1.59  $   58,288     $   475,397       89%   D            1    0
    210011020     P       P-L      0.47  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210011080     P       P-L      1.43  $   49,210     $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210011090     P       P-L      33.1  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210062030     P       P-L      0.51  $   21,513     $     57,385      73%   D            1    0
    210062070     P       P-L      0.49  $  278,029     $   692,293       71%   D            1    0
    210081210     P       P-L      1.13  $   54,701     $   202,966       79%   D            1    0
    210103010     P       P-L      1.55  $  695,220     $   313,207       31%   U            1    1
    210106010     P       P-L      0.25  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
                                                   B-12                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                   Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres     Land Value     Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210106020   GC        P-L      0.17  $ 53,052       $     62,147      54%   D       1    1    1
    210106030     P       P-L      0.25  $ 17,227       $     25,840      60%   D            1    0
    210106040     P       P-L      0.36  $ 46,469       $   169,928       79%   D            1    0
    210106080     P       P-L      0.24  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210106095     P       P-L      0.27  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210113080     P       P-L      0.19  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210113220     P       P-L      0.41  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210120010     P       P-L      5.67  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    220081160     P       P-L      4.51  $ 80,714       $   476,040       86%   D            1    0
    220120010     P       P-L      9.73  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    220130240     P       P-L      1.28  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    220140010     P       P-L      2.83  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    220162120     P       P-L      0.49  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    220192230     P       P-L      1.47  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    220200010     P       P-L       9.8  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230010040    LR       P-L      0.72  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230030130     P       P-L      1.54  $ 135,426      $   367,757       73%   D            1    0
    230040020     P       P-L      0.84  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230040030     P       P-L      2.44  $ 58,288       $  1,028,056      95%   D            1    0
    230040080     P       P-L      2.04  $ 327,743      $   149,567       31%   U            1    1
    230062140     P       P-L      0.15  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230062220   GC        P-L       0.1  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230062230     P       P-L      0.01  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230070010     P       P-L      0.03  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230070030     P       P-L      0.71  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230071010     P       P-L       1.1  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230072010     P       P-L      0.43  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230072070     P       P-L      0.34  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230074020     P       P-L      0.43  $ 126,052      $     98,038      44%   D       1    1    1
    230075050     P       P-L      0.06  $    7,994     $     42,781      84%   D            1    0
    230075170     P       P-L      0.52  $ 20,610       $   276,450       93%   D            1    0
    230077020     P       P-L      0.42  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230082090     P       P-L       0.9  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230090010     P       P-L      8.79  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230090020     P       P-L      0.53  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230100210     P       P-L      7.46  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230100220     P       P-L      0.56  $ 94,167       $     78,023      45%   D            1    0
    230110010   CM        P-L      0.05  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230110360    HR       P-L      1.65  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230120020     P       P-L      1.74  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230120060     P       P-L      0.66  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230120070     P       P-L      0.74  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230120080     P       P-L       5.5  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230130010     P       P-L      0.48  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230130020     P       P-L      0.73  $       -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
                                                   B-13                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                        Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                               Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres     Land Value      Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230131010    P        P-L      3.12  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    230131025    P        P-L      0.18  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    230172015    P        P-L      5.17  $        -      $        -         0%   D     101  101  101
    230172045    P        P-L      3.91  $  594,660      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    230173010    P        P-L      1.44  $  153,674      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    230190030   MR        P-L      0.39  $    79,450     $        -         0%   V            1    1
    230190050   MR        P-L      8.26  $ 1,673,211     $  2,384,460      59%   D            1    0
    230210015    P        P-L            $  612,000      $   612,000       50%   D       1    1    1
    230210035    P        P-L            $    35,817     $   620,692       95%   D       1    1    1
    230210055    P        P-L            $  527,850      $   527,850       50%   D       1    1    1
    240010020    P        P-L      13.6  $ 1,343,156     $  1,920,660      59%   D            1    0
    240010030    P        P-L      1.29  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    240010050   MHR       P-L      1.69  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    240010120   MHR       P-L      1.28  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    240071075    P        P-L      0.67  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    240080135    P        P-L       223  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    280071010    P        P-L      3.83  $    86,204     $   144,629       63%   D            1    0
    280080050    P        P-L      4.78  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    280091050    P        P-L        2.2 $    43,931     $        -         0%   V            1    1
    280092060   CM        P-L      4.47  $    56,489     $        -         0%   V            1    1
    280100060   CM        P-L      1.95  $    31,377     $        -         0%   V            1    1
    280100160   CM        P-L      1.79  $    28,686     $   141,710       83%   D            1    0
    170324095   MHR       R-0      2.39  $  405,756      $        -         0%   V            8    5
    170361015   MHR       R-0      0.25  $    38,982     $   119,421       75%   D       1    1    1
    170361025   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  116,841      $   175,264       60%   D       1    1    1
    170361035   MHR       R-0      0.26  $    73,859     $   156,030       68%   D       1    1    1
    170361045   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  120,229      $   180,345       60%   D       1    1    1
    170361055   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  121,979      $   182,973       60%   D       1    1    1
    170361065   MHR       R-0      0.26  $    80,362     $   169,273       68%   D       1    1    1
    170361075   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  207,074      $   310,612       60%   D       1    1    1
    170361085   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  359,550      $   370,850       51%   D       1    1    1
    170361095   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  125,872      $   233,764       65%   D       1    1    1
    170361105   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  290,791      $   290,791       50%   D       1    1    1
    170361115   MHR       R-0      0.26  $  110,762      $   193,168       64%   D       1    1    1
    170361125   MHR       R-0      0.26  $    38,982     $   114,540       75%   D       1    1    1
    170361135   MHR       R-0      0.03  $        -      $        -         0%   V            1    1
    170362025   MHR       R-0      0.27  $  624,240      $   155,019       20%   U       1    1    1
    170362035   MHR       R-0      0.27  $    38,982     $   119,421       75%   D       1    1    1
    170362045   MHR       R-0      0.27  $    74,276     $   137,958       65%   D       1    1    1
    170362055   MHR       R-0      0.27  $  124,912      $   231,979       65%   D       1    1    1
    170362065   MHR       R-0      0.27  $  115,679      $   173,520       60%   D       1    1    1
    170362075   MHR       R-0      0.27  $    38,982     $   124,528       76%   D       1    1    1
    170362085   MHR       R-0      0.27  $    38,982     $   116,169       75%   D       1    1    1
    170362095   MHR       R-0      0.27  $  222,688      $   334,033       60%   D       1    1    1
    170362105   MHR       R-0      0.29  $    48,733     $   122,668       72%   D       1    1    1
                                                    B-14                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    170362115   MHR       R-0       0.4 $  135,036      $  221,831       62%   D       1    2    1
    170362125   MHR       R-0      0.31 $  362,100      $  362,100       50%   D       1    1    1
    170362135   MHR       R-0      0.29 $  132,502      $  269,609       67%   D       1    1    1
    170362145   MHR       R-0      0.39 $    64,985     $  136,037       68%   D       1    2    1
    170362155   MHR       R-0      0.41 $  132,049      $  239,185       64%   D       1    2    1
    170362165   MHR       R-0      0.34 $  205,089      $  307,634       60%   D       1    2    1
    170362175   MHR       R-0      0.31 $  407,796      $  421,696       51%   D       1    1    1
    170362185   MHR       R-0      0.35 $  183,390      $  275,087       60%   D       1    2    1
    170362195   MHR       R-0      0.33 $    88,718     $  170,950       66%   D       1    1    1
    170362205   MHR       R-0      0.32 $    17,017     $   46,164       73%   D       1    1    1
    170362230   MHR       R-0      3.91 $  343,579      $  350,271       50%   D       1   12    1
    170362240   MHR       R-0      1.26 $  108,497      $   71,670       40%   D       1    4    1
    190180010   MHR       R-0      0.68 $  356,735      $  162,152       31%   D       1    3    1
    190180020   MR        R-0      1.27 $    31,628     $   89,686       74%   D       1    4    1
    190180030   MR        R-0      0.44 $  581,400      $  132,600       19%   U       1    2    1
    190180040   MR        R-0      0.38 $  324,305      $  107,019       25%   D       1    2    1
    200181010   MR        R-0      0.85 $  214,522      $  126,328       37%   D       1    3    1
    200181020    LR       R-0      0.28 $    16,032     $  105,640       87%   D       1    1    1
    200181030    LR       R-0      0.24 $  202,977      $  150,963       43%   D       1    1    1
    200181040    LR       R-0      0.42 $    90,953     $  113,697       56%   D       1    2    1
    200181050    LR       R-0      0.37 $    16,032     $   68,217       81%   D       1    2    1
    200192020    LR       R-0      0.37 $  253,722      $  135,737       35%   D       1    2    1
    200192030    LR       R-0      0.39 $    18,729     $  140,237       88%   D       1    2    1
    200192040    LR       R-0      0.31 $    92,855     $  135,715       59%   D       1    1    1
    200192050    LR       R-0      1.27 $    23,288     $   41,232       64%   D       1    4    1
    200192060    LR       R-0      0.29 $  169,570      $  212,112       56%   D       1    1    1
    200192070    LR       R-0      0.23 $  253,511      $  157,709       38%   D       1    1    1
    200192080    LR       R-0      0.18 $    65,565     $   75,762       54%   D       1    1    1
    200192090    LR       R-0      0.59 $    90,953     $  212,248       70%   D       3    3    3
    200192120    LR       R-0      1.44 $ 1,218,796     $  360,338       23%   D       1    5    1
    200192130    LR       R-0      0.87 $  273,598      $       -         0%   V            3    2
    200202010    LR       R-0      0.33 $   43,085      $   46,653       52%   D       1    1    1
    200202030    LR       R-0      0.25 $  269,923      $  122,589       31%   D       1    1    1
    200202040    LR       R-0      0.25 $  489,600      $   79,560       14%   U       1    1    1
    200202050    LR       R-0      0.25 $  269,923      $  134,960       33%   D       1    1    1
    200202060    LR       R-0      0.25 $    14,347     $   97,869       87%   D       1    1    1
    200202090    LR       R-0      0.25 $    14,319     $   32,258       69%   D       1    1    1
    200202100    LR       R-0      0.25 $    15,697     $  101,697       87%   D       1    1    1
    200202110    LR       R-0      0.25 $  494,190      $  118,605       19%   U       1    1    1
    200202120    LR       R-0      0.25 $    14,319     $   69,405       83%   D       1    1    1
    200202130    LR       R-0      0.25 $  194,497      $  111,561       36%   D       1    1    1
    200202140    LR       R-0      0.32 $  476,920      $  158,973       25%   D       2    2    2
    200202150    LR       R-0      0.25 $  269,923      $  137,772       34%   D       1    1    1
    200202160    LR       R-0      0.25 $  264,259      $  122,907       32%   D       1    1    1
    200203010    LR       R-0      0.44 $  309,288      $  192,893       38%   D       1    2    1
                                                  B-15                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200203020    LR       R-0      0.25 $  309,288     $  134,490       30%   D       1    1    1
    200203030    LR       R-0      0.25 $   67,469     $  119,025       64%   D       1    1    1
    200203040    LR       R-0      0.25 $   15,183     $   90,535       86%   D       1    1    1
    200203070    LR       R-0      0.17 $   10,732     $   24,195       69%   D       1    1    1
    200203080    LR       R-0      0.25 $   13,421     $   35,859       73%   D       1    1    1
    200203090    LR       R-0      0.25 $  112,042     $  156,807       58%   D       1    1    1
    200203100    LR       R-0      0.32 $  204,576     $  145,181       42%   D       1    1    1
    210031180    LR       R-0       0.4 $  235,599     $  177,707       43%   D       1    2    1
    210031210    LR       R-0      0.71 $  369,877     $       -         0%   V            3    2
    210131020   MR        R-0      8.68 $  101,324     $   51,988       34%   D       3   27    3
    220012210   MR        R-0      0.38 $   84,350     $       -         0%   V            2    1
    220012230   MR        R-0      2.68 $  449,876     $  443,730       50%   D       3    9    3
    220012240   MR        R-0      0.25 $   61,843     $  114,419       65%   D       1    1    1
    220012250   MR        R-0      0.24 $  145,873     $  127,638       47%   D       1    1    1
    220012260   MR        R-0      0.24 $   12,524     $   43,912       78%   D       1    1    1
    220012270   MR        R-0      0.24 $  389,166     $  173,810       31%   D       1    1    1
    220012280   MR        R-0      0.27 $  275,660     $   63,917       19%   U       1    1    1
    220012290   MR        R-0      0.27 $   12,524     $   56,477       82%   D       1    1    1
    220012300   MR        R-0       0.4 $   12,625     $   73,808       85%   D       1    2    1
    220012310   MR        R-0       0.4 $   18,070     $       -         0%   V            2    1
    220012320   MR        R-0       0.3 $   14,853     $   73,517       83%   D       1    1    1
    220012330   MR        R-0       0.3 $   17,161     $  107,238       86%   D       1    1    1
    220012340   MR        R-0      0.34 $   71,675     $  172,047       71%   D       1    2    1
    220012350   MR        R-0      0.34 $  258,114     $  209,953       45%   D       1    2    1
    220012360   MR        R-0      0.34 $   16,373     $  230,699       93%   D       1    2    1
    220012370   MR        R-0      0.32 $  551,412     $  196,635       26%   D       1    1    1
    220012380   MR        R-0      0.37 $   12,145     $  247,300       95%   D       1    2    1
    220012390   MR        R-0      0.85 $  268,737     $  233,685       47%   D       1    3    1
    220012400   MR        R-0      0.42 $  291,749     $  230,360       44%   D       1    2    1
    220012410   MR        R-0      0.51 $  175,263     $  204,495       54%   D       1    2    1
    220012420   MR        R-0       0.5 $  168,079     $  204,232       55%   D       1    2    1
    220012430   MR        R-0      0.54 $  385,922     $  198,473       34%   D       1    2    1
    220012440   MR        R-0      0.57 $  343,300     $  439,423       56%   D       1    2    1
    220012450   MR        R-0      0.57 $  175,263     $  125,020       42%   D       1    2    1
    220012460   MR        R-0      2.33 $   27,114     $   42,469       61%   D       1    7    1
    220012480   MR        R-0      1.07 $   89,172     $  121,366       58%   D       1    4    1
    220012490   MR        R-0      0.38 $  468,180     $  135,252       22%   D       1    2    1
    220012500   MR        R-0      1.47 $  605,371     $  237,823       28%   D       1    5    1
    220012615   MR        R-0      1.88 $  350,531     $  354,616       50%   D       1    6    1
    220012625   MR        R-0      1.46 $  646,696     $  425,955       40%   D       1    5    1
    220012640   MR        R-0      6.08 $   76,552     $  106,697       58%   D       1   19    1
    220012665   MR        R-0      2.05 $  423,544     $  560,834       57%   D       1    7    1
    220013055   MR        R-0      0.34 $    9,390     $   75,320       89%   D       1    2    1
    220013060   MR        R-0      0.29 $  206,490     $  136,512       40%   D       1    1    1
    220013070   MR        R-0      0.34 $  111,466     $  179,001       62%   D       1    2    1
                                                 B-16                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220013080   MR        R-0      0.29 $   21,292     $  183,328       90%   D       1    1    1
    220013090   MR        R-0      0.33 $   23,133     $   76,037       77%   D       1    1    1
    220013105   MR        R-0      0.34 $  308,738     $  172,420       36%   D       1    2    1
    220013110   MR        R-0      0.34 $   13,421     $   56,477       81%   D       1    2    1
    220013120   MR        R-0      0.34 $  248,750     $  155,467       38%   D       1    2    1
    220013130   MR        R-0      0.34 $  205,971     $  199,108       49%   D       1    2    1
    220013140   MR        R-0      0.34 $  381,536     $  148,374       28%   D       1    2    1
    220013150   MR        R-0      0.33 $   78,824     $  216,794       73%   D       1    1    1
    220013160   MR        R-0      0.32 $   14,319     $   71,997       83%   D       1    1    1
    220021020   MR        R-0      1.43 $  309,987     $  191,608       38%   D       1    5    1
    220021030   MR        R-0      0.27 $  124,366     $   60,936       33%   D       1    1    1
    220021040   MR        R-0      0.18 $   10,459     $   33,278       76%   D       1    1    1
    220021050   MR        R-0      0.18 $  482,218     $   89,024       16%   U       1    1    1
    220021060   MR        R-0      0.18 $  112,053     $   84,037       43%   D       1    1    1
    220021070   MR        R-0      0.27 $  520,200     $   78,030       13%   U       1    1    1
    220021080   MR        R-0      0.46 $   14,331     $   29,395       67%   D       1    2    1
    220021090   MR        R-0      0.27 $  621,584     $  271,334       30%   D       1    1    1
    220022060   MR        R-0      0.54 $  180,973     $  108,581       37%   D       1    2    1
    220022110   MR        R-0       0.6 $  624,240     $  157,100       20%   U       1    2    2
    220023050   MR        R-0      2.24 $  494,863     $       -         0%   V            7    5
    220024080   MR        R-0      0.31 $  119,177     $  107,138       47%   D       1    1    1
    220024090   MHR       R-0      0.31 $   14,853     $   65,907       82%   D       1    1    1
    220024110   MR        R-0      0.76 $   97,482     $  164,411       63%   D       1    3    1
    220024120   MR        R-0      0.28 $  561,000     $  147,900       21%   U       1    1    1
    220030030   MR        R-0       1.5 $  464,837     $  129,721       22%   D       1    5    1
    220030070   MR        R-0      0.24 $  565,000     $  160,000       22%   D       1    1    1
    220030080   MR        R-0      0.25 $   10,732     $   49,300       82%   D       1    1    1
    220030090   MR        R-0      0.25 $   10,732     $   43,754       80%   D       1    1    1
    220030100   MR        R-0      0.25 $  147,494     $   81,427       36%   D       1    1    1
    220030110   MR        R-0      0.22 $   10,732     $   38,536       78%   D       1    1    1
    220030120   MR        R-0      0.26 $  457,776     $  124,848       21%   D       1    1    1
    220030130   MR        R-0      0.18 $   15,356     $   41,224       73%   D       1    1    1
    220030140   MR        R-0      0.17 $  175,011     $   99,182       36%   D       1    1    1
    220030150   MR        R-0      0.22 $  438,600     $   91,800       17%   U       1    1    1
    220030180   MR        R-0      0.43 $   77,278     $  118,074       60%   D       1    2    1
    220030190   MR        R-0      0.44 $   14,012     $   56,107       80%   D       1    2    1
    220030210   MR        R-0      0.13 $    8,940     $   30,461       77%   D       1    1    1
    220030220   MR        R-0      0.13 $    8,948     $   23,298       72%   D       1    1    1
    220030230   MR        R-0      0.13 $  157,913     $   61,787       28%   D       1    1    1
    220030240   MR        R-0      0.13 $  428,400     $   81,090       16%   U       1    1    1
    220030250   MR        R-0      0.18 $  140,585     $  105,721       43%   D       1    1    1
    220030260   MR        R-0      0.18 $  370,937     $  123,998       25%   D       1    1    1
    220030300   MR        R-0      1.58 $  116,565     $   80,137       41%   D       1    5    1
    220030330   MR        R-0      0.06 $    7,274     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    220030340   MR        R-0      0.27 $  233,441     $  181,278       44%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-17                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220030350   MR        R-0      0.27 $  186,556     $  129,346       41%   D       1    1    1
    220030360   MR        R-0      1.37 $  273,515     $  164,108       37%   D       1    5    1
    220030370   MR        R-0      0.62 $  228,352     $  218,513       49%   D       1    2    1
    220030380   MR        R-0      1.38 $  116,565     $  377,321       76%   D       1    5    1
    220030390   MR        R-0       0.5 $   73,107     $   84,892       54%   D       1    2    1
    220030400   MR        R-0      0.28 $   56,861     $  110,418       66%   D       1    1    1
    220030410   MR        R-0      0.28 $   49,708     $  165,308       77%   D       1    1    1
    220030460   MR        R-0      0.92 $  454,027     $  210,034       32%   D       1    3    1
    220030480   MR        R-0      1.22 $  436,968     $       -         0%   V            4    3
    220030490   MR        R-0      0.39 $  217,963     $  154,868       42%   D       1    2    1
    220030500   MR        R-0      0.49 $  309,288     $  123,713       29%   D       1    2    1
    220030510   MR        R-0      0.28 $  297,712     $  221,805       43%   D       1    1    1
    220030520   MR        R-0       0.3 $  384,948     $   31,212        8%   U       1    1    1
    220030535   MR        R-0      0.28 $  371,146     $  219,312       37%   D       1    1    1
    220030545   MR        R-0      0.28 $  292,419     $  213,688       42%   D       1    1    1
    220030555   MR        R-0      0.28 $  248,750     $  254,944       51%   D       1    1    1
    220030565   MR        R-0      0.32 $  245,860     $  293,160       54%   D       1    1    1
    220030575   MR        R-0      0.28 $  693,600     $  289,900       29%   D       1    1    1
    220030585   MR        R-0      0.35 $  503,415     $  275,554       35%   D       1    2    1
    220030595   MR        R-0      0.29 $  296,968     $  336,567       53%   D       1    1    1
    220030605   MR        R-0      0.28 $  236,943     $  333,753       58%   D       1    1    1
    220030615   MR        R-0      0.28 $  170,187     $  330,654       66%   D       1    1    1
    220030625   MR        R-0      0.28 $  410,786     $  340,519       45%   D       1    1    1
    220030635   MR        R-0      0.33 $  546,210     $  291,312       35%   D       1    1    1
    220030645   MR        R-0      0.28 $  245,363     $  227,836       48%   D       1    1    1
    220030655   MR        R-0      0.35 $  157,938     $  260,091       62%   D       1    2    1
    220030665   MR        R-0      0.28 $  321,209     $  286,796       47%   D       1    1    1
    220030675   MR        R-0      0.43 $  363,492     $  271,955       43%   D       1    2    1
    220040020   MR        R-0       0.8 $  114,281     $  126,793       53%   D       1    3    1
    220040030   MR        R-0      0.79 $  163,572     $  203,008       55%   D       1    3    1
    220040060   MR        R-0      0.63 $   81,740     $  114,689       58%   D       1    2    1
    220040070   MR        R-0      0.47 $  405,756     $   66,585       14%   U       1    2    1
    220040080   MR        R-0      0.51 $   13,421     $   43,025       76%   D       1    2    1
    220040090   MR        R-0      0.88 $  402,731     $   76,306       16%   U       1    3    2
    220040100   MR        R-0      0.71 $  575,000     $  100,000       15%   U       1    3    2
    220040110   MR        R-0      0.55 $   81,740     $  104,035       56%   D       1    2    1
    220040120   MR        R-0      0.47 $  224,376     $  141,883       39%   D       1    2    1
    220040130   MR        R-0      0.65 $  116,565     $  283,168       71%   D       1    2    1
    220040150   MR        R-0      0.34 $   80,137     $  160,287       67%   D       1    2    1
    220040170   MR        R-0      0.48 $   29,136     $       -         0%   V            2    1
    220040190   MR        R-0      1.06 $   92,772     $  213,012       70%   D       1    4    1
    220040200   MR        R-0      0.31 $  111,932     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    220040210   MR        R-0      0.76 $  842,724     $  158,140       16%   U       1    3    2
    220040220   MR        R-0      0.45 $   27,244     $   77,514       74%   D       1    2    1
    220040230   MR        R-0      0.34 $  212,226     $  153,721       42%   D       1    2    1
                                                 B-18                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220040240   MR        R-0      0.41 $  158,030     $  197,927       56%   D       1    2    1
    220040250   MR        R-0      0.31 $  335,115     $  139,449       29%   D       1    1    1
    220051030   MR        R-0      0.13 $    8,940     $   22,389       71%   D       1    1    1
    220051040   MR        R-0      0.14 $    8,030     $   16,107       67%   D       1    1    1
    220051050   MR        R-0      0.19 $  188,474     $   78,077       29%   D       1    1    1
    220051080   MR        R-0      0.38 $  780,300     $  572,220       42%   D      11   11   11
    220051090   MR        R-0      0.45 $  571,200     $  198,900       26%   D       1    2    1
    220051100   MR        R-0      1.81 $  611,856     $  209,928       26%   D       1    6    1
    220051110   MR        R-0       0.5 $   14,853     $   55,070       79%   D       1    2    1
    220051120   MR        R-0       0.5 $   13,538     $   47,019       78%   D       1    2    1
    220051130   MR        R-0      0.65 $   23,288     $   49,300       68%   D       1    2    1
    220051140   MR        R-0      0.25 $   12,524     $   36,735       75%   D       1    1    1
    220051150   MR        R-0      0.25 $  550,800     $  132,498       19%   U       1    1    1
    220051180   MR        R-0      0.25 $  136,807     $   56,293       29%   D       1    1    1
    220051190   MR        R-0      0.24 $  172,076     $   51,622       23%   D       2    2    2
    220051220   MR        R-0      0.08 $   52,020     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    220051230   MR        R-0      0.18 $  168,702     $   73,103       30%   D       1    1    1
    220051250   MR        R-0      2.17 $   43,931     $       -         0%   V            7    5
    220051260   MR        R-0      0.32 $   15,697     $  116,347       88%   D       1    1    1
    220051270   MR        R-0      0.32 $   60,629     $  178,889       75%   D       1    1    1
    220051280   MR        R-0      0.55 $  171,580     $  112,183       40%   D       3    3    3
    220051290   MR        R-0      1.34 $  228,357     $  167,461       42%   D       1    5    1
    220052010   MR        R-0       0.8 $  174,122     $  289,949       62%   D       1    3    1
    220052020   MR        R-0      1.25 $  673,200     $  117,300       15%   U       1    4    3
    220052030   MR        R-0      0.58 $  591,600     $   61,200        9%   U       1    2    2
    220052040   MR        R-0      0.88 $  561,000     $  137,700       20%   U       1    3    2
    240071085   MR        R-0      0.51 $  494,190     $  243,453       33%   D       1    2    1
    240071095   MR        R-0      0.51 $  107,141     $  321,447       75%   D       1    2    1
    240071105    LR       R-0      0.51 $  204,473     $  274,580       57%   D       1    2    1
    240072155    LR       R-0      0.82 $  205,980     $  205,980       50%   D       1    3    1
    240072245    LR       R-0      0.42 $   16,032     $  102,389       86%   D       1    2    1
    240072265    LR       R-0      0.53 $  529,699     $  225,932       30%   D       1    2    1
    240072305    LR       R-0      0.45 $  190,294     $  175,070       48%   D       1    2    1
    240072335    LR       R-0       0.6 $  410,786     $  189,177       32%   D       1    2    1
    240072345    LR       R-0       1.1 $  106,115     $  236,852       69%   D       1    4    1
    240072385    LR       R-0      0.39 $  192,247     $  176,767       48%   D       1    2    1
    240072395    LR       R-0      0.39 $  298,041     $  229,434       43%   D       1    2    1
    240072415    LR       R-0      1.16 $  408,000     $       -         0%   V            4    3
    240072425    LR       R-0      1.68 $  714,000     $  220,700       24%   D       1    6    1
    240072445    LR       R-0      0.41 $   16,249     $   58,785       78%   D       1    2    1
    240072465    LR       R-0       0.6 $   79,645     $  121,060       60%   D       1    2    1
    240072475    LR       R-0       0.6 $  454,027     $  135,126       23%   D       1    2    1
    240072485    LR       R-0      0.45 $   85,892     $  198,953       70%   D       1    2    1
    240072505    LR       R-0      0.41 $  345,924     $  131,099       27%   D       1    2    1
    240072525    LR       R-0       0.6 $   99,998     $  204,291       67%   D       1    2    1
                                                 B-19                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    240072535    LR       R-0       0.6 $   75,796     $  229,481       75%   D       1    2    1
    240072545    LR       R-0       0.6 $   14,684     $   78,087       84%   D       1    2    1
    240072555    LR       R-0       0.6 $  200,756     $  186,988       48%   D       1    2    1
    240072565    LR       R-0      0.57 $   79,645     $  218,658       73%   D       1    2    1
    240072635    LR       R-0      0.61 $  215,220     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    240072645    LR       R-0      0.55 $  192,780     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    240072655    LR       R-0      0.29 $  124,440     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240072665    LR       R-0      0.78 $  329,868     $   42,840       11%   U       1    3    2
    240072675    LR       R-0      0.61 $  259,692     $  182,060       41%   D       1    2    1
    190081040   VLR      R-0-1     1.09 $  122,051     $  117,431       49%   D       1    2    1
    190082170   VLR      R-0-1      1.4 $   89,172     $  203,626       70%   D       1    2    1
    190082180   VLR      R-0-1      1.1 $  206,490     $  234,511       53%   D       1    2    1
    190082230    LR      R-0-1     10.1 $  583,383     $  439,664       43%   D       1   11    1
    190092040    LR      R-0-1     1.18 $  357,034     $  208,587       37%   D       1    2    1
    190092050    LR      R-0-1     0.91 $  204,473     $  203,455       50%   D       1    1    1
    190092060    LR      R-0-1     1.05 $  496,187     $  148,855       23%   D       1    2    1
    190092070    LR      R-0-1     0.96 $  121,275     $  195,976       62%   D       1    1    1
    190092080    LR      R-0-1      1.1 $  113,737     $  154,362       58%   D       1    2    1
    190092090    LR      R-0-1     0.81 $   25,086     $   64,554       72%   D       1    1    1
    190092110    LR      R-0-1     0.97 $  258,801     $  258,801       50%   D       1    1    1
    190092120    LR      R-0-1     0.87 $   87,422     $  115,111       57%   D       1    1    1
    190092140    LR      R-0-1     0.76 $  135,715     $  171,429       56%   D       1    1    1
    190092150    LR      R-0-1     0.81 $  111,466     $  170,923       61%   D       1    1    1
    190092160    LR      R-0-1     0.73 $  111,466     $  263,680       70%   D       1    1    1
    190092210    LR      R-0-1     0.82 $  593,501     $  338,144       36%   D       1    1    1
    190092220    LR      R-0-1     0.83 $   25,096     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    190092230    LR      R-0-1     0.57 $  249,678     $  248,092       50%   D       1    1    1
    190092240    LR      R-0-1     0.91 $  382,393     $  229,096       37%   D       1    1    1
    190100210   VLR      R-0-1     14.1 $  215,268     $       -         0%   V           15   12
    190100260   VLR      R-0-1     1.01 $  248,748     $  212,882       46%   D       1    2    1
    190100270   VLR      R-0-1     1.08 $  309,288     $  213,688       41%   D       1    2    1
    190100280   VLR      R-0-1        1 $   85,041     $  237,257       74%   D       1    1    1
    190220145    LR      R-0-1        0 $   19,340     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    190220155    LR      R-0-1        0 $   19,340     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    190220165    LR      R-0-1        0 $   19,340     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    190220175    LR      R-0-1        0 $   19,340     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    190220185    LR      R-0-1        0 $   19,340     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    190220195    LR      R-0-1        0 $   19,340     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    190220205    LR      R-0-1        0 $   19,340     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    200010010    LR      R-0-1     1.17 $       -      $       -         0%   V            2    1
    200010035    LR      R-0-1        1 $  544,912     $  263,850       33%   D       1    1    1
    200010100    LR      R-0-1     2.78 $   39,442     $  108,510       73%   D       1    3    1
    200010110    LR      R-0-1     1.01 $   89,358     $  176,673       66%   D       1    2    1
    200010140    LR      R-0-1     0.98 $   21,496     $  121,078       85%   D       1    1    1
    200010310    LR      R-0-1     0.85 $  238,358     $  322,040       57%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-20                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200010320    LR      R-0-1     0.84 $  517,357      $  202,559       28%   D       1    1    1
    200010330    LR      R-0-1     0.84 $    38,688     $  258,085       87%   D       1    1    1
    200010340    LR      R-0-1     0.93 $    25,285     $  146,460       85%   D       1    1    1
    200010350    LR      R-0-1     1.02 $  417,131      $  435,008       51%   D       1    2    1
    200010360    LR      R-0-1     0.99 $  380,591      $  258,319       40%   D       1    1    1
    200010370    LR      R-0-1     0.91 $  205,213      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200010380    LR      R-0-1     0.93 $  238,358      $  258,623       52%   D       1    1    1
    200010390    LR      R-0-1     0.89 $    43,089     $  172,425       80%   D       1    1    1
    200010400    LR      R-0-1     0.87 $  663,000      $  362,100       35%   D       1    1    1
    200010460    LR      R-0-1     1.12 $    13,262     $       -         0%   V            2    1
    200010470    LR      R-0-1      1.2 $    14,184     $   84,290       86%   D       1    2    1
    200010480    LR      R-0-1     2.68 $    31,694     $   88,771       74%   D       1    3    1
    200021030    LR      R-0-1     1.23 $   22,292      $   96,733       81%   D       1    2    1
    200021050    LR      R-0-1        1 $    44,775     $  236,209       84%   D       1    1    1
    200021060    LR      R-0-1        1 $    24,610     $  165,181       87%   D       1    1    1
    200021070    LR      R-0-1        1 $  357,541      $  425,910       54%   D       1    1    1
    200021080    LR      R-0-1        1 $  634,644      $  353,736       36%   D       1    1    1
    200021110    LR      R-0-1     1.39 $  357,541      $  229,198       39%   D       1    2    1
    200021120    LR      R-0-1        1 $ 1,010,000     $  150,000       13%   U       1    1    1
    200021130    LR      R-0-1        1 $    24,234     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200021140    LR      R-0-1     0.85 $  151,050      $  317,157       68%   D       1    1    1
    200021150    LR      R-0-1     1.96 $  673,141      $  782,034       54%   D       1    2    1
    200021205    LR      R-0-1     1.02 $  235,169      $  249,678       51%   D       1    2    1
    200021210    LR      R-0-1     1.71 $  614,696      $  347,091       36%   D       1    2    1
    200022010    LR      R-0-1        1 $  238,358      $  356,735       60%   D       1    1    1
    200022020    LR      R-0-1        1 $  635,894      $  210,904       25%   D       1    1    1
    200022030    LR      R-0-1        1 $  435,559      $  328,647       43%   D       1    1    1
    200022040    LR      R-0-1        1 $    26,880     $  132,916       83%   D       1    1    1
    200022050    LR      R-0-1        1 $  184,291      $  264,095       59%   D       1    1    1
    200030010    LR      R-0-1     1.16 $  536,311      $  297,950       36%   D       1    2    1
    200030030    LR      R-0-1     1.66 $  665,410      $  445,832       40%   D       1    2    1
    200030050    LR      R-0-1     2.21 $  972,917      $  499,875       34%   D       1    3    1
    200030060    LR      R-0-1        1 $    97,800     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200030070    LR      R-0-1     1.82 $  228,200      $  192,000       46%   D       3    3    3
    200030080    LR      R-0-1     0.54 $    68,554     $   59,874       47%   D       3    3    3
    200040030    LR      R-0-1     1.17 $  395,080      $  296,890       43%   D       1    2    1
    200040040    LR      R-0-1     0.57 $  253,722      $  321,967       56%   D       1    1    1
    200040050    LR      R-0-1     0.61 $    19,705     $   73,531       79%   D       1    1    1
    200040080    LR      R-0-1     1.37 $  385,767      $  309,288       44%   D       1    2    1
    200040090    LR      R-0-1     0.11 $        -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200040110    LR      R-0-1     0.38 $  109,093      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200040130    LR      R-0-1     0.41 $  126,856      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200040140    LR      R-0-1     0.37 $        -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200040150    LR      R-0-1      0.4 $    14,319     $   80,365       85%   D       1    1    1
    200040160    LR      R-0-1     2.38 $ 1,589,736     $  498,323       24%   D       1    3    1
                                                   B-21                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200052010    LR      R-0-1      1.2 $  639,529      $   292,199       31%   D       1    2    1
    200052020    LR      R-0-1     1.18 $  243,125      $   213,549       47%   D       1    2    1
    200052040    LR      R-0-1     0.73 $    23,323     $   109,573       82%   D       1    1    1
    200052050    LR      R-0-1     0.79 $  879,138      $   192,272       18%   U       1    1    1
    200052060    LR      R-0-1     1.22 $ 1,734,000     $   525,060       23%   D       1    2    1
    200052070    LR      R-0-1      0.8 $   25,086      $     81,527      76%   D       1    1    1
    200052080    LR      R-0-1        1 $  551,096      $   195,386       26%   D       1    1    1
    200052090    LR      R-0-1     1.03 $  731,049      $   518,128       41%   D       1    2    1
    200053010    LR      R-0-1     1.06 $  108,705      $     63,319      37%   D       1    2    1
    200053020    LR      R-0-1     0.85 $    28,290     $   115,268       80%   D       1    1    1
    200053030    LR      R-0-1     1.09 $    35,859     $   121,459       77%   D       1    2    1
    200053060    LR      R-0-1      1.1 $    25,319     $     79,614      76%   D       1    2    1
    200061030    LR      R-0-1     1.16 $  507,213      $   159,881       24%   D       1    2    1
    200061040    LR      R-0-1     0.96 $  234,691      $   399,345       63%   D       1    1    1
    200061050    LR      R-0-1     0.89 $  119,562      $   305,687       72%   D       1    1    1
    200061140    LR      R-0-1     1.15 $  253,720      $   229,866       48%   D       1    2    1
    200061150    LR      R-0-1     0.79 $  336,436      $   174,686       34%   D       1    1    1
    200061180    LR      R-0-1     1.06 $  610,776      $   205,393       25%   D       1    2    1
    200062010    LR      R-0-1     1.35 $  107,719      $   350,697       77%   D       1    2    1
    200062020    LR      R-0-1     1.65 $  208,082      $   444,491       68%   D       1    2    1
    200062030    LR      R-0-1     1.45 $  403,883      $   404,543       50%   D       1    2    1
    200062040    LR      R-0-1     0.81 $  551,320      $   388,773       41%   D       1    1    1
    200062060    LR      R-0-1     1.06 $  551,320      $   406,456       42%   D       1    2    1
    200062070    LR      R-0-1     1.75 $  661,582      $   519,342       44%   D       1    2    1
    200080200    LR      R-0-1     1.38 $  671,439      $   239,558       26%   D       1    2    1
    200080210    LR      R-0-1     1.85 $  890,754      $  1,418,015      61%   D       1    2    1
    200080225    LR      R-0-1        1 $  377,629      $   543,481       59%   D       1    1    1
    200080235    LR      R-0-1        1 $  368,738      $   399,466       52%   D       1    1    1
    200080245    LR      R-0-1     1.01 $  327,743      $   572,067       64%   D       1    2    1
    200080255    LR      R-0-1        1 $  253,720      $   504,638       67%   D       1    1    1
    200080265    LR      R-0-1        1 $  368,738      $   552,951       60%   D       1    1    1
    200080275    LR      R-0-1     1.16 $  238,358      $   457,404       66%   D       1    2    1
    200080285    LR      R-0-1     0.18 $        -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    200080310    LR      R-0-1      1.7 $    30,795     $   258,651       89%   D       1    2    1
    200080320    LR      R-0-1      0.7 $    51,000     $         -        0%   V            1    1
    200080330    LR      R-0-1      1.7 $  538,711      $   297,281       36%   D       1    2    1
    200090050    LR      R-0-1     1.07 $  142,583      $   280,454       66%   D       1    2    1
    200090060    LR      R-0-1     0.76 $    81,232     $   186,860       70%   D       1    1    1
    200090070    LR      R-0-1      0.7 $  556,406      $   142,015       20%   U       1    1    1
    200090080    LR      R-0-1     0.71 $    25,086     $     90,563      78%   D       1    1    1
    200090170    LR      R-0-1     0.62 $  247,177      $   258,572       51%   D       1    1    1
    200090180    LR      R-0-1     0.92 $  183,546      $   219,110       54%   D       1    1    1
    200100030    LR      R-0-1     0.71 $    78,083     $   489,286       86%   D       1    1    1
    200100050    LR      R-0-1     1.45 $  310,935      $   361,868       54%   D       1    2    1
    200100060    LR      R-0-1     1.13 $  365,523      $   194,173       35%   D       1    2    1
                                                   B-22                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200100070    LR      R-0-1     1.43 $ 1,071,000     $  443,700       29%   D       1    2    1
    200100080    LR      R-0-1     1.47 $  417,131      $  268,153       39%   D       1    2    1
    200100090    LR      R-0-1     1.35 $  769,896      $  291,312       27%   D       1    2    1
    200110030    LR      R-0-1     1.11 $    19,705     $   82,497       81%   D       1    2    1
    200110040    LR      R-0-1      1.5 $  180,013      $  543,532       75%   D       1    2    1
    200110050    LR      R-0-1      1.8 $  372,023      $  248,013       40%   D       1    2    1
    200110070    LR      R-0-1      1.5 $  498,121      $  355,591       42%   D       1    2    1
    200110080    LR      R-0-1      1.3 $    44,775     $  263,318       85%   D       1    2    1
    200110090    LR      R-0-1     1.11 $  164,288      $  278,643       63%   D       1    2    1
    200110100    LR      R-0-1     1.16 $  113,697      $  227,407       67%   D       1    2    1
    200110110    LR      R-0-1     1.42 $  999,600      $  219,300       18%   U       1    2    2
    200110120    LR      R-0-1     0.98 $  321,316      $  385,582       55%   D       1    1    1
    200130010    LR      R-0-1     0.95 $  168,069      $  357,163       68%   D       1    1    1
    200130020    LR      R-0-1     0.72 $    28,041     $   92,289       77%   D       1    1    1
    200130050    LR      R-0-1     0.76 $  561,705      $  233,160       29%   D       1    1    1
    200130060    LR      R-0-1     0.78 $  717,876      $  249,696       26%   D       1    1    1
    200130070    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $  513,483      $  199,446       28%   D       1    1    1
    200130080    LR      R-0-1     0.91 $    26,226     $  193,840       88%   D       1    1    1
    200130090    LR      R-0-1     0.77 $  367,545      $  171,128       32%   D       1    1    1
    200130100    LR      R-0-1     0.75 $    21,496     $   50,199       70%   D       1    1    1
    200130110    LR      R-0-1     0.72 $  289,448      $  271,776       48%   D       1    1    1
    200130140    LR      R-0-1     0.59 $  622,200      $  141,576       19%   U       1    1    1
    200130150    LR      R-0-1     0.73 $  529,911      $  143,075       21%   U       1    1    1
    200130160    LR      R-0-1     0.68 $    21,496     $   71,820       77%   D       2    3    2
    200141010    LR      R-0-1      0.9 $  398,232      $  209,413       34%   D       1    1    1
    200141020    LR      R-0-1     0.61 $    24,995     $  123,058       83%   D       1    1    1
    200141030    LR      R-0-1     0.64 $  135,715      $  204,291       60%   D       1    1    1
    200141040    LR      R-0-1     0.77 $    25,086     $   68,964       73%   D       1    1    1
    200141050    LR      R-0-1     0.79 $    25,086     $  140,210       85%   D       1    1    1
    200141060    LR      R-0-1     0.93 $  401,139      $  340,957       46%   D       1    1    1
    200141070    LR      R-0-1     0.54 $  540,509      $  210,798       28%   D       1    1    1
    200141080    LR      R-0-1     0.51 $    23,323     $   66,449       74%   D       1    1    1
    200141090    LR      R-0-1     0.54 $  443,217      $  227,013       34%   D       1    1    1
    200141100    LR      R-0-1      0.6 $  650,250      $  145,656       18%   U       1    1    1
    200142010    LR      R-0-1     0.84 $    19,705     $  145,822       88%   D       1    1    1
    200142020    LR      R-0-1     0.43 $    43,098     $  112,079       72%   D       1    1    1
    200142040    LR      R-0-1     0.82 $  216,152      $  199,793       48%   D       1    1    1
    200142050    LR      R-0-1     0.72 $    24,219     $   63,750       72%   D       1    1    1
    200142060    LR      R-0-1     0.67 $    33,797     $  163,971       83%   D       1    1    1
    200142070    LR      R-0-1     0.62 $  157,153      $  198,326       56%   D       1    1    1
    200142080    LR      R-0-1     0.58 $   18,041      $   87,396       83%   D       1    1    1
    200142090    LR      R-0-1     0.38 $  598,230      $  166,464       22%   U       1    1    1
    200142100    LR      R-0-1     0.59 $  248,750      $  232,583       48%   D       1    1    1
    200142110    LR      R-0-1     0.59 $ 1,009,800     $  262,140       21%   U       1    1    1
    200170020    LR      R-0-1     0.91 $    20,941     $  118,667       85%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-23                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200170050    LR      R-0-1      0.8 $    66,282     $  181,479       73%   D       1    1    1
    200191010    LR      R-0-1     1.15 $    18,082     $  100,526       85%   D       1    2    1
    200191020    LR      R-0-1     1.07 $    17,922     $   96,853       84%   D       1    2    1
    200191030    LR      R-0-1     0.49 $    99,998     $  203,022       67%   D       1    1    1
    200191040    LR      R-0-1     0.67 $    17,901     $   93,131       84%   D       1    1    1
    200191080    LR      R-0-1        1 $  487,710      $  297,281       38%   D       1    1    1
    200192010    LR      R-0-1     0.63 $  441,055      $  192,960       30%   D       1    1    1
    200211010    LR      R-0-1        1 $ 1,060,000     $  165,000       13%   U       1    1    1
    200211025    LR      R-0-1     0.99 $  229,434      $  395,777       63%   D       1    1    1
    200212010    LR      R-0-1        1 $    25,033     $  105,113       81%   D       1    1    1
    200212020    LR      R-0-1        1 $  411,960      $  378,765       48%   D       1    1    1
    200212030    LR      R-0-1        1 $  182,086      $  518,252       74%   D       1    1    1
    200213010    LR      R-0-1        1 $  284,679      $  347,859       55%   D       1    1    1
    200213020    LR      R-0-1        1 $  421,758      $  219,312       34%   D       1    1    1
    200213030    LR      R-0-1     0.99 $  475,648      $  322,142       40%   D       1    1    1
    200213040    LR      R-0-1     0.99 $  355,847      $  435,692       55%   D       1    1    1
    200213050    LR      R-0-1     0.99 $  474,133      $  245,225       34%   D       1    1    1
    200213060    LR      R-0-1        1 $  307,280      $  184,367       37%   D       1    1    1
    200213070    LR      R-0-1        1 $  128,858      $  212,248       62%   D       1    1    1
    200213080    LR      R-0-1        1 $  497,268      $  221,608       31%   D       1    1    1
    200213090    LR      R-0-1     0.99 $    89,358     $  389,982       81%   D       1    1    1
    200213100    LR      R-0-1     0.99 $  329,595      $  327,731       50%   D       1    1    1
    200214010    LR      R-0-1        1 $  114,345      $  223,523       66%   D       1    1    1
    200214020    LR      R-0-1        1 $    22,797     $  160,414       88%   D       1    1    1
    200214030    LR      R-0-1        1 $  430,028      $  471,226       52%   D       1    1    1
    200221010    LR      R-0-1     0.94 $  393,641      $  224,936       36%   D       1    1    1
    200221030    LR      R-0-1        1 $  145,717      $  182,148       56%   D       1    1    1
    200221040    LR      R-0-1        1 $  688,884      $  291,450       30%   D       1    1    1
    200221050    LR      R-0-1        1 $  297,950      $  234,502       44%   D       1    1    1
    200221060    LR      R-0-1        1 $    89,358     $  224,832       72%   D       1    1    1
    200221070    LR      R-0-1      1.1 $  159,302      $  271,904       63%   D       1    2    1
    200221080    LR      R-0-1     1.13 $  805,800      $  652,700       45%   D       1    2    1
    200222020    LR      R-0-1     0.89 $  741,876      $  344,441       32%   D       1    1    1
    210011100    LR      R-0-1     0.46 $  466,321      $  160,434       26%   D       1    1    1
    210011110    LR      R-0-1     0.45 $  432,407      $  227,531       34%   D       1    1    1
    210011120    LR      R-0-1     0.83 $    15,342     $   32,545       68%   D       1    1    1
    210011130    LR      R-0-1     0.71 $  252,113      $  126,053       33%   D       1    1    1
    210011140    LR      R-0-1        1 $  432,407      $  240,526       36%   D       1    1    1
    210011150    LR      R-0-1        1 $  123,856      $  246,266       67%   D       1    1    1
    210011160    LR      R-0-1     2.29 $  162,202      $  331,847       67%   D       1    3    1
    210011170    LR      R-0-1     1.18 $  268,730      $  292,100       52%   D       1    2    1
    210011180    LR      R-0-1     1.51 $  131,143      $  298,728       69%   D       1    2    1
    210131030    LR      R-0-1     0.11 $  247,430      $  110,493       31%   D       1    1    1
    210131040    LR      R-0-1     0.27 $  228,862      $  108,399       32%   D       1    1    1
    210131050    LR      R-0-1     0.14 $  665,856      $   78,030       10%   U       1    1    1
                                                  B-24                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210131060    LR      R-0-1     0.45 $  350,532      $  195,188       36%   D       1    1    1
    210131070    LR      R-0-1     0.64 $  562,130      $  117,830       17%   U       1    1    1
    210131080    LR      R-0-1     0.42 $    13,421     $   35,859       73%   D       1    1    1
    210131090    LR      R-0-1     0.64 $    33,797     $  123,615       79%   D       1    1    1
    220012020    LR      R-0-1     0.83 $  468,620      $  185,819       28%   D       1    1    1
    220012030    LR      R-0-1     1.98 $  171,647      $  261,620       60%   D       1    2    1
    220012040    LR      R-0-1     0.98 $  508,714      $  203,950       29%   D       1    1    1
    220012050    LR      R-0-1        1 $  310,938      $  161,244       34%   D       1    1    1
    220012060    LR      R-0-1     1.73 $  350,299      $  186,470       35%   D       2    2    2
    220012070    LR      R-0-1     1.86 $  384,305      $  250,287       39%   D       1    2    1
    220012080    LR      R-0-1     0.96 $  368,731      $   61,448       14%   U       1    1    1
    220012090    LR      R-0-1     1.41 $  126,769      $  248,133       66%   D       1    2    1
    220012100    LR      R-0-1     4.11 $  364,691      $   72,935       17%   U       1    5    4
    220012110    LR      R-0-1     4.33 $    81,129     $  282,984       78%   D       1    5    1
    220012120    LR      R-0-1     0.59 $  291,749      $  170,185       37%   D       1    1    1
    220012160    LR      R-0-1     0.55 $  161,746      $  116,455       42%   D       1    1    1
    220012170    LR      R-0-1     0.39 $  496,187      $  208,397       30%   D       1    1    1
    220012180    LR      R-0-1     0.39 $  429,631      $  107,408       20%   U       1    1    1
    220012515    LR      R-0-1     1.44 $  198,332      $       -         0%   V            2    2
    220012525    LR      R-0-1     1.23 $  217,651      $  230,969       51%   D       1    2    1
    220012535    LR      R-0-1     1.46 $  583,750      $  278,415       32%   D       1    2    1
    220012545    LR      R-0-1      1.7 $ 1,326,000     $  306,000       19%   U       1    2    2
    220012555    LR      R-0-1     5.43 $  192,790      $  358,773       65%   D       1    6    1
    220012565    LR      R-0-1     2.04 $  202,603      $  272,216       57%   D       1    3    1
    220012575    LR      R-0-1     1.06 $ 1,025,000     $  250,000       20%   U       1    2    1
    220013015    LR      R-0-1     1.06 $  205,213      $  249,270       55%   D       1    2    1
    220013025    LR      R-0-1     1.01 $  175,263      $  303,053       63%   D       1    2    1
    220013035    LR      R-0-1     1.01 $  204,467      $  237,159       54%   D       1    2    1
    220013045    LR      R-0-1        1 $  245,857      $  311,329       56%   D       1    1    1
    230010010    LR      R-0-1     0.75 $  769,896      $  218,484       22%   U       1    1    1
    230010080    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $  592,747      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230010100    LR      R-0-1     0.89 $ 1,040,400     $  379,746       27%   D       1    1    1
    230010110    LR      R-0-1     0.76 $  163,577      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230010120    LR      R-0-1      0.9 $  262,426      $  553,226       68%   D       1    1    1
    230020010    LR      R-0-1     0.73 $  769,896      $  228,888       23%   U       1    1    1
    230020020    LR      R-0-1     0.73 $  481,817      $  424,262       47%   D       1    1    1
    230020030    LR      R-0-1     0.73 $ 1,203,600     $  326,400       21%   U       1    1    1
    230020040    LR      R-0-1     0.73 $    43,089     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230020050    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $    26,880     $  134,519       83%   D       1    1    1
    230020060    LR      R-0-1     0.53 $  417,131      $  415,938       50%   D       1    1    1
    230020070    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $    30,475     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230020080    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $    26,880     $  106,197       80%   D       1    1    1
    230020100    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $  567,004      $  185,769       25%   D       1    1    1
    230020130    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $  795,600      $  326,400       29%   D       1    1    1
    230020150    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $  286,796      $  428,082       60%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-25                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230020160    LR      R-0-1     0.74 $  121,859      $   377,946       76%   D       1    1    1
    230020170    LR      R-0-1     5.05 $  498,351      $  7,471,112      94%   D       0    6    0
    230020200    LR      R-0-1     0.78 $  712,739      $   376,165       35%   D       1    1    1
    230020210   MR       R-0-1     0.34 $  197,977      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230040040   MR       R-0-1     0.31 $  131,931      $     60,847      32%   D       1    1    1
    230040060   MR       R-0-1     0.68 $    71,030     $   129,138       65%   D       1    1    1
    230040090   MR       R-0-1     2.09 $    53,799     $         -        0%   V            3    2
    230050010   MR       R-0-1      1.1 $  372,833      $   265,834       42%   D       1    2    1
    230050020   MR       R-0-1      1.1 $  449,702      $   300,465       40%   D       1    2    1
    230050030   MR       R-0-1     1.11 $    32,272     $         -        0%   V            2    1
    230050080   MR       R-0-1     1.72 $    60,330     $   150,871       71%   D       1    2    1
    230050120   MR       R-0-1     0.37 $        -      $         -        0%   V            1    1
    230050130   MR       R-0-1     1.62 $  143,457      $   244,023       63%   D       1    2    1
    240050060   MR       R-0-1     53.3 $  423,323      $   288,664       41%   D       1   54    1
    240090115   MR       R-0-1     0.79 $  358,356      $   164,291       31%   D       1    1    1
    240090125   MR       R-0-1     4.16 $  437,543      $     80,944      16%   U       1    5    4
    240090345   MR       R-0-1     1.28 $    77,044     $   309,291       80%   D       1    2    1
    240090355   MR       R-0-1        1 $  168,702      $   334,227       66%   D       1    1    1
    240090365   MR       R-0-1        1 $  297,950      $   196,644       40%   D       1    1    1
    240090375   MR       R-0-1     1.16 $  204,467      $   262,888       56%   D       1    2    1
    240090380   MR       R-0-1        1 $    12,815     $     10,843      46%   D       1    1    1
    240090390   MR       R-0-1     1.47 $    18,808     $   119,094       86%   D       1    2    1
    280072030   MR       R-0-1     0.53 $    64,985     $   129,986       67%   D       1    1    1
    280072040   MR       R-0-1        1 $    17,901     $     59,655      77%   D       1    1    1
    280072050   MR       R-0-1     0.97 $    17,115     $   123,858       88%   D       1    1    1
    280072060   MR       R-0-1     0.65 $ 1,065,900     $   459,000       30%   D       1    1    1
    280072070    LR      R-0-1     0.32 $  146,052      $   173,731       54%   D       1    1    1
    280072080   MR       R-0-1      0.5 $  204,473      $   126,188       38%   D       1    1    1
    280072090   MR       R-0-1      0.5 $    16,107     $     69,936      81%   D       1    1    1
    280072240   MR       R-0-1     0.24 $    56,861     $   100,512       64%   D       1    1    1
    280072250   MR       R-0-1     0.24 $    46,378     $   100,507       68%   D       1    1    1
    280072260   MR       R-0-1      0.2 $   28,156      $     96,116      77%   D       1    1    1
    280072410   MR       R-0-1     0.23 $  461,022      $   254,356       36%   D       1    1    1
    280072420   MR       R-0-1     0.24 $  486,458      $   254,992       34%   D       1    1    1
    280080020   MR       R-0-1     0.69 $  215,399      $     67,306      24%   D       1    1    1
    280080030   MR       R-0-1      0.3 $  249,928      $     89,106      26%   D       1    1    1
    280080040   MR       R-0-1     7.98 $    71,733     $     17,922      20%   U       4    8    7
    280080070   MR       R-0-1        3 $    57,995     $     76,227      57%   D       2    3    2
    280080100   MR       R-0-1        1 $  297,950      $   196,644       40%   D       1    1    1
    280080110   MR       R-0-1     1.83 $  350,531      $   259,084       42%   D       1    2    1
    280080120   MR       R-0-1     0.95 $  556,407      $   370,937       40%   D       1    1    1
    280080130   MR       R-0-1     0.95 $  321,316      $   306,137       49%   D       1    1    1
    280091040   MR       R-0-1     0.82 $  268,153      $   280,071       51%   D       1    1    1
    280091090   MR       R-0-1     0.76 $  356,735      $   149,940       30%   D       1    1    1
    280091100    LR      R-0-1     0.81 $  272,417      $   589,258       68%   D       1    1    1
                                                   B-26                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    280092040    LR      R-0-1     0.97 $  103,294      $  339,267       77%   D       1    1    1
    280092070    LR      R-0-1        2 $  191,253      $  487,181       72%   D       1    2    1
    280092080    LR      R-0-1     0.88 $  297,950      $  331,169       53%   D       1    1    1
    280100080    LR      R-0-1     0.94 $  329,966      $  567,550       63%   D       1    1    1
    280100090    LR      R-0-1        1 $  274,636      $  528,575       66%   D       1    1    1
    280100100    LR      R-0-1     1.12 $  224,936      $  172,683       43%   D       1    2    1
    280100110    LR      R-0-1        1 $    21,513     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    280100120    LR      R-0-1     0.46 $  191,173      $   90,661       32%   D       1    1    1
    280100130    LR      R-0-1     0.46 $  190,294      $  158,577       45%   D       1    1    1
    280100140    LR      R-0-1     5.97 $   64,554      $   30,577       32%   D       3    6    3
    230132090   MR      R-0-1/2    0.58 $  151,894      $  251,371       62%   D       1    2    1
    230132110   MR      R-0-1/2    0.55 $  146,208      $   64,668       31%   D       3    3    3
    230132120   MR      R-0-1/2    0.61 $  161,548      $  354,873       69%   D       1    2    1
    280072100   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  178,768      $  400,040       69%   D       1    1    1
    280072110   MR      R-0-1/2    0.52 $  172,076      $  226,871       57%   D       1    2    1
    280072120   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  218,069      $  243,926       53%   D       1    1    1
    280072130   MR      R-0-1/2    0.51 $  289,451      $  113,334       28%   D       1    2    1
    280072170   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $     8,956     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    280072180   MR      R-0-1/2    0.47 $     8,956     $   32,793       79%   D       1    1    1
    280072190   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  330,790      $  299,915       48%   D       1    1    1
    280072200   MR      R-0-1/2    0.47 $  245,822      $  177,510       42%   D       1    1    1
    280072220   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  442,170      $  278,827       39%   D       1    1    1
    280072230   MR      R-0-1/2    0.74 $  274,636      $  232,759       46%   D       1    2    1
    280072340   MR      R-0-1/2    0.52 $  303,909      $  261,002       46%   D       1    2    1
    280072350   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  309,739      $   80,769       21%   U       1    1    1
    280072360   MR      R-0-1/2    0.47 $  298,266      $  160,604       35%   D       1    1    1
    280072370   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  208,943      $  122,740       37%   D       1    1    1
    280072390   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  217,649      $  273,620       56%   D       1    1    1
    280072400   MR      R-0-1/2    0.47 $  155,756      $  204,971       57%   D       1    1    1
    280072430   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  875,000      $  120,000       12%   U       2    2    2
    280072440   MR      R-0-1/2    0.46 $  257,047      $  160,651       38%   D       1    1    1
    100160170   VLR      R-0-2     4.11 $  205,971      $       -         0%   V            3    1
    200080180   VLR      R-0-2       14 $ 1,085,582     $  696,596       39%   D       1    7    1
    200080190   VLR      R-0-2     3.35 $  252,113      $  417,395       62%   D       1    2    1
    210011015    LR      R-0-2     12.3 $  458,873      $  688,310       60%   D       1    7    1
    210011030    LR      R-0-2      1.5 $ 1,134,036     $  390,150       26%   D       1    1    1
    210011050    LR      R-0-2     2.08 $    62,141     $   53,848       46%   D       1    2    1
    210011060    LR      R-0-2     1.32 $  114,589      $  137,957       55%   D       1    1    1
    210011070    LR      R-0-2     2.23 $  391,412      $  172,335       31%   D       1    2    1
    210131110    LR      R-0-2     1.13 $  151,953      $  347,897       70%   D       1    1    1
    210131120    LR      R-0-2     1.62 $  212,734      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    210131140    LR      R-0-2     1.12 $  163,577      $  421,596       72%   D       1    1    1
    210131150    LR      R-0-2     10.6 $  252,650      $  453,663       64%   D            6    0
    210131160    LR      R-0-2     2.23 $  468,180      $  121,500       21%   U            2    1
    210131170    LR      R-0-2     2.11 $  688,500      $  295,200       30%   D            2    0
                                                  B-27                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210131180    LR      R-0-2     0.94 $  156,437      $  421,596       73%   D       1    1    1
    210131190    LR      R-0-2     0.18 $     7,282     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    210131200    LR      R-0-2     10.3 $        -      $       -         0%   V            6    3
    210131210    LR      R-0-2     0.32 $     7,140     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    210131220    LR      R-0-2     9.99 $  237,399      $  550,563       70%   D            5    0
    210131230    LR      R-0-2     0.22 $    67,500     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    210131240   VLR      R-0-2      0.1 $    28,800     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240031070   VLR      R-0-2     2.16 $ 1,560,600     $  572,220       27%   D       1    2    1
    240033170   VLR      R-0-2     0.98 $  105,614      $  271,478       72%   D       1    1    1
    240033180   VLR      R-0-2     0.98 $  303,225      $  358,356       54%   D       1    1    1
    240072055   VLR      R-0-2     7.97 $  305,849      $  145,035       32%   D       1    4    1
    240072085   VLR      R-0-2     0.69 $    11,469     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240072605   VLR      R-0-2        2 $    27,025     $  221,788       89%   D       1    1    1
    240072615   VLR      R-0-2     2.36 $  609,397      $  185,468       23%   D       1    2    1
    240072625   VLR      R-0-2     2.36 $    70,417     $  133,026       65%   D       1    2    1
    100070110   VLR      R-0-4     14.7 $  575,755      $  656,679       53%   D            4    0
    100160180   VLR      R-0-4     4.56 $    70,025     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    200010420   VLR      R-0-4     4.01 $  217,116      $  422,173       66%   D       1    2    1
    200010430   VLR      R-0-4     4.53 $  257,154      $  415,761       62%   D       1    2    1
    200010440   VLR      R-0-4     4.34 $  292,492      $  382,700       57%   D       1    2    1
    200010450   VLR      R-0-4     4.33 $  714,070      $  453,155       39%   D       1    2    1
    220012010   VLR      R-0-4     4.27 $  168,702      $  170,800       50%   D       1    2    1
    240120025   VLR      R-0-4     6.38 $  193,579      $  266,056       58%   D       1    2    1
    240120035   VLR      R-0-4     4.66 $  245,109      $       -         0%   V            2    2
    240120045   VLR      R-0-4     4.91 $  417,131      $  300,859       42%   D       1    2    1
    240120055   VLR      R-0-4     5.33 $  399,465      $  538,665       57%   D       1    2    1
    240120095   VLR      R-0-4     0.45 $        -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240131015   VLR      R-0-4     4.46 $  135,715      $  277,108       67%   D       1    2    1
    240131025   VLR      R-0-4     4.73 $  144,257      $  890,923       86%   D       1    2    1
    240131035   VLR      R-0-4      3.8 $  210,091      $  493,448       70%   D       1    1    1
    240131045   VLR      R-0-4     3.78 $  605,371      $  253,632       30%   D       1    1    1
    240131055   VLR      R-0-4     3.75 $  138,429      $  423,947       75%   D       1    1    1
    240131065   VLR      R-0-4     3.86 $  794,867      $  364,570       31%   D       1    1    1
    240132015   VLR      R-0-4      2.4 $  430,028      $  472,370       52%   D       1    1    1
    240132025   VLR      R-0-4     3.53 $  257,087      $  678,411       73%   D       1    1    1
    240132035   VLR      R-0-4     3.41 $     9,211     $   20,082       69%   D       1    1    1
    240132045   VLR      R-0-4     3.61 $  153,001      $  364,411       70%   D       1    1    1
    240132055   VLR      R-0-4     3.31 $  420,554      $  415,065       50%   D       1    1    1
    240132065   VLR      R-0-4     3.48 $ 1,000,000     $  500,000       33%   D       1    1    1
    240132075   VLR      R-0-4     2.45 $  128,858      $   68,216       35%   D       1    1    1
    240133015   VLR      R-0-4     2.38 $  950,000      $  350,000       27%   D       1    1    1
    240133025   VLR      R-0-4     2.43 $  624,240      $  306,918       33%   D       1    1    1
    240133035   VLR      R-0-4     3.15 $  344,154      $  345,081       50%   D       1    1    1
    240133045   VLR      R-0-4     3.03 $  151,601      $  267,541       64%   D       1    1    1
    240133055   VLR      R-0-4     2.73 $  170,553      $  509,804       75%   D       1    1    1
                                                   B-28                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                               Table B-3
                   Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.     GP     Zoning   Acres     Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    240133065    VLR     R-0-4        3  $  303,909      $  453,432       60%   D       1    1    1
    240133075    VLR     R-0-4     2.78  $  365,523      $  354,276       49%   D       1    1    1
    240134015    VLR     R-0-4     2.53  $  383,761      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240140025   OSRE     R-0-4      0.1  $        -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240140035   OSRE     R-0-4     0.22  $        -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240141015    VLR     R-0-4     2.16  $  411,960      $  492,310       54%   D       1    1    1
    240141025    VLR     R-0-4     2.11  $  458,873      $  344,154       43%   D       1    1    1
    240141035    VLR     R-0-4     2.28  $  288,844      $  288,844       50%   D       1    1    1
    240141045    VLR     R-0-4     2.46  $  160,287      $  266,122       62%   D       1    1    1
    240141055    VLR     R-0-4     2.96  $  637,800      $  496,570       44%   D       1    1    1
    240141065    VLR     R-0-4     2.71  $  131,143      $  392,743       75%   D       1    1    1
    240141070    VLR     R-0-4     0.55  $        -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240142015    VLR     R-0-4     3.66  $ 2,000,000     $  685,000       26%   D       1    1    1
    240142025    VLR     R-0-4     4.23  $  659,421      $  377,274       36%   D       1    2    1
    240142035    VLR     R-0-4     3.23  $  907,800      $  316,200       26%   D       1    1    1
    240142045    VLR     R-0-4     3.38  $  123,856      $  442,364       78%   D       1    1    1
    240142055    VLR     R-0-4     2.96  $  280,134      $  237,512       46%   D       1    1    1
    240142065    VLR     R-0-4     3.91  $  343,430      $  405,211       54%   D       1    1    1
    240142075    VLR     R-0-4     3.86  $  344,154      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    240142085    VLR     R-0-4     3.86  $  238,109      $  321,730       57%   D       1    1    1
    240142110    VLR     R-0-4     0.32  $  182,344      $  135,742       43%   D       1    1    1
    240143015    VLR     R-0-4     2.13  $  405,021      $  319,615       44%   D       1    1    1
    240143025    VLR     R-0-4      2.4  $  138,429      $  417,673       75%   D       1    1    1
    240143035    VLR     R-0-4     2.28  $  554,990      $  432,582       44%   D       1    1    1
    240143045    VLR     R-0-4     2.43  $  141,196      $  396,858       74%   D       1    1    1
    170301035   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    47,745     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    170301045   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    84,549     $  126,826       60%   D       1    1    1
    170301055   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    78,656     $  117,985       60%   D       1    1    1
    170301065   MHR       R-1      0.17  $  209,820      $  243,330       54%   D       1    1    1
    170301075   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    12,524     $   28,674       70%   D       1    1    1
    170301085   MHR       R-1      0.17  $  133,027      $  199,539       60%   D       1    1    1
    170301095   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    91,131     $  136,699       60%   D       1    1    1
    170302025   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    92,957     $  139,438       60%   D       1    1    1
    170302035   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    12,524     $   34,951       74%   D       1    1    1
    170302045   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    26,498     $   89,486       77%   D       1    1    1
    170302055   MHR       R-1      0.17  $  101,000      $  155,421       61%   D       1    1    1
    170302065   MHR       R-1      0.17  $  170,942      $  180,457       51%   D       1    1    1
    170302075   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    81,992     $  122,991       60%   D       1    1    1
    170303015   MHR       R-1      0.17  $   82,031      $  123,049       60%   D       1    1    1
    170303025   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    12,524     $   43,025       77%   D       1    1    1
    170303035   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    98,053     $  147,082       60%   D       1    1    1
    170303045   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    12,524     $   39,442       76%   D       1    1    1
    170303055   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    12,481     $   34,809       74%   D       1    1    1
    170303065   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    12,524     $   34,045       73%   D       1    1    1
    170303075   MHR       R-1      0.17  $    12,524     $   51,429       80%   D       1    1    1
                                                    B-29                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    170303085   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   92,004     $  138,007       60%   D       1    1    1
    170304085   MHR       R-1      0.21 $   94,635     $  141,955       60%   D       1    1    1
    170304095   MHR       R-1      0.18 $  193,417     $  193,417       50%   D       1    1    1
    170304105   MHR       R-1      0.35 $   98,916     $  148,377       60%   D       1    2    1
    170304115   MHR       R-1      0.31 $  302,430     $  302,430       50%   D       1    2    1
    170304125   MHR       R-1      0.26 $   18,222     $   99,323       84%   D       1    2    1
    170304135   MHR       R-1      0.31 $   90,197     $  154,372       63%   D       1    2    1
    170305015   MHR       R-1      0.18 $  142,648     $  213,973       60%   D       1    1    1
    170305085   MHR       R-1       0.2 $  213,282     $  213,282       50%   D       1    1    1
    170305095   MHR       R-1      0.23 $   27,000     $   89,580       77%   D       1    1    1
    170305105   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   47,510       79%   D       1    1    1
    170305115   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   54,163       81%   D       1    1    1
    170305125   MHR       R-1      0.24 $  143,959     $  242,669       63%   D       1    1    1
    170305135   MHR       R-1      0.25 $  283,500     $  283,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    170305145   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   84,124     $  132,036       61%   D       1    1    1
    170305155   MHR       R-1      0.26 $   12,524     $   34,951       74%   D       1    2    1
    170311015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   95,804     $  143,708       60%   D       1    1    1
    170311025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  138,369     $  207,553       60%   D       1    1    1
    170311035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  144,113     $  216,170       60%   D       1    1    1
    170311045   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   31,256     $   93,816       75%   D       1    1    1
    170311055   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  126,004     $  291,922       70%   D       1    1    1
    170311065   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   37,642       75%   D       1    1    1
    170311075   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   18,065     $   70,649       80%   D       1    1    1
    170311085   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   53,052     $   98,538       65%   D       1    1    1
    170312015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   33,161       73%   D       1    1    1
    170312025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   93,131     $  139,695       60%   D       1    1    1
    170312035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  241,893     $  241,893       50%   D       1    1    1
    170313015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   18,065     $   73,176       80%   D       1    1    1
    170313025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   75,794     $  137,312       64%   D       1    1    1
    170313035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   41,232       77%   D       1    1    1
    170313045   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   79,450     $  119,177       60%   D       1    1    1
    170313055   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   47,745     $   88,681       65%   D       1    1    1
    170313065   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   75,780       86%   D       1    1    1
    170313075   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  221,085     $  221,085       50%   D       1    1    1
    170313085   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  100,803     $  188,436       65%   D       1    1    1
    170313095   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   80,711     $  163,956       67%   D       1    1    1
    170313105   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   18,077     $   72,402       80%   D       1    1    1
    170313115   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  140,695     $  211,043       60%   D       1    1    1
    170313125   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  280,000     $  280,000       50%   D       1    1    1
    170313135   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   34,951       74%   D       1    1    1
    170313145   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  104,779     $  157,168       60%   D       1    1    1
    170313155   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   60,936     $  115,819       66%   D       1    1    1
    170313165   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  130,110     $  219,237       63%   D       1    1    1
    170313175   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,634     $   35,258       74%   D       1    1    1
    170313185   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,481     $   36,501       75%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-30                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    170314015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,543     $   35,912       74%   D       1    1    1
    170314025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   48,106     $  102,804       68%   D       1    1    1
    170314035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  135,775     $  199,337       59%   D       1    1    1
    170314045   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   18,065     $   66,243       79%   D       1    1    1
    170314055   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  143,342     $  215,013       60%   D       1    1    1
    170314065   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   63,991     $  169,835       73%   D       1    1    1
    170315015   MHR       R-1       0.2 $   96,078     $  144,124       60%   D       1    1    1
    170315025   MHR       R-1      0.23 $  282,030     $  282,030       50%   D       1    1    1
    170315035   MHR       R-1      0.18 $   14,012     $   51,593       79%   D       1    1    1
    170315045   MHR       R-1      0.18 $   12,524     $   35,859       74%   D       1    1    1
    170315055   MHR       R-1      0.23 $   12,524     $   34,951       74%   D       1    1    1
    170315065   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  297,840     $  297,840       50%   D       1    1    1
    170315075   MHR       R-1      0.21 $  243,973     $  271,473       53%   D       1    1    1
    170315085   MHR       R-1       0.2 $  102,448     $  174,129       63%   D       1    1    1
    170315095   MHR       R-1       0.2 $   79,385     $  203,424       72%   D       1    1    1
    170315105   MHR       R-1       0.2 $  231,489     $  231,489       50%   D       1    1    1
    170315115   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   14,012     $   89,075       86%   D       1    1    1
    170315125   MHR       R-1      0.18 $   35,316     $  106,012       75%   D       1    1    1
    170315135   MHR       R-1      0.18 $   94,471     $  141,709       60%   D       1    1    1
    170315145   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   34,045       73%   D       1    1    1
    170315155   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   91,133     $  136,704       60%   D       1    1    1
    170315165   MHR       R-1      0.19 $  224,466     $  224,466       50%   D       1    1    1
    170315175   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   34,106     $  106,655       76%   D       1    1    1
    170315185   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   90,543     $  135,815       60%   D       1    1    1
    170315195   MHR       R-1      0.19 $  155,665     $  233,498       60%   D       1    1    1
    170315205   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   49,706     $   92,326       65%   D       1    1    1
    170315215   MHR       R-1       0.2 $   12,543     $   41,293       77%   D       1    1    1
    170315225   MHR       R-1      0.22 $   12,524     $   44,694       78%   D       1    1    1
    170315235   MHR       R-1      0.23 $   89,478     $  171,778       66%   D       1    1    1
    170315245   MHR       R-1      0.25 $  120,284     $  180,427       60%   D       1    1    1
    170315255   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  124,380     $  207,093       62%   D       1    1    1
    170316015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  305,490     $  305,490       50%   D       1    1    1
    170316025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   56,093     $  125,123       69%   D       1    1    1
    170316035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   14,012     $   88,064       86%   D       1    1    1
    170316045   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   56,093     $  106,243       65%   D       1    1    1
    170316055   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   34,045       73%   D       1    1    1
    170316065   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  140,695     $  211,043       60%   D       1    1    1
    170316075   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   66,493     $  140,372       68%   D       1    1    1
    170316085   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   56,093     $  104,181       65%   D       1    1    1
    170316095   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  202,357     $  202,357       50%   D       1    1    1
    170316105   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   37,364       75%   D       1    1    1
    170316115   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   90,199     $  135,301       60%   D       1    1    1
    170316125   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   89,936     $  134,906       60%   D       1    1    1
    170320015   MHR       R-1         0 $       -      $       -         0%   V            0    0
    170321015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   76,580     $  114,872       60%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-31                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    170321025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,543     $   32,306       72%   D       1    1    1
    170321035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  144,855     $  217,283       60%   D       1    1    1
    170321045   MHR       R-1      0.23 $   98,746     $  168,096       63%   D       1    1    1
    170321055   MHR       R-1      0.24 $  202,878     $  202,878       50%   D       1    1    1
    170321065   MHR       R-1      0.22 $   60,993     $  113,284       65%   D       1    1    1
    170321075   MHR       R-1      0.21 $  283,050     $  283,050       50%   D       1    1    1
    170322015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  234,090     $  234,090       50%   D       1    1    1
    170322025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,481     $   33,104       73%   D       1    1    1
    170322035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   45,850     $  132,900       74%   D       1    1    1
    170322045   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   78,673     $  146,115       65%   D       1    1    1
    170322055   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   91,759     $  189,481       67%   D       1    1    1
    170322065   MHR       R-1      0.26 $   12,524     $   55,579       82%   D       1    2    1
    170322075   MHR       R-1      0.23 $   60,936     $  144,374       70%   D       1    1    1
    170322085   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   80,519     $  120,784       60%   D       1    1    1
    170322095   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  104,162     $  156,243       60%   D       1    1    1
    170323015   MHR       R-1      0.19 $  138,369     $  207,553       60%   D       1    1    1
    170323025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   47,396       79%   D       1    1    1
    170323035   MHR       R-1      0.18 $   47,907     $   88,991       65%   D       1    1    1
    170323045   MHR       R-1      0.19 $  107,920     $  161,882       60%   D       1    1    1
    170323055   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   12,524     $   32,258       72%   D       1    1    1
    170323065   MHR       R-1       0.2 $   12,524     $   34,951       74%   D       1    1    1
    170323075   MHR       R-1      0.21 $  223,165     $  223,165       50%   D       1    1    1
    170323085   MHR       R-1       0.2 $   91,134     $  136,705       60%   D       1    1    1
    170323095   MHR       R-1      0.19 $  140,531     $  210,798       60%   D       1    1    1
    170323105   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   86,461     $  146,449       63%   D       1    1    1
    170323115   MHR       R-1      0.19 $  197,676     $  197,676       50%   D       1    1    1
    170323125   MHR       R-1      0.19 $   46,810     $   86,941       65%   D       1    1    1
    170324075   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   12,524     $   34,951       74%   D       1    1    1
    170324085   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   81,143     $  150,699       65%   D       1    1    1
    170324105   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   92,718     $  139,080       60%   D       1    1    1
    170324115   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  133,112     $  199,670       60%   D       1    1    1
    170324125   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  254,377     $  254,377       50%   D       1    1    1
    170324175   MHR       R-1      0.34 $   12,543     $   41,410       77%   D       1    2    1
    170324185   MHR       R-1      0.26 $  140,695     $  218,221       61%   D       1    2    1
    170325015   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  109,983     $  203,152       65%   D       1    1    1
    170325025   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  206,519     $  206,519       50%   D       1    1    1
    170325035   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  339,150     $  339,150       50%   D       1    1    1
    170325045   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  218,484     $  218,484       50%   D       1    1    1
    170325055   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   77,113     $  115,672       60%   D       1    1    1
    170340015   MHR       R-1       1.4 $       -      $       -         0%   V            6    6
    170340035   MHR       R-1      1.02 $       -      $       -         0%   V            5    5
    170340045   MHR       R-1      0.95 $       -      $       -         0%   V            4    4
    170341015   MHR       R-1      0.11 $  254,356     $   42,391       14%   U       1    1    1
    170341025   MHR       R-1      0.11 $   11,625     $   34,045       75%   D       1    1    1
    170341035   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   91,032     $   92,638       50%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-32                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    170341045   MHR       R-1      0.14 $   50,962     $   75,660       60%   D       1    1    1
    170341055   MHR       R-1      0.18 $   77,287     $    6,978        8%   U       1    1    1
    170341065   MHR       R-1      0.13 $  177,604     $   74,842       30%   D       1    1    1
    170341075   MHR       R-1       0.2 $  275,554     $   60,408       18%   U       1    1    1
    170341085   MHR       R-1       0.3 $  228,862     $  191,840       46%   D       1    2    1
    170341095   MHR       R-1      0.29 $   16,373     $   57,287       78%   D       1    2    1
    170341105   MHR       R-1      0.22 $   74,993     $  108,521       59%   D       1    1    1
    170341115   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  525,000     $  150,000       22%   U       1    1    1
    170342015   MHR       R-1      0.28 $  224,936     $  107,112       32%   D       1    2    1
    170342025   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  137,659     $   86,035       38%   D       1    1    1
    170342035   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  105,041     $  158,268       60%   D       1    1    1
    170342045   MHR       R-1      0.22 $   60,629     $  110,220       65%   D       1    1    1
    170342055   MHR       R-1      0.22 $   64,427     $  146,972       70%   D       1    1    1
    170342065   MHR       R-1       0.3 $  317,946     $  153,674       33%   D       1    2    1
    170342075   MHR       R-1      0.24 $  128,524     $   97,277       43%   D       1    1    1
    170342085   MHR       R-1      0.25 $  147,490     $   98,326       40%   D       1    1    1
    170342095   MHR       R-1      0.56 $  250,774     $  145,181       37%   D       1    3    1
    170342105   MHR       R-1      0.15 $  237,823     $   84,318       26%   D       1    1    1
    170342115   MHR       R-1      0.15 $  232,418     $   43,239       16%   U       1    1    1
    170342125   MHR       R-1      0.14 $   56,432     $   69,579       55%   D       1    1    1
    170342135   MHR       R-1      0.15 $  116,837     $   99,312       46%   D       1    1    1
    170342145   MHR       R-1      0.14 $  237,823     $   73,508       24%   U       1    1    1
    170342155   MHR       R-1      0.15 $   12,540     $   46,532       79%   D       2    2    2
    170342165   MHR       R-1      0.14 $  387,600     $   89,200       19%   U       1    1    1
    170342175   MHR       R-1      0.45 $    9,833     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    170342185   MHR       R-1      0.12 $   71,425     $   78,566       52%   D       1    1    1
    170342195   MHR       R-1      0.15 $   58,277     $   58,277       50%   D       1    1    1
    170342205   MHR       R-1      0.13 $   10,753     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    170342235   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  405,756     $  109,242       21%   U       1    1    1
    170342245   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   10,753     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    170342255   MHR       R-1      0.16 $  123,582     $  107,865       47%   D       1    1    1
    170342265   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   10,753     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    170342275   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   10,753     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    170342285   MHR       R-1      0.14 $  231,553     $   82,696       26%   D       1    1    1
    170342295   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   10,753     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    170342305   MHR       R-1      0.16 $  191,196     $   77,600       29%   D       1    1    1
    170342315   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   10,753     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    170342325   MHR       R-1      0.15 $    9,933     $    4,009       29%   D            1    0
    170342335   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   59,442     $  104,035       64%   D       2    2    2
    170342345   MHR       R-1      0.16 $  418,200     $  153,000       27%   D       2    2    2
    170342355   MHR       R-1      0.15 $   47,515     $   78,698       62%   D       2    2    2
    170342365   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   49,977     $   72,297       59%   D       2    2    2
    170342375   MHR       R-1      0.13 $   71,425     $  107,141       60%   D       1    1    1
    170342395   MHR       R-1      0.16 $  176,421     $  104,360       37%   D       1    1    1
    170343015   MHR       R-1      0.13 $   55,325     $   67,453       55%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-33                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    170343025   MHR       R-1       0.1 $  254,356     $   31,794       11%   U       1    1    1
    170343035   MHR       R-1      0.11 $   71,425     $   71,425       50%   D       1    1    1
    170343045   MHR       R-1      0.11 $  270,254     $  108,951       29%   D       1    1    1
    170343055   MHR       R-1      0.15 $  500,000     $  100,000       17%   U       1    1    1
    170343075   MHR       R-1      0.11 $  109,402     $   72,934       40%   D       1    1    1
    170343085   MHR       R-1      0.14 $  426,564     $  100,918       19%   U       1    1    1
    170343095   MHR       R-1      0.15 $  194,096     $   77,635       29%   D       1    1    1
    170343105   MHR       R-1      0.15 $  530,000     $  115,000       18%   U       1    1    1
    170343115   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  157,913     $  156,383       50%   D       1    1    1
    170343125   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  155,463     $   93,275       37%   D       1    1    1
    170343135   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  131,092     $   95,338       42%   D       1    1    1
    170343145   MHR       R-1      0.22 $   55,747     $  122,070       69%   D       1    1    1
    170343155   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  286,150     $   84,784       23%   U       1    1    1
    170343165   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  208,065     $  128,775       38%   D       1    1    1
    170343175   MHR       R-1       0.2 $  157,455     $   88,847       36%   D       1    1    1
    170343205   MHR       R-1      0.15 $   38,869     $   59,154       60%   D       1    1    1
    170343215   MHR       R-1      0.13 $  148,082     $   87,500       37%   D       1    1    1
    170343225   MHR       R-1      0.12 $  275,554     $   63,588       19%   U       1    1    1
    170343235   MHR       R-1      0.12 $  109,850     $   82,385       43%   D       1    1    1
    170343245   MHR       R-1      0.14 $   44,579     $   80,998       65%   D       1    1    1
    170343255   MHR       R-1      0.17 $   67,852     $  167,395       71%   D       1    1    1
    170343275   MHR       R-1      0.14 $  147,490     $   92,250       38%   D       1    1    1
    170343285   MHR       R-1      0.14 $   48,734     $   96,397       66%   D       1    1    1
    170343295   MHR       R-1      2.38 $   74,873     $       -         0%   V           10   10
    170343305   MHR       R-1      0.16 $   50,752     $   63,672       56%   D       1    1    1
    170343315   MHR       R-1      0.17 $  219,312     $   67,480       24%   U       1    1    1
    170343325   MHR       R-1      0.19 $  248,633     $  135,126       35%   D       1    1    1
    170343335   MHR       R-1      0.22 $  622,200     $  131,580       17%   U       1    1    1
    170343345   MHR       R-1      0.21 $   55,965     $   74,030       57%   D       1    1    1
    170343355   MHR       R-1      0.14 $  123,991     $   55,792       31%   D       1    1    1
    170343365   MHR       R-1         0 $      695     $       -         0%   V            0    0
    170362220   MHR       R-1      0.72 $       -      $       -         0%   V            3    3
    200073010   MR        R-1      0.39 $  310,810     $  189,218       38%   D       1    2    1
    200073020   MR        R-1         0 $  348,869     $  176,302       34%   D       1    1    1
    200073030   MR        R-1      0.15 $   12,926     $  142,168       92%   D       1    1    1
    200073040   MR        R-1       0.3 $   16,107     $   17,922       53%   D       1    2    1
    200073050   MR        R-1      0.15 $   84,031     $  135,777       62%   D       1    1    1
    200073060   MR        R-1      0.16 $   12,481     $   53,699       81%   D       1    1    1
    200073070   MR        R-1      0.24 $  520,200     $  134,211       21%   U       1    1    1
    200073080   MR        R-1      0.38 $  468,180     $  165,423       26%   D       1    2    1
    200073090   MR        R-1      0.09 $  191,196     $   67,480       26%   D       1    1    1
    200073100   MR        R-1       0.3 $  130,588     $   99,492       43%   D       1    2    1
    200073110   MR        R-1       0.3 $   14,320     $   27,772       66%   D       2    2    2
    200073120   MR        R-1      0.14 $  107,260     $  119,177       53%   D       1    1    1
    200073135   MR        R-1      0.01 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
                                                  B-34                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200073145   MR        R-1      0.01 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    200073155   MR        R-1      0.04 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    210031110   MR        R-1      0.27 $   11,625     $   82,804       88%   D       1    2    1
    210031120   MR        R-1      0.27 $   68,216     $   71,243       51%   D       1    2    1
    210031130   MR        R-1      0.26 $   12,524     $   33,161       73%   D       1    2    1
    210031200   MR        R-1      0.31 $  374,895     $  159,881       30%   D       1    2    1
    220040260   MR        R-1      0.86 $  632,400     $   80,580       11%   U       1    4    4
    220040270   MR        R-1      0.02 $    9,118     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    220052050   MR        R-1      0.15 $  360,338     $   97,502       21%   U       1    1    1
    220052060   MR        R-1      0.15 $  270,254     $   64,859       19%   U       1    1    1
    220052070   MR        R-1      0.15 $  155,275     $   38,815       20%   U       1    1    1
    220052080   MR        R-1      0.23 $  328,544     $   63,588       16%   U       1    1    1
    220052090   MR        R-1      0.15 $   45,469     $   68,216       60%   D       1    1    1
    220052100   MR        R-1      0.16 $  128,521     $   92,300       42%   D       1    1    1
    220061025   MR        R-1      0.32 $  119,083     $  170,467       59%   D       1    2    1
    220061035   MR        R-1      0.17 $   70,234     $  108,645       61%   D       1    1    1
    220061045   MR        R-1      0.17 $   14,319     $   30,461       68%   D       1    1    1
    220061055   MR        R-1      0.17 $  141,034     $  211,552       60%   D       1    1    1
    220061065   MR        R-1      0.17 $   81,441     $  122,167       60%   D       1    1    1
    220061075   MR        R-1      0.17 $   82,192     $  123,292       60%   D       1    1    1
    220061085   MR        R-1      0.17 $  106,167     $  159,254       60%   D       1    1    1
    220061095   MR        R-1      0.17 $   99,574     $  149,361       60%   D       1    1    1
    220061105   MR        R-1      0.17 $  220,177     $  220,177       50%   D       1    1    1
    220061115   MR        R-1      0.17 $  216,923     $  216,923       50%   D       1    1    1
    220061125   MR        R-1      0.19 $  331,250     $  331,250       50%   D       1    1    1
    220061135   MR        R-1      0.29 $  126,863     $  190,296       60%   D       1    2    1
    220061145   MR        R-1      0.22 $   14,319     $   36,735       72%   D       1    1    1
    220061155   MR        R-1      0.16 $   83,513     $  125,270       60%   D       1    1    1
    220061165   MR        R-1      0.21 $  275,400     $  275,400       50%   D       1    1    1
    220061170   MR        R-1      0.38 $   11,837     $   43,763       79%   D       1    2    1
    220061180   MR        R-1      0.38 $  228,867     $  113,175       33%   D       1    2    1
    220062015   MR        R-1      0.16 $   20,400     $   41,677       67%   D       1    1    1
    220062025   MR        R-1      0.16 $  238,170     $  238,170       50%   D       1    1    1
    220062035   MR        R-1      0.16 $  303,450     $  303,450       50%   D       1    1    1
    220062045   MR        R-1      0.16 $   16,542     $   30,740       65%   D       1    1    1
    220062055   MR        R-1      0.16 $   95,804     $  143,708       60%   D       1    1    1
    220062065   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   30,461       68%   D       1    1    1
    220062075   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   75,080       84%   D       1    1    1
    220062085   MR        R-1      0.16 $  200,305     $  200,305       50%   D       1    1    1
    220062095   MR        R-1      0.16 $   43,392     $   80,603       65%   D       1    1    1
    220062105   MR        R-1      0.16 $   80,759     $  121,140       60%   D       1    1    1
    220062115   MR        R-1      0.16 $   16,542     $   58,668       78%   D       1    1    1
    220062125   MR        R-1      0.16 $   84,887     $  127,333       60%   D       1    1    1
    220062135   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   28,674       67%   D       1    1    1
    220062145   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,445     $   28,015       66%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-35                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220062155   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   27,769       66%   D       1    1    1
    220062165   MR        R-1      0.16 $   86,459     $  129,690       60%   D       1    1    1
    220062175   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,289     $   29,967       68%   D       1    1    1
    220062185   MR        R-1      0.16 $   25,336     $   84,976       77%   D       1    1    1
    220062195   MR        R-1      0.16 $   88,190     $  132,286       60%   D       1    1    1
    220062205   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   39,037       73%   D       1    1    1
    220063015   MR        R-1      0.17 $   14,319     $   26,880       65%   D       1    1    1
    220063025   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   27,769       66%   D       1    1    1
    220063035   MR        R-1      0.16 $   66,493     $  123,498       65%   D       1    1    1
    220063045   MR        R-1      0.18 $  219,382     $  219,382       50%   D       1    1    1
    220063055   MR        R-1      0.17 $   14,445     $   65,873       82%   D       1    1    1
    220063065   MR        R-1      0.17 $   44,207     $   82,113       65%   D       1    1    1
    220063075   MR        R-1      0.17 $   43,341     $   80,503       65%   D       1    1    1
    220063085   MR        R-1      0.17 $  106,603     $  159,905       60%   D       1    1    1
    220063095   MR        R-1      0.17 $  121,730     $  182,595       60%   D       1    1    1
    220063105   MR        R-1      0.17 $  123,939     $  185,909       60%   D       1    1    1
    220063115   MR        R-1      0.17 $   14,319     $   34,951       71%   D       1    1    1
    220063125   MR        R-1      0.17 $   14,319     $   29,571       67%   D       1    1    1
    220063135   MR        R-1      0.17 $   73,985     $  137,407       65%   D       1    1    1
    220063145   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   27,769       66%   D       1    1    1
    220064015   MR        R-1      0.19 $  210,681     $  210,681       50%   D       1    1    1
    220064025   MR        R-1      0.17 $  302,500     $  302,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    220065015   MR        R-1      0.16 $   14,319     $   33,161       70%   D       1    1    1
    220065025   MR        R-1      0.17 $  129,721     $  272,732       68%   D       1    1    1
    220065035   MR        R-1      0.17 $   32,487     $  105,567       76%   D       1    1    1
    220065045   MR        R-1      0.16 $   83,654     $  125,483       60%   D       1    1    1
    220066015   MR        R-1      0.16 $  233,160     $  233,160       50%   D       1    1    1
    220066025   MR        R-1      0.17 $   33,896     $  101,749       75%   D       1    1    1
    220070140   MR        R-1      0.01 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    220071010   MR        R-1      0.22 $  426,564     $  108,201       20%   U       1    1    1
    220071020   MR        R-1       0.2 $  436,968     $  156,060       26%   D       1    1    1
    220071030   MR        R-1       0.2 $  151,050     $  109,855       42%   D       1    1    1
    220071040   MR        R-1       0.2 $   15,183     $   84,515       85%   D       1    1    1
    220071050   MR        R-1       0.2 $  370,937     $  152,613       29%   D       1    1    1
    220071060   MR        R-1       0.2 $   14,319     $   36,735       72%   D       1    1    1
    220071070   MR        R-1      0.24 $   14,319     $   52,889       79%   D       1    1    1
    220071080   MR        R-1      0.24 $   14,319     $   44,819       76%   D       1    1    1
    220071090   MR        R-1      0.24 $  143,014     $  189,237       57%   D       1    1    1
    220071100   MR        R-1      0.24 $  209,500     $  159,881       43%   D       1    1    1
    220071110   MR        R-1      0.24 $  224,936     $  170,863       43%   D       1    1    1
    220072010   MR        R-1      0.18 $  242,579     $  122,512       34%   D       1    1    1
    220072020   MR        R-1      0.19 $  149,250     $   91,786       38%   D       1    1    1
    220072030   MR        R-1      0.19 $   91,032     $  126,052       58%   D       1    1    1
    220072040   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,319     $   38,536       73%   D       1    1    1
    220072050   MR        R-1      0.19 $  364,140     $  130,050       26%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-36                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220072060   MR        R-1      0.19 $   53,478     $  121,994       70%   D       1    1    1
    220072070   MR        R-1      0.23 $  286,686     $  121,288       30%   D       1    1    1
    220072080   MR        R-1      0.23 $   56,861     $   88,541       61%   D       1    1    1
    220072090   MR        R-1      0.23 $   30,740     $  136,210       82%   D       1    1    1
    220072100   MR        R-1      0.23 $  171,584     $  120,953       41%   D       1    1    1
    220072110   MR        R-1      0.23 $   14,319     $   77,117       84%   D       1    1    1
    220081010   MR        R-1      0.19 $   15,697     $   50,190       76%   D       1    1    1
    220081020   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   31,357       69%   D       1    1    1
    220081030   MR        R-1      0.18 $  360,338     $  115,012       24%   D       1    1    1
    220081040   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   38,536       73%   D       1    1    1
    220081050   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   29,571       67%   D       1    1    1
    220081060   MR        R-1      0.18 $  275,660     $   91,885       25%   D       1    1    1
    220081070   MR        R-1      0.18 $  149,132     $   80,300       35%   D       1    1    1
    220081080   MR        R-1       0.2 $  164,979     $   85,433       34%   D       1    1    1
    220081090   MR        R-1      0.28 $   14,319     $   39,200       73%   D       1    2    1
    220081100   MR        R-1      0.25 $   14,342     $   31,404       69%   D       1    1    1
    220081110   MR        R-1      0.25 $   60,629     $  163,024       73%   D       1    1    1
    220081120   MR        R-1      0.19 $  540,600     $  111,180       17%   U       1    1    1
    220081130    P        R-1      0.19 $  370,937     $   95,383       20%   U       1    1    1
    220081140   MR        R-1      0.19 $  147,490     $   99,744       40%   D       1    1    1
    220081150   MR        R-1      0.19 $  275,660     $   90,804       25%   D       1    1    1
    220081230   MR        R-1      1.12 $  606,451     $  361,665       37%   D       1    5    1
    220081240   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   42,127       75%   D       1    1    1
    220081250   MR        R-1      0.18 $   90,852     $  136,281       60%   D       1    1    1
    220081260   MR        R-1      0.18 $  132,059     $  198,089       60%   D       1    1    1
    220081270   MR        R-1      0.18 $   77,797     $  134,387       63%   D       1    1    1
    220081280   MR        R-1      0.18 $   54,556     $  115,195       68%   D       1    1    1
    220081290   MR        R-1      0.17 $  147,881     $  221,824       60%   D       1    1    1
    220081300   MR        R-1       0.2 $  125,699     $  188,550       60%   D       1    1    1
    220081310   MR        R-1       0.2 $  111,239     $  166,859       60%   D       1    1    1
    220081320   MR        R-1      0.18 $  306,000     $  306,000       50%   D       1    1    1
    220081330   MR        R-1      0.19 $   27,324     $   83,845       75%   D       1    1    1
    220081340   MR        R-1      0.18 $  211,981     $  211,981       50%   D       1    1    1
    220081350   MR        R-1      0.18 $  101,275     $  151,914       60%   D       1    1    1
    220081360   MR        R-1      0.18 $   83,323     $  137,324       62%   D       1    1    1
    220081370   MR        R-1      0.18 $   98,674     $  148,014       60%   D       1    1    1
    220081380   MR        R-1      0.18 $   16,542     $   91,235       85%   D       1    1    1
    220081390   MR        R-1      0.18 $   16,329     $   68,491       81%   D       1    1    1
    220081400   MR        R-1       0.2 $   95,191     $  142,791       60%   D       1    1    1
    220082010   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,319     $   34,681       71%   D       1    1    1
    220082020   MR        R-1      0.18 $   15,697     $   42,654       73%   D       1    1    1
    220082030   MR        R-1      0.18 $  275,660     $   96,767       26%   D       1    1    1
    220082040   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   35,859       71%   D       1    1    1
    220082050   MR        R-1      0.18 $  231,553     $   98,643       30%   D       1    1    1
    220082060   MR        R-1      0.18 $  105,156     $  155,014       60%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-37                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220082070   MR        R-1      0.18 $  178,515     $  124,870       41%   D       1    1    1
    220082080   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $  169,573       92%   D       1    1    1
    220082090   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $  103,160       88%   D       1    1    1
    220082100   MR        R-1      0.18 $   56,861     $   56,042       50%   D       1    1    1
    220082110   MR        R-1      0.18 $  105,156     $  183,117       64%   D       1    1    1
    220082120   MR        R-1      0.18 $  129,399     $   73,755       36%   D       1    1    1
    220082130   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   40,332       74%   D       1    1    1
    220082140   MR        R-1      0.18 $  478,584     $   67,626       12%   U       1    1    1
    220082150   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   34,045       70%   D       1    1    1
    220083020   MR        R-1      0.18 $  342,450     $  342,450       50%   D       1    1    1
    220083030   MR        R-1      0.19 $  351,849     $  351,849       50%   D       1    1    1
    220083040   MR        R-1      0.18 $  109,769     $  164,655       60%   D       1    1    1
    220083050   MR        R-1      0.21 $  134,519     $  201,780       60%   D       1    1    1
    220083060   MR        R-1      0.22 $   95,807     $  143,713       60%   D       1    1    1
    220083070   MR        R-1      0.23 $   14,319     $   34,951       71%   D       1    1    1
    220083080   MR        R-1      0.19 $   55,073     $  102,286       65%   D       1    1    1
    220083090   MR        R-1      0.18 $  136,207     $  204,311       60%   D       1    1    1
    220083100   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   34,951       71%   D       1    1    1
    220083110   MR        R-1      0.18 $   45,091     $   83,753       65%   D       1    1    1
    220083120   MR        R-1      0.18 $  202,878     $  202,878       50%   D       1    1    1
    220083130   MR        R-1      0.18 $   30,440     $  101,585       77%   D       1    1    1
    220083140   MR        R-1      0.18 $   85,837     $  128,759       60%   D       1    1    1
    220084010   MR        R-1      0.19 $  108,392     $  162,591       60%   D       1    1    1
    220084020   MR        R-1      0.19 $  236,691     $  236,691       50%   D       1    1    1
    220084030   MR        R-1      0.18 $   62,413     $  115,927       65%   D       1    1    1
    220084040   MR        R-1      0.18 $   75,850     $  113,778       60%   D       1    1    1
    220084070   MR        R-1      0.19 $  331,500     $  331,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    220084080   MR        R-1      0.19 $  100,155     $  150,234       60%   D       1    1    1
    220084090   MR        R-1      0.19 $   98,251     $  168,789       63%   D       1    1    1
    220084100   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $  165,606       92%   D       1    1    1
    220084110   MR        R-1       0.2 $   14,164     $   39,889       74%   D       1    1    1
    220084130   MR        R-1      0.03 $   14,038     $   41,305       75%   D       1    1    1
    220090040   MR        R-1      3.65 $   62,767     $   31,357       33%   D       1   15    1
    220090070   MR        R-1      0.13 $  157,455     $   88,319       36%   D       1    1    1
    220090080   MR        R-1      0.22 $  312,647     $  111,280       26%   D       1    1    1
    220090100   MR        R-1      0.17 $  171,580     $   32,989       16%   U       1    1    1
    220090110   MR        R-1      0.18 $  485,000     $   80,000       14%   U       1    1    1
    220090120   MR        R-1      0.17 $   10,621     $   38,033       78%   D       1    1    1
    220090140   MR        R-1      0.16 $  126,187     $   53,914       30%   D       1    1    1
    220090150   MR        R-1      0.16 $  118,150     $   71,931       38%   D       1    1    1
    220090160   MR        R-1      0.16 $  176,421     $   84,901       32%   D       1    1    1
    220090180   MR        R-1       0.2 $   10,621     $   73,825       87%   D       1    1    1
    220090190   MR        R-1       0.2 $   71,425     $  105,710       60%   D       1    1    1
    220090200   MR        R-1      0.19 $  116,837     $  144,879       55%   D       1    1    1
    220090210   MR        R-1      0.15 $   10,732     $    5,351       33%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-38                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220090220   MR        R-1      0.16 $   65,565     $   85,965       57%   D       1    1    1
    220090230   MR        R-1      0.17 $  168,702     $   64,104       28%   D       2    2    2
    220090290   MR        R-1      0.23 $  176,421     $   71,670       29%   D       1    1    1
    220090300   MR        R-1      0.23 $  510,000     $  166,260       25%   D       1    1    1
    220090400   MR        R-1      0.23 $  275,554     $   95,383       26%   D       1    1    1
    220090410   MR        R-1      0.13 $  119,177     $  141,821       54%   D       1    1    1
    220090450   MR        R-1      1.86 $   64,554     $  236,676       79%   D       4    8    4
    220090480   MR        R-1      0.17 $  129,742     $  127,615       50%   D       1    1    1
    220090490   MR        R-1      0.17 $  116,841     $   80,617       41%   D       1    1    1
    220090500   MR        R-1      0.19 $    9,792     $   36,230       79%   D       1    1    1
    220090510   MR        R-1      0.17 $    9,792     $   36,230       79%   D       1    1    1
    220100020   MR        R-1      0.14 $  457,776     $  140,454       23%   U       1    1    1
    220100030   MR        R-1      0.14 $  459,000     $   99,960       18%   U       1    1    1
    220100080   MR        R-1      0.14 $  176,421     $   65,605       27%   D       1    1    1
    220100090   MR        R-1      0.14 $  107,398     $   64,037       37%   D       1    1    1
    220100100   MR        R-1      0.17 $  307,348     $   70,211       19%   U       1    1    1
    220100110   MR        R-1      0.17 $  107,260     $  101,300       49%   D       1    1    1
    220100130   MR        R-1      0.15 $  499,800     $   35,700        7%   U       1    1    1
    220100150   MR        R-1      0.14 $  387,600     $   71,400       16%   U       1    1    1
    220100160   MR        R-1      0.14 $   10,732     $    9,833       48%   D       1    1    1
    220100170   MR        R-1      0.14 $  164,777     $  110,241       40%   D       1    1    1
    220100180   MR        R-1      0.14 $  107,260     $  153,351       59%   D       1    1    1
    220100190   MR        R-1      0.17 $   66,877     $   52,010       44%   D       1    1    1
    220100200   MR        R-1      0.17 $   10,621     $   27,030       72%   D       1    1    1
    220100230   MR        R-1      0.17 $  124,369     $   49,767       29%   D       1    1    1
    220100240   MR        R-1      0.17 $   10,732     $  136,235       93%   D       1    1    1
    220100250   MR        R-1      0.18 $  124,369     $   57,206       32%   D       1    1    1
    220100260   MR        R-1      0.15 $   66,877     $   81,740       55%   D       1    1    1
    220100270   MR        R-1      0.17 $  137,312     $  102,984       43%   D       1    1    1
    220100280   MR        R-1      0.17 $   11,976     $   32,094       73%   D       1    1    1
    220100290   MR        R-1      0.17 $  114,716     $   83,686       42%   D       1    1    1
    220100300   MR        R-1      0.17 $  116,841     $   84,923       42%   D       1    1    1
    220100310   MR        R-1      0.17 $  540,600     $  160,650       23%   U       1    1    1
    220100320   MR        R-1      0.16 $   10,748     $   39,203       78%   D       1    1    1
    220100330   MR        R-1      0.15 $  423,929     $  192,886       31%   D       1    1    1
    220100340   MR        R-1      0.17 $   71,425     $  106,579       60%   D       1    1    1
    220100350   MR        R-1      0.18 $   10,732     $   37,642       78%   D       1    1    1
    220100360   MR        R-1      0.15 $   71,426     $   84,053       54%   D       1    1    1
    220100380   MR        R-1      0.14 $  176,421     $  104,748       37%   D       1    1    1
    220100390   MR        R-1      0.14 $  408,000     $   96,900       19%   U       1    1    1
    220100420   MR        R-1      0.71 $  270,405     $  147,492       35%   D       1    3    1
    220100430   MR        R-1      0.17 $  142,335     $   87,985       38%   D       1    1    1
    220100440   MR        R-1      0.14 $  231,553     $   48,238       17%   U       1    1    1
    220100450   MR        R-1      0.14 $  349,741     $   73,126       17%   U       3    3    3
    220100460   MR        R-1      0.12 $  405,756     $   88,434       18%   U       1    1    1
                                                 B-39                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220100470   MR        R-1      0.18 $  101,219     $  104,265       51%   D       1    1    1
    220110010   MR        R-1      0.17 $   11,976     $   58,902       83%   D       1    1    1
    220110020   MR        R-1      0.17 $   62,462     $   62,462       50%   D       1    1    1
    220110040   MR        R-1      0.17 $  187,447     $   73,053       28%   D       1    1    1
    220110060   MR        R-1      0.17 $  272,790     $   75,157       22%   U       1    1    1
    220110070   MR        R-1      0.17 $  322,524     $   50,979       14%   U       1    1    1
    220110090   MR        R-1      0.16 $  114,716     $   97,508       46%   D       1    1    1
    220110100   MR        R-1      0.17 $  259,444     $  125,270       33%   D       1    1    1
    220110130   MR        R-1      0.17 $  107,260     $   84,091       44%   D       1    1    1
    220110150   MR        R-1      0.19 $   59,658     $   57,497       49%   D       1    1    1
    220110160   MR        R-1      0.18 $   48,733     $   42,634       47%   D       1    1    1
    220110190   MR        R-1      0.18 $  119,177     $   98,921       45%   D       1    1    1
    220110200   MR        R-1      0.63 $  407,368     $  110,867       21%   U       1    3    3
    220110210   MR        R-1       0.4 $  335,115     $  149,179       31%   D       1    2    1
    220110220   MR        R-1      0.33 $  258,114     $   72,856       22%   U       1    2    2
    220110230   MR        R-1      0.61 $   92,855     $  178,575       66%   D       1    3    1
    220110240   MR        R-1      0.43 $  353,736     $   88,434       20%   U       1    2    2
    220110250   MR        R-1       0.2 $  127,019     $   73,445       37%   D       1    1    1
    220110260   MR        R-1      0.22 $   28,989     $   57,995       67%   D       1    1    1
    220110300   MR        R-1      0.17 $  510,000     $  121,380       19%   U       1    1    1
    220110320   MR        R-1      0.17 $  116,837     $  107,746       48%   D       1    1    1
    220110330   MR        R-1      0.17 $  124,366     $  217,649       64%   D       1    1    1
    220110340   MR        R-1      0.25 $   60,629     $   77,684       56%   D       1    1    1
    220110350   MR        R-1      0.25 $   14,347     $  169,971       92%   D       1    1    1
    220110380   MR        R-1      0.17 $  126,856     $   82,421       39%   D       1    1    1
    220110390   MR        R-1      0.17 $   10,732     $   26,880       71%   D       1    1    1
    220110400   MR        R-1      0.16 $  120,781     $  114,061       49%   D       1    1    1
    220110410   MR        R-1      0.18 $  164,777     $  109,850       40%   D       1    1    1
    220110430   MR        R-1      0.31 $   60,629     $   78,404       56%   D       1    2    1
    220110440   MR        R-1      0.17 $  140,207     $   91,716       40%   D       1    1    1
    220110460   MR        R-1      0.17 $  170,283     $  107,179       39%   D       1    1    1
    220110470   MR        R-1      0.17 $  112,043     $   90,334       45%   D       1    1    1
    220110480   MR        R-1       0.2 $   62,462     $   76,016       55%   D       1    1    1
    220110490   MR        R-1      0.18 $  121,560     $  125,956       51%   D       1    1    1
    220110500   MR        R-1      0.36 $   83,373     $  258,351       76%   D       1    2    1
    220110520   MR        R-1       0.2 $   37,464     $   53,848       59%   D       1    1    1
    220110530   MR        R-1      0.27 $  151,894     $  105,156       41%   D       1    2    1
    220110540   MR        R-1      0.23 $  468,180     $  145,656       24%   U       2    2    2
    220110550   MR        R-1      0.18 $  338,130     $  107,161       24%   D       1    1    1
    220110560   MR        R-1      0.27 $   11,825     $  188,636       94%   D       1    2    1
    220110570   MR        R-1      0.32 $   14,137     $   39,442       74%   D       1    2    1
    220120020   MR        R-1      0.01 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    220120030   MR        R-1      0.43 $  617,099     $  122,999       17%   U       1    2    2
    220120040   MR        R-1      0.64 $   32,264     $   31,250       49%   D       1    3    1
    220120050   MR        R-1      0.46 $  145,872     $  262,530       64%   D       1    2    1
                                                  B-40                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220120065   MR        R-1      0.15 $  220,527     $  110,262       33%   D       1    1    1
    220120075   MR        R-1       0.2 $   13,421     $   54,856       80%   D       1    1    1
    220120085   MR        R-1       0.2 $  231,553     $   60,643       21%   U       1    1    1
    220120095   MR        R-1       0.2 $  171,580     $  102,208       37%   D       1    1    1
    220120105   MR        R-1       0.2 $  202,442     $   78,726       28%   D       1    1    1
    220120115   MR        R-1       0.2 $   98,039     $  111,346       53%   D       1    1    1
    220120125   MR        R-1       0.2 $   53,052     $   75,035       59%   D       1    1    1
    220120135   MR        R-1       0.2 $  478,635     $  140,800       23%   U       1    1    1
    220120145   MR        R-1       0.2 $  192,960     $   83,798       30%   D       1    1    1
    220120155   MR        R-1       0.2 $   92,855     $  114,281       55%   D       1    1    1
    220120165   MR        R-1       0.2 $   71,425     $  129,577       64%   D       1    1    1
    220120175   MR        R-1       0.2 $   53,052     $  102,395       66%   D       1    1    1
    220120185   MR        R-1       0.2 $   13,421     $   24,183       64%   D       1    1    1
    220120195   MR        R-1       0.2 $  254,356     $   71,007       22%   U       1    1    1
    220120205   MR        R-1       0.2 $   14,510     $   55,931       79%   D       1    1    1
    220120215   MR        R-1       0.2 $   53,052     $   81,858       61%   D       1    1    1
    220120225   MR        R-1       0.2 $   13,439     $   26,919       67%   D       1    1    1
    220120235   MR        R-1       0.2 $  135,202     $   73,127       35%   D       1    1    1
    220120245   MR        R-1       0.2 $  168,215     $   49,811       23%   U       1    1    1
    220120255   MR        R-1       0.2 $  179,949     $   71,977       29%   D       1    1    1
    220120265   MR        R-1       0.2 $  179,503     $   63,543       26%   D       1    1    1
    220120275   MR        R-1       0.2 $  259,444     $   73,079       22%   U       1    1    1
    220120285   MR        R-1       0.2 $  137,312     $  119,461       47%   D       1    1    1
    220120290   MR        R-1      0.15 $   11,718     $   24,381       68%   D       1    1    1
    220120300   MR        R-1      0.23 $  128,524     $   79,002       38%   D       1    1    1
    220120330   MR        R-1      0.14 $   11,625     $   24,183       68%   D       1    1    1
    220120340   MR        R-1      0.14 $  418,200     $   90,780       18%   U       1    1    1
    220120350   MR        R-1      0.14 $  109,404     $   88,512       45%   D       1    1    1
    220120360   MR        R-1      0.14 $  306,918     $   73,868       19%   U       1    1    1
    220120370   MR        R-1      0.14 $  259,656     $   73,656       22%   U       1    1    1
    220120380   MR        R-1      0.13 $   11,625     $   37,007       76%   D       1    1    1
    220120390   MR        R-1       0.2 $  137,659     $   74,565       35%   D       1    1    1
    220130015   MR        R-1      0.19 $   55,747     $  136,989       71%   D       1    1    1
    220130025   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,421     $   22,389       63%   D       1    1    1
    220130035   MR        R-1      0.19 $  114,716     $  177,811       61%   D       1    1    1
    220130045   MR        R-1      0.19 $  510,000     $   69,000       12%   U       1    1    1
    220130055   MR        R-1      0.19 $  218,618     $   82,269       27%   D       1    1    1
    220130065   MR        R-1      0.19 $  264,955     $   94,958       26%   D       1    1    1
    220130075   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,421     $   21,496       62%   D       1    1    1
    220130085   MR        R-1      0.19 $  188,474     $   87,588       32%   D       1    1    1
    220130095   MR        R-1      0.19 $  121,560     $   72,935       37%   D       1    1    1
    220130105   MR        R-1      0.19 $   55,747     $   78,844       59%   D       1    1    1
    220130115   MR        R-1      0.19 $   66,877     $  104,242       61%   D       1    1    1
    220130125   MR        R-1      0.19 $  317,947     $   79,486       20%   U       1    1    1
    220130135   MR        R-1      0.19 $  168,215     $   51,753       24%   U       1    1    1
                                                 B-41                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220130145   MR        R-1      0.19 $  128,100     $   60,316       32%   D       1    1    1
    220130155   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,421     $   25,086       65%   D       1    1    1
    220130165   MR        R-1      0.19 $  500,000     $  110,000       18%   U       1    1    1
    220130175   MR        R-1      0.19 $  500,000     $   87,500       15%   U       1    1    1
    220130185   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,421     $   25,086       65%   D       1    1    1
    220130195   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,853     $   78,236       84%   D       1    1    1
    220130205   MR        R-1      0.19 $  319,876     $   71,488       18%   U       1    1    1
    220130215   MR        R-1      0.19 $  119,050     $  133,343       53%   D       1    1    1
    220130225   MR        R-1      0.19 $   78,566     $  161,403       67%   D       1    1    1
    220130235   MR        R-1      0.23 $   14,319     $   36,735       72%   D       1    1    1
    220140090   MR        R-1      0.27 $   88,973     $  140,937       61%   D       1    2    1
    220140260   MR        R-1      0.15 $  179,949     $   73,103       29%   D       1    1    1
    220140270   MR        R-1      0.13 $  118,513     $   67,682       36%   D       1    1    1
    220140290   MR        R-1      0.11 $   11,182     $   43,946       80%   D       1    1    1
    220140300   MR        R-1      0.11 $   64,993     $   72,218       53%   D       1    1    1
    220140310   MR        R-1      0.13 $   10,732     $   29,934       74%   D       1    1    1
    220140320   MR        R-1      0.14 $   11,625     $   21,496       65%   D       1    1    1
    220140330   MR        R-1      0.14 $  114,716     $  103,244       47%   D       1    1    1
    220140340   MR        R-1      0.14 $  121,288     $   52,374       30%   D       1    1    1
    220140350   MR        R-1      0.14 $   11,625     $   25,967       69%   D       1    1    1
    220140365   MR        R-1      0.14 $   11,625     $   37,854       77%   D       1    1    1
    220140370   MR        R-1      0.14 $  216,203     $   59,454       22%   U       1    1    1
    220140380   MR        R-1      0.14 $  168,702     $   53,982       24%   D       1    1    1
    220140390   MR        R-1      0.14 $  112,467     $  113,121       50%   D       1    1    1
    220140400   MR        R-1      0.14 $  114,716     $  121,801       51%   D       1    1    1
    220140410   MR        R-1      0.14 $  168,702     $   78,726       32%   D       1    1    1
    220140610   MR        R-1       0.1 $  433,500     $   66,300       13%   U       1    1    1
    220140630   MR        R-1      0.38 $  151,046     $  319,864       68%   D       4    4    4
    220151020   MR        R-1      0.14 $    9,833     $   24,183       71%   D       1    1    1
    220151030   MR        R-1      0.14 $  116,841     $   77,113       40%   D       1    1    1
    220151040   MR        R-1      0.14 $   11,976     $   43,089       78%   D       1    1    1
    220151050   MR        R-1      0.14 $   10,732     $   25,086       70%   D       1    1    1
    220151060   MR        R-1      0.14 $  328,544     $   69,947       18%   U       1    1    1
    220151070   MR        R-1      0.14 $   10,732     $   28,674       73%   D       1    1    1
    220151080   MR        R-1      0.14 $   10,732     $   31,357       75%   D       1    1    1
    220151090   MR        R-1      0.14 $  408,000     $   60,180       13%   U       1    1    1
    220151100   MR        R-1      0.14 $  175,011     $  107,694       38%   D       1    1    1
    220151110   MR        R-1      0.14 $   11,976     $   44,775       79%   D       1    1    1
    220151120   MR        R-1      0.14 $   55,747     $   47,779       46%   D       1    1    1
    220151130   MR        R-1      0.14 $  171,580     $   59,388       26%   D       1    1    1
    220151140   MR        R-1      0.14 $  243,758     $   71,690       23%   U       1    1    1
    220151150   MR        R-1      0.14 $  423,300     $   61,200       13%   U       1    1    1
    220151160   MR        R-1      0.14 $   10,621     $   25,732       71%   D       1    1    1
    220151170   MR        R-1      0.13 $  143,558     $   51,643       26%   D       1    1    1
    220151180   MR        R-1      0.14 $  254,356     $   63,588       20%   U       1    1    1
                                                 B-42                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220151190   MR        R-1      0.17 $   62,462     $  120,010       66%   D       1    1    1
    220151200   MR        R-1      0.17 $   71,425     $  129,478       64%   D       1    1    1
    220151210   MR        R-1      0.17 $  561,000     $  111,480       17%   U       1    1    1
    220151220   MR        R-1      0.17 $  121,560     $  182,344       60%   D       1    1    1
    220151230   MR        R-1      0.17 $  184,778     $   34,967       16%   U       1    1    1
    220151240   MR        R-1      0.17 $  109,983     $   74,211       40%   D       1    1    1
    220151250   MR        R-1      0.17 $  122,907     $   68,825       36%   D       1    1    1
    220151260   MR        R-1      0.17 $  475,000     $  153,000       24%   D       1    1    1
    220151270   MR        R-1      0.17 $  116,837     $  115,668       50%   D       1    1    1
    220151280   MR        R-1      0.17 $  122,907     $  108,184       47%   D       1    1    1
    220151290   MR        R-1      0.17 $  122,907     $  114,918       48%   D       1    1    1
    220151300   MR        R-1      0.17 $  307,348     $   52,460       15%   U       1    1    1
    220151310   MR        R-1      0.17 $   53,052     $   71,243       57%   D       2    2    2
    220151320   MR        R-1      0.17 $  114,716     $   26,382       19%   U       1    1    1
    220151330   MR        R-1      0.17 $  172,961     $  137,829       44%   D       1    1    1
    220151340   MR        R-1      0.25 $   70,271     $   57,900       45%   D       1    1    1
    220151350   MR        R-1      0.25 $  175,011     $  115,771       40%   D       1    1    1
    220152030   MR        R-1      0.17 $   12,145     $   28,880       70%   D       1    1    1
    220152040   MR        R-1      0.17 $   10,621     $   22,292       68%   D       1    1    1
    220152050   MR        R-1      0.17 $  155,275     $   42,695       22%   U       1    1    1
    220152070   MR        R-1      0.17 $   10,732     $   11,625       52%   D       1    1    1
    220152080   MR        R-1      0.17 $  460,000     $   45,000        9%   U       1    1    1
    220152090   MR        R-1      0.17 $  116,841     $  110,461       49%   D       1    1    1
    220152100   MR        R-1      0.17 $  301,716     $   41,616       12%   U       1    1    1
    220152110   MR        R-1      0.17 $  172,961     $   55,482       24%   D       1    1    1
    220152120   MR        R-1      0.17 $  364,140     $   59,302       14%   U       1    1    1
    220152130   MR        R-1      0.16 $  175,011     $   67,306       28%   D       1    1    1
    220152140   MR        R-1      0.17 $   36,495     $  136,883       79%   D       1    1    1
    220152150   MR        R-1      0.17 $   65,565     $   64,104       49%   D       1    1    1
    220152160   MR        R-1      0.17 $   65,565     $   87,422       57%   D       1    1    1
    220152170   MR        R-1      0.17 $  126,412     $   43,939       26%   D       1    1    1
    220152180   MR        R-1      0.17 $   71,425     $   61,930       46%   D       1    1    1
    220152190   MR        R-1      0.25 $  158,379     $  197,845       56%   D       1    1    1
    220152200   MR        R-1      0.25 $  198,473     $  180,635       48%   D       1    1    1
    220152210   MR        R-1      0.19 $   12,481     $   42,491       77%   D       1    1    1
    220152220   MR        R-1      0.19 $  131,981     $  105,584       44%   D       1    1    1
    220152230   MR        R-1      0.19 $  121,560     $   72,935       37%   D       2    2    2
    220152240   MR        R-1       0.2 $  332,928     $   93,636       22%   U       1    1    1
    220152250   MR        R-1       0.2 $   12,524     $   25,967       67%   D       1    1    1
    220152280   MR        R-1      0.23 $   13,528     $   21,123       61%   D       1    1    1
    220152290   MR        R-1      0.23 $  149,132     $  183,546       55%   D       1    1    1
    220152320   MR        R-1      0.23 $  374,544     $  104,922       22%   U       1    1    1
    220152330   MR        R-1      0.23 $  397,800     $  216,750       35%   D       1    1    1
    220152340   MR        R-1      0.29 $   17,562     $   46,972       73%   D       1    2    1
    220152350   MR        R-1      0.18 $  306,000     $       -         0%   V            1    1
                                                 B-43                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220152360   MR        R-1      0.17 $  328,544     $   91,144       22%   U       1    1    1
    220152370   MR        R-1      0.17 $  307,348     $  100,682       25%   D       1    1    1
    220161015   MR        R-1       0.2 $  187,447     $   97,991       34%   D       1    1    1
    220161025   MR        R-1       0.2 $   14,319     $   26,880       65%   D       1    1    1
    220161035   MR        R-1       0.2 $   71,425     $  144,181       67%   D       1    1    1
    220161040   MR        R-1      0.25 $   14,319     $   24,183       63%   D       1    1    1
    220161060   MR        R-1      0.21 $   13,421     $   25,086       65%   D       1    1    1
    220161070   MR        R-1      0.21 $   13,528     $   30,708       69%   D       1    1    1
    220161080   MR        R-1      0.14 $  122,907     $   71,283       37%   D       1    1    1
    220161090   MR        R-1      0.15 $  187,447     $   63,123       25%   D       1    1    1
    220161100   MR        R-1      0.16 $   55,747     $  153,819       73%   D       1    1    1
    220161110   MR        R-1      0.16 $   11,470     $   25,505       69%   D       1    1    1
    220161120   MR        R-1      0.17 $   48,733     $  109,317       69%   D       1    1    1
    220161130   MR        R-1      0.14 $  155,275     $   87,055       36%   D       1    1    1
    220161140   MR        R-1      0.14 $   12,657     $   56,611       82%   D       1    1    1
    220161150   MR        R-1      0.14 $  140,585     $   61,856       31%   D       1    1    1
    220161160   MR        R-1      0.14 $  198,473     $   61,745       24%   U       1    1    1
    220161170   MR        R-1      0.28 $   18,793     $   33,161       64%   D       1    2    1
    220161180   MR        R-1      0.22 $  164,771     $   94,739       37%   D       1    1    1
    220161195   MR        R-1       0.2 $   74,993     $  102,138       58%   D       1    1    1
    220161205   MR        R-1       0.2 $  317,947     $   58,288       15%   U       1    1    1
    220161215   MR        R-1       0.2 $  136,807     $   57,207       29%   D       1    1    1
    220161225   MR        R-1       0.2 $   15,697     $   38,523       71%   D       1    1    1
    220161235   MR        R-1       0.2 $   98,039     $  135,905       58%   D       1    1    1
    220161240   MR        R-1      0.18 $  143,397     $   86,035       37%   D       1    1    1
    220161250   MR        R-1      0.14 $  126,856     $   65,965       34%   D       1    1    1
    220161260   MR        R-1      0.28 $   19,705     $   34,951       64%   D       1    2    1
    220161270   MR        R-1      0.14 $   71,425     $   88,568       55%   D       1    1    1
    220161280   MR        R-1      0.14 $  322,524     $   91,698       22%   U       1    1    1
    220161290   MR        R-1      0.14 $  280,851     $   58,288       17%   U       1    1    1
    220161300   MR        R-1      0.14 $   12,524     $   17,922       59%   D       1    1    1
    220161310   MR        R-1      0.11 $  405,756     $   56,181       12%   U       1    1    1
    220161320   MR        R-1      0.12 $   11,625     $   21,496       65%   D       1    1    1
    220161405   MR        R-1       0.2 $  430,088     $   91,262       18%   U       1    1    1
    220161420   MR        R-1      0.14 $  520,000     $  115,000       18%   U       1    1    1
    220161430   MR        R-1      0.14 $  122,906     $   68,825       36%   D       1    1    1
    220162015   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,421     $   20,592       61%   D       1    1    1
    220162035   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,873     $   54,728       79%   D       1    1    1
    220162045   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,528     $   71,967       84%   D       1    1    1
    220162055   MR        R-1      0.19 $   54,115     $   61,843       53%   D       1    1    1
    220162065   MR        R-1      0.19 $  306,918     $   26,010        8%   U       1    1    1
    220162075   MR        R-1      0.19 $   54,115     $   60,298       53%   D       1    1    1
    220162085   MR        R-1      0.19 $   35,609     $   66,389       65%   D       1    1    1
    220162095   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,421     $   27,769       67%   D       1    1    1
    220162105   MR        R-1      0.19 $  122,907     $   94,636       44%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-44                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220171015   MR        R-1      0.18 $   88,026     $  160,641       65%   D       1    1    1
    220171025   MR        R-1      0.18 $   51,404     $   95,476       65%   D       1    1    1
    220171035   MR        R-1      0.18 $   20,265     $   81,617       80%   D       1    1    1
    220171045   MR        R-1      0.18 $  298,350     $  298,350       50%   D       1    1    1
    220171055   MR        R-1      0.18 $  130,461     $  195,693       60%   D       1    1    1
    220171065   MR        R-1      0.18 $   48,416     $   89,936       65%   D       1    1    1
    220171075   MR        R-1      0.18 $   62,335     $  128,553       67%   D       1    1    1
    220171085   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,319     $   34,045       70%   D       1    1    1
    220172015   MR        R-1      0.18 $   18,223     $  102,478       85%   D       1    1    1
    220172025   MR        R-1      0.18 $  277,950     $  277,950       50%   D       1    1    1
    220172035   MR        R-1      0.18 $   91,556     $  137,336       60%   D       1    1    1
    220172045   MR        R-1      0.18 $   22,189     $   80,534       78%   D       1    1    1
    220172055   MR        R-1      0.18 $   48,641     $   90,352       65%   D       1    1    1
    220172065   MR        R-1      0.18 $  169,146     $  253,720       60%   D       1    1    1
    220172075   MR        R-1      0.18 $  100,620     $  150,935       60%   D       1    1    1
    220172085   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,319     $   44,819       76%   D       1    1    1
    220172095   MR        R-1      0.19 $   55,201     $  102,527       65%   D       1    1    1
    220172105   MR        R-1      0.18 $  205,075     $  205,075       50%   D       1    1    1
    220172115   MR        R-1      0.18 $   99,999     $  188,303       65%   D       1    1    1
    220172125   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   38,536       73%   D       1    1    1
    220172135   MR        R-1      0.18 $  327,500     $  327,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    220172145   MR        R-1      0.18 $  316,710     $  316,710       50%   D       1    1    1
    220172155   MR        R-1      0.18 $  116,966     $  175,449       60%   D       1    1    1
    220172165   MR        R-1      0.18 $   96,741     $  145,115       60%   D       1    1    1
    220173015   MR        R-1      0.18 $   82,945     $  141,604       63%   D       1    1    1
    220173025   MR        R-1      0.18 $  233,049     $  233,049       50%   D       1    1    1
    220173035   MR        R-1      0.18 $  122,813     $  184,222       60%   D       1    1    1
    220173045   MR        R-1      0.18 $   48,158     $   89,447       65%   D       1    1    1
    220173055   MR        R-1      0.18 $   79,388     $  184,306       70%   D       1    1    1
    220173065   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,435     $   37,946       72%   D       1    1    1
    220173075   MR        R-1      0.18 $  101,219     $  178,882       64%   D       1    1    1
    220173085   MR        R-1      0.19 $   87,183     $  130,775       60%   D       1    1    1
    220181015   MR        R-1      0.19 $   84,121     $  126,183       60%   D       1    1    1
    220181025   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,445     $   32,545       69%   D       1    1    1
    220181035   MR        R-1      0.18 $  114,673     $  172,010       60%   D       1    1    1
    220181045   MR        R-1      0.18 $   84,345     $  127,355       60%   D       1    1    1
    220181055   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   38,536       73%   D       1    1    1
    220181065   MR        R-1      0.18 $  153,502     $  230,256       60%   D       1    1    1
    220181075   MR        R-1      0.18 $  113,464     $  170,196       60%   D       1    1    1
    220181085   MR        R-1      0.21 $   14,319     $   43,025       75%   D       1    1    1
    220181095   MR        R-1      0.29 $  153,070     $  229,606       60%   D       1    2    1
    220181105   MR        R-1      0.25 $   53,026     $  152,970       74%   D       1    1    1
    220181115   MR        R-1      0.25 $   89,247     $  133,872       60%   D       1    1    1
    220182015   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,319     $   53,260       79%   D       1    1    1
    220182025   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,445     $   39,788       73%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-45                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220182035   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   50,944       78%   D       1    1    1
    220182045   MR        R-1      0.18 $   87,137     $  161,831       65%   D       1    1    1
    220182055   MR        R-1      0.18 $  269,203     $  269,203       50%   D       1    1    1
    220182065   MR        R-1      0.18 $  262,305     $  262,305       50%   D       1    1    1
    220182075   MR        R-1       0.2 $  156,853     $  235,279       60%   D       1    1    1
    220182085   MR        R-1       0.2 $  323,850     $  323,850       50%   D       1    1    1
    220182095   MR        R-1      0.18 $  160,855     $  241,283       60%   D       1    1    1
    220182105   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   34,951       71%   D       1    1    1
    220182115   MR        R-1      0.18 $   22,189     $   85,336       79%   D       1    1    1
    220182125   MR        R-1      0.18 $   83,724     $  125,590       60%   D       1    1    1
    220182135   MR        R-1      0.18 $  112,063     $  168,096       60%   D       1    1    1
    220182145   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,319     $   38,536       73%   D       1    1    1
    220183015   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,445     $   40,686       74%   D       1    1    1
    220183025   MR        R-1      0.18 $   20,602     $   62,018       75%   D       1    1    1
    220183035   MR        R-1      0.18 $   86,339     $  129,512       60%   D       1    1    1
    220183045   MR        R-1      0.18 $   80,253     $  149,049       65%   D       1    1    1
    220183055   MR        R-1      0.18 $  123,713     $  202,772       62%   D       1    1    1
    220183065   MR        R-1      0.18 $   47,745     $   88,681       65%   D       1    1    1
    220183075   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,445     $   38,877       73%   D       1    1    1
    220183085   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   55,592       80%   D       1    1    1
    220183095   MR        R-1      0.19 $  144,855     $  217,283       60%   D       1    1    1
    220183100   MR        R-1      0.23 $   41,420     $  128,936       76%   D       1    1    1
    220183110   MR        R-1      0.23 $   70,594     $  158,301       69%   D       1    1    1
    220183120   MR        R-1      0.23 $   14,319     $   57,380       80%   D       1    1    1
    220184010   MR        R-1      0.23 $   71,215     $  161,184       69%   D       1    1    1
    220184020   MR        R-1      0.23 $  302,685     $  140,531       32%   D       1    1    1
    220184030   MR        R-1      0.25 $   14,319     $   57,380       80%   D       1    1    1
    220184040   MR        R-1      0.22 $  118,541     $  177,811       60%   D       1    1    1
    220184050   MR        R-1      0.22 $  102,178     $  171,371       63%   D       1    1    1
    220184060   MR        R-1      0.22 $  115,165     $  172,751       60%   D       1    1    1
    220184070   MR        R-1      0.25 $  168,702     $  140,585       45%   D       1    1    1
    220184080   MR        R-1      0.23 $   15,356     $   96,513       86%   D       1    1    1
    220184090   MR        R-1      0.22 $  143,014     $  156,844       52%   D       1    1    1
    220185010   MR        R-1      0.23 $  100,481     $  152,074       60%   D       1    1    1
    220185020   MR        R-1      0.23 $   54,905     $  101,982       65%   D       1    1    1
    220185030   MR        R-1      0.23 $  286,110     $  286,110       50%   D       1    1    1
    220191015   MR        R-1      0.18 $  107,952     $  161,930       60%   D       1    1    1
    220191025   MR        R-1      0.28 $   20,265     $   98,033       83%   D       1    2    1
    220191035   MR        R-1      0.25 $   14,174     $   57,960       80%   D       1    1    1
    220191045   MR        R-1      0.22 $   14,445     $   56,978       80%   D       1    1    1
    220191055   MR        R-1      0.25 $  256,741     $  256,741       50%   D       1    1    1
    220192015   MR        R-1      0.18 $  112,241     $  168,365       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192025   MR        R-1      0.25 $  342,720     $  342,720       50%   D       1    1    1
    220192035   MR        R-1      0.34 $  314,721     $  314,721       50%   D       1    2    1
    220192045   MR        R-1       0.2 $  374,473     $  374,473       50%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-46                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220192055   MR        R-1      0.21 $  105,257     $  157,887       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192065   MR        R-1      0.23 $  111,785     $  167,682       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192075   MR        R-1       0.2 $   92,383     $  138,579       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192085   MR        R-1      0.19 $   50,991     $   94,713       65%   D       1    1    1
    220192095   MR        R-1      0.19 $   29,262     $   52,054       64%   D       1    1    1
    220192105   MR        R-1      0.22 $  125,337     $  188,009       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192115   MR        R-1       0.2 $  177,286     $  265,930       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192125   MR        R-1      0.22 $  131,693     $  197,542       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192135   MR        R-1      0.19 $  131,934     $  197,903       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192145   MR        R-1      0.18 $   65,109     $   64,343       50%   D       1    1    1
    220192150   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   67,244       82%   D       1    1    1
    220192160   MR        R-1      0.18 $   60,119     $  111,661       65%   D       1    1    1
    220192170   MR        R-1      0.18 $   20,445     $   81,840       80%   D       1    1    1
    220192180   MR        R-1      0.18 $   17,922     $   72,625       80%   D       1    1    1
    220192190   MR        R-1      0.18 $   20,265     $  111,897       85%   D       1    1    1
    220192205   MR        R-1      0.18 $  162,306     $  243,461       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192215   MR        R-1      0.18 $   16,678     $   80,001       83%   D       1    1    1
    220192225   MR        R-1      0.18 $   57,033     $  105,924       65%   D       1    1    1
    220192245   MR        R-1      0.22 $   14,299     $   73,651       84%   D       1    1    1
    220192255   MR        R-1       0.2 $  107,968     $  161,953       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192265   MR        R-1      0.22 $  120,342     $  180,516       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192275   MR        R-1      0.39 $   14,319     $   54,578       79%   D       1    2    1
    220192285   MR        R-1      0.38 $  143,725     $  215,589       60%   D       1    2    1
    220192295   MR        R-1      0.19 $   97,606     $  146,411       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192305   MR        R-1      0.19 $   14,319     $   52,464       79%   D       1    1    1
    220192315   MR        R-1      0.19 $   83,086     $  154,306       65%   D       1    1    1
    220192325   MR        R-1      0.19 $  128,786     $  193,180       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192335   MR        R-1      0.19 $   50,050     $  117,832       70%   D       1    1    1
    220192345   MR        R-1       0.2 $   14,445     $   44,761       76%   D       1    1    1
    220192355   MR        R-1      0.35 $   20,767     $   79,050       79%   D       1    2    1
    220192365   MR        R-1       0.2 $  243,493     $  243,493       50%   D       1    1    1
    220192375   MR        R-1      0.18 $  151,342     $  227,013       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192385   MR        R-1      0.18 $   69,742     $  136,116       66%   D       1    1    1
    220192395   MR        R-1      0.18 $  131,882     $  197,824       60%   D       1    1    1
    220192405   MR        R-1      0.18 $  239,292     $  239,292       50%   D       1    1    1
    220192415   MR        R-1      0.18 $  339,500     $  339,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    220192425   MR        R-1      0.18 $   90,573     $  135,861       60%   D       1    1    1
    220193015   MR        R-1      0.18 $  160,982     $  255,676       61%   D       1    1    1
    220193025   MR        R-1      0.18 $  110,832     $  166,249       60%   D       1    1    1
    220193035   MR        R-1      0.18 $  132,712     $  199,068       60%   D       1    1    1
    220193045   MR        R-1      0.18 $  385,050     $  385,050       50%   D       1    1    1
    220193055   MR        R-1      0.18 $  238,459     $  238,459       50%   D       1    1    1
    220193060   MR        R-1      0.18 $   88,080     $  163,580       65%   D       1    1    1
    220193075   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   94,912       87%   D       1    1    1
    220193080   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   58,269       80%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-47                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220193095   MR        R-1      0.18 $  351,250     $  351,250       50%   D       1    1    1
    220193105   MR        R-1      0.18 $   84,117     $  126,178       60%   D       1    1    1
    220194015   MR        R-1      0.19 $  100,012     $  194,412       66%   D       1    1    1
    220194025   MR        R-1      0.19 $   20,265     $   64,219       76%   D       1    1    1
    220194035   MR        R-1      0.18 $   88,746     $  164,823       65%   D       1    1    1
    220194045   MR        R-1      0.18 $   30,244     $   90,772       75%   D       1    1    1
    220194055   MR        R-1      0.18 $   87,034     $  130,554       60%   D       1    1    1
    220194065   MR        R-1      0.18 $  105,718     $  158,578       60%   D       1    1    1
    220194075   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   51,939       78%   D       1    1    1
    220194080   MR        R-1      0.18 $  336,600     $  336,600       50%   D       1    1    1
    220194095   MR        R-1      0.18 $  401,625     $  401,625       50%   D       1    1    1
    220194105   MR        R-1      0.18 $   77,494     $  143,930       65%   D       1    1    1
    220194110   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   53,799       79%   D       1    1    1
    220194120   MR        R-1      0.18 $  100,438     $  205,280       67%   D       1    1    1
    220194130   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   54,682       79%   D       1    1    1
    220194145   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,342     $   43,976       75%   D       1    1    1
    220194155   MR        R-1      0.18 $   77,995     $  144,860       65%   D       1    1    1
    220194165   MR        R-1      0.18 $   89,706     $  134,561       60%   D       1    1    1
    220195010   MR        R-1      0.18 $  151,342     $  227,013       60%   D       1    1    1
    220195020   MR        R-1      0.18 $   16,542     $   52,731       76%   D       1    1    1
    220195030   MR        R-1      0.18 $   20,265     $   81,123       80%   D       1    1    1
    220195045   MR        R-1       0.3 $  160,982     $  253,019       61%   D       1    2    1
    220195055   MR        R-1      0.19 $  100,479     $  150,720       60%   D       1    1    1
    220196015   MR        R-1      0.18 $   63,744     $  118,389       65%   D       1    1    1
    220196020   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   57,380       80%   D       1    1    1
    220196030   MR        R-1      0.18 $  390,150     $  390,150       50%   D       1    1    1
    220196040   MR        R-1      0.18 $  109,877     $  164,821       60%   D       1    1    1
    220196050   MR        R-1      0.18 $  110,883     $  166,327       60%   D       1    1    1
    220196060   MR        R-1      0.18 $  121,043     $  181,567       60%   D       1    1    1
    220196070   MR        R-1      0.18 $   92,070     $  138,105       60%   D       1    1    1
    220196080   MR        R-1      0.18 $  105,828     $  158,743       60%   D       1    1    1
    220196090   MR        R-1      0.18 $   23,185     $  148,962       87%   D       1    1    1
    220200035   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   41,232       74%   D       1    1    1
    220200045   MR        R-1      0.18 $  326,400     $  326,400       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200055   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   35,859       71%   D       1    1    1
    220200065   MR        R-1      0.18 $  163,212     $  286,240       64%   D       1    1    1
    220200075   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,445     $   36,177       71%   D       1    1    1
    220200085   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   38,536       73%   D       1    1    1
    220200095   MR        R-1      0.18 $  177,286     $  265,930       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200105   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,445     $   35,258       71%   D       1    1    1
    220200115   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   34,951       71%   D       1    1    1
    220200125   MR        R-1      0.18 $  208,340     $  208,340       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200135   MR        R-1      0.18 $  110,348     $  165,525       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200145   MR        R-1      0.18 $   54,377     $  101,001       65%   D       1    1    1
    220200155   MR        R-1      0.18 $   62,638     $  117,136       65%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-48                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220200165   MR        R-1      0.18 $  217,963     $  217,963       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200175   MR        R-1      0.19 $  387,090     $  387,090       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200185   MR        R-1      0.18 $   86,461     $  150,863       64%   D       1    1    1
    220200195   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   35,859       71%   D       1    1    1
    220200205   MR        R-1      0.18 $   46,413     $   86,215       65%   D       1    1    1
    220200215   MR        R-1      0.18 $  285,600     $  285,600       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200225   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   71,576       83%   D       1    1    1
    220200235   MR        R-1      0.17 $   14,319     $   34,951       71%   D       1    1    1
    220200245   MR        R-1      0.22 $  331,500     $  331,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200255   MR        R-1      0.18 $   77,995     $  144,860       65%   D       1    1    1
    220200265   MR        R-1      0.22 $  147,752     $  221,628       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200275   MR        R-1      0.17 $  145,936     $  218,906       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200285   MR        R-1      0.18 $  229,928     $  229,928       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200295   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   45,712       76%   D       1    1    1
    220200305   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   64,961       82%   D       1    1    1
    220200315   MR        R-1      0.19 $   84,072     $  126,109       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200325   MR        R-1      0.19 $  270,504     $  270,504       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200335   MR        R-1      0.19 $   84,377     $  126,565       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200345   MR        R-1      0.18 $   95,071     $  142,611       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200355   MR        R-1      0.18 $   56,093     $  104,181       65%   D       1    1    1
    220200365   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   40,332       74%   D       1    1    1
    220200375   MR        R-1      0.18 $  137,209     $  205,816       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200385   MR        R-1      0.18 $  234,090     $  234,090       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200395   MR        R-1      0.18 $   83,573     $  138,983       62%   D       1    1    1
    220200405   MR        R-1      0.18 $  103,444     $  159,258       61%   D       1    1    1
    220200415   MR        R-1      0.18 $   89,691     $  134,540       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200425   MR        R-1      0.18 $  302,500     $  302,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200435   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   35,859       71%   D       1    1    1
    220200445   MR        R-1      0.18 $   72,738     $  135,100       65%   D       1    1    1
    220200455   MR        R-1      0.18 $  136,207     $  204,311       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200465   MR        R-1      0.18 $   27,047     $   73,990       73%   D       1    1    1
    220200475   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,319     $   40,332       74%   D       1    1    1
    220200485   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,174     $   35,818       72%   D       1    1    1
    220200495   MR        R-1      0.18 $  103,477     $  155,218       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200505   MR        R-1      0.18 $  331,500     $  331,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    220200525   MR        R-1      0.18 $  107,918     $  161,878       60%   D       1    1    1
    220200535   MR        R-1      0.22 $   14,038     $   35,157       71%   D       1    1    1
    220210170   MR        R-1      0.26 $   59,314     $  178,388       75%   D       1    2    1
    220210180   MR        R-1      0.59 $   97,269     $  211,606       69%   D       1    3    1
    220210190   MR        R-1      0.31 $  202,980     $  177,607       47%   D       1    2    1
    220210200   MR        R-1      0.28 $  148,974     $  157,314       51%   D       1    2    1
    220210220   MR        R-1      0.96 $   34,010     $       -         0%   V            4    4
    220210230   MR        R-1      0.11 $   35,986     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230061090   MR        R-1      0.15 $  413,330     $   86,904       17%   U       1    1    1
    230061100   MR        R-1      0.12 $  192,960     $   55,185       22%   U       1    1    1
                                                 B-49                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230061110   MR        R-1      0.18 $  164,918     $  157,511       49%   D       1    1    1
    230061120   MR        R-1      0.17 $  345,924     $   85,940       20%   U       1    1    1
    230061130   MR        R-1      0.16 $  489,600     $   66,300       12%   U       1    1    1
    230061140   MR        R-1      0.15 $   65,565     $   64,104       49%   D       1    1    1
    230061150   MR        R-1      0.29 $   16,107     $   34,045       68%   D       1    2    1
    230061220   MR        R-1      0.17 $  469,200     $  107,100       19%   U       1    1    1
    230061250   MR        R-1      0.14 $   19,872     $   29,812       60%   D       1    1    1
    230061260   MR        R-1      0.13 $   11,154     $   51,791       82%   D       1    1    1
    230062010   MR        R-1      0.29 $  416,160     $   79,564       16%   U       1    2    2
    230062020   MR        R-1      0.18 $  137,312     $  124,955       48%   D       1    1    1
    230062030   MR        R-1      0.18 $  378,356     $  122,181       24%   D       1    1    1
    230062040   MR        R-1      0.17 $   12,283     $   77,656       86%   D       1    1    1
    230062050   MR        R-1      0.17 $   65,338     $   68,461       51%   D       1    1    1
    230062060   MR        R-1      0.22 $  378,356     $  129,721       26%   D       1    1    1
    230062070   MR        R-1      0.22 $   74,309     $  102,550       58%   D       1    1    1
    230062080   MR        R-1      0.14 $  122,889     $   73,466       37%   D       1    1    1
    230062090   MR        R-1      0.14 $  499,800     $   81,600       14%   U       1    1    1
    230062100   MR        R-1      0.15 $  197,977     $  119,049       38%   D       1    1    1
    230062110   MR        R-1      0.16 $  143,397     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230062120   MR        R-1      0.52 $   18,395     $  106,202       85%   D       1    3    1
    230062130   MR        R-1      0.21 $  572,220     $  166,932       23%   U       1    1    1
    230062150   MR        R-1      0.17 $  175,011     $   49,802       22%   U       1    1    1
    230062160   MR        R-1      0.17 $  328,544     $   42,391       11%   U       1    1    1
    230062170   MR        R-1      0.17 $   99,290     $   61,161       38%   D       2    2    2
    230062210   MR        R-1      0.34 $   16,237     $   18,946       54%   D       1    2    1
    230063060   MR        R-1      0.15 $    9,833     $   28,674       74%   D       1    1    1
    230063070   MR        R-1      0.13 $  216,203     $   89,978       29%   D       1    1    1
    230063080   MR        R-1      0.18 $  184,778     $   48,564       21%   U       1    1    1
    230063220   MR        R-1      0.17 $  254,039     $   62,156       20%   U       1    1    1
    230063240   MR        R-1      0.16 $  612,000     $  153,000       20%   U            1    1
    230071030   MR        R-1      0.51 $  130,584     $  108,398       45%   D       2    3    2
    230071040   MR        R-1      0.34 $   21,496     $    9,833       31%   D       1    2    1
    230071050   MR        R-1      0.17 $   10,732     $   14,319       57%   D       1    1    1
    230072020   MR        R-1      0.17 $   79,207     $   75,585       49%   D       1    1    1
    230072030   MR        R-1      0.17 $  339,142     $   83,724       20%   U       1    1    1
    230072040   MR        R-1      0.17 $   65,565     $  145,331       69%   D       1    1    1
    230072050   MR        R-1      0.25 $   12,524     $   55,592       82%   D       2    2    2
    230072060   MR        R-1      0.51 $  194,582     $       -         0%   V            3    3
    230073010   MR        R-1      0.13 $  530,400     $  122,400       19%   U       1    1    1
    230073020   MR        R-1      0.12 $  364,140     $   61,903       15%   U       1    1    1
    230073030   MR        R-1      0.12 $   10,748     $   21,528       67%   D       1    1    1
    230073100   MR        R-1      0.12 $   93,470     $   93,470       50%   D       1    1    1
    230073110   MR        R-1      0.14 $   91,168     $   93,477       51%   D       1    1    1
    230074010   MR        R-1      0.25 $   64,985     $   79,606       55%   D       1    1    1
    230074050   MR        R-1      0.41 $  109,283     $  190,289       64%   D       1    2    1
                                                 B-50                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230074060   MR        R-1       0.2 $  242,325     $  158,180       39%   D       1    1    1
    230074070   MR        R-1      0.41 $   50,711     $  177,677       78%   D       1    2    1
    230081010   MR        R-1      0.31 $   14,174     $   35,818       72%   D       1    2    1
    230081020   MR        R-1      0.14 $  143,397     $  160,604       53%   D       1    1    1
    230081030   MR        R-1      0.13 $  216,203     $  118,910       35%   D       1    1    1
    230081040   MR        R-1      0.13 $  158,379     $  131,981       45%   D       1    1    1
    230081050   MR        R-1      0.13 $  152,230     $  113,538       43%   D       1    1    1
    230081060   MR        R-1      0.13 $  286,150     $  113,930       28%   D       1    1    1
    230081070   MR        R-1      0.13 $  149,132     $  162,897       52%   D       1    1    1
    230081080   MR        R-1      0.16 $   13,421     $   55,592       81%   D       1    1    1
    230081090   MR        R-1      0.13 $   59,442     $   95,118       62%   D       1    1    1
    230081100   MR        R-1      0.13 $  119,177     $  101,300       46%   D       1    1    1
    230081110   MR        R-1      0.13 $   59,442     $   98,091       62%   D       1    1    1
    230081120   MR        R-1      0.13 $   12,524     $   50,199       80%   D       1    1    1
    230081130   MR        R-1      0.26 $   14,299     $   50,802       78%   D       1    2    1
    230081145   MR        R-1       0.2 $  177,611     $   95,146       35%   D       1    1    1
    230081150   MR        R-1      0.44 $  281,065     $  230,016       45%   D       1    2    1
    230081160   MR        R-1      0.46 $  483,736     $  146,577       23%   U       1    2    2
    230081300   MR        R-1      0.45 $   15,183     $   85,680       85%   D       1    2    1
    230081315   MR        R-1      0.41 $   15,183     $   98,033       87%   D       1    2    1
    230081325   MR        R-1      0.31 $   14,319     $   51,988       78%   D       1    2    1
    230081335   MR        R-1      0.37 $   13,421     $   59,178       82%   D       1    2    1
    230081345   MR        R-1       0.6 $  107,141     $  213,369       67%   D       1    3    1
    230081355   MR        R-1      0.84 $  101,996     $  163,204       62%   D       1    4    1
    230081365   MR        R-1      0.28 $  119,319     $  197,472       62%   D       1    2    1
    230081370   MR        R-1      0.23 $  178,768     $  172,810       49%   D       1    1    1
    230081400   MR        R-1      0.24 $  478,584     $  197,676       29%   D       1    1    1
    230081410   MR        R-1      0.24 $  178,768     $  244,317       58%   D       1    1    1
    230081420   MR        R-1      0.27 $  219,709     $  281,502       56%   D       1    2    1
    230081430   MR        R-1       0.3 $   99,998     $  221,436       69%   D       1    2    1
    230081440   MR        R-1      0.29 $   87,423     $  214,939       71%   D       1    2    1
    230081450   MR        R-1      0.27 $   74,309     $  163,492       69%   D       1    2    1
    230081460   MR        R-1      0.24 $   89,277     $  160,719       64%   D       1    1    1
    230082010   MR        R-1      0.18 $   49,165     $   81,780       62%   D       1    1    1
    230082020   MR        R-1      0.19 $   13,421     $   44,819       77%   D       1    1    1
    230082030   MR        R-1      0.19 $  231,554     $  115,776       33%   D       1    1    1
    230082040   MR        R-1      0.18 $   13,426     $   52,006       79%   D       1    1    1
    230082050   MR        R-1      0.23 $   14,319     $   50,199       78%   D       1    1    1
    230082070   MR        R-1      0.34 $  175,258     $  182,268       51%   D       1    2    1
    230082105   MR        R-1      0.26 $  201,936     $  168,279       45%   D       1    2    1
    230082115   MR        R-1      0.01 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230082120   MR        R-1       0.4 $   13,438     $  389,986       97%   D       1    2    1
    230082130   MR        R-1      0.45 $   15,220     $   41,912       73%   D       1    2    1
    230083010   MR        R-1      0.24 $  367,545     $  210,798       36%   D       1    1    1
    230083020   MR        R-1      0.22 $  202,802     $  185,654       48%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-51                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230083030   MR        R-1      0.23 $   15,208     $  114,110       88%   D       1    1    1
    230083040   MR        R-1       0.3 $  231,553     $  174,216       43%   D       1    2    1
    230083050   MR        R-1      0.18 $   14,920     $   52,748       78%   D       1    1    1
    230083060   MR        R-1      0.19 $  309,507     $  119,608       28%   D       1    1    1
    230083070   MR        R-1      0.16 $  179,949     $  127,952       42%   D       1    1    1
    230083080   MR        R-1      0.13 $  480,000     $  170,000       26%   D       1    1    1
    230083090   MR        R-1      0.13 $  392,133     $   78,425       17%   U       1    1    1
    230083100   MR        R-1      0.13 $  500,000     $   99,000       17%   U       1    1    1
    230083110   MR        R-1      0.13 $  392,133     $   63,058       14%   U       1    1    1
    230083120   MR        R-1      0.13 $   14,124     $   65,543       82%   D       1    1    1
    230083130   MR        R-1      0.15 $   14,920     $   49,216       77%   D       1    1    1
    230083140   MR        R-1      0.15 $   13,334     $   49,308       79%   D       1    1    1
    230083150   MR        R-1      0.12 $   13,764     $   56,017       80%   D       1    1    1
    230090030   MR        R-1      0.21 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230090040   MR        R-1       0.2 $  122,907     $   36,866       23%   U       1    1    1
    230090060   MR        R-1      0.53 $   80,137     $  220,094       73%   D       1    3    1
    230090080   MR        R-1      0.82 $   73,107     $   51,164       41%   D       1    4    1
    230090110   MR        R-1      1.33 $   20,592     $  159,372       89%   D       2    6    2
    230090120   MR        R-1      0.12 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230090130   MR        R-1      1.06 $   87,732     $   23,541       21%   U       1    5    5
    230090140   MR        R-1      0.25 $   72,852     $  148,630       67%   D       1    1    1
    230090150   MR        R-1      0.41 $    5,351     $   34,045       86%   D       2    2    2
    230090235   MR        R-1      0.22 $  344,441     $  185,468       35%   D       1    1    1
    230090295   MR        R-1      0.22 $  172,076     $  160,604       48%   D       1    1    1
    230090305   MR        R-1      0.23 $   10,956     $  176,275       94%   D       1    1    1
    230090310   MR        R-1      0.49 $  728,280     $  114,444       14%   U       1    2    2
    230120010   MR        R-1      0.32 $   10,828     $  163,791       94%   D       1    2    1
    240144010   MR        R-1      0.13 $    4,026     $    2,638       40%   D            1    0
    280155011   MR        R-1       0.1 $   68,381     $  102,572       60%   D       1    1    1
    280155012   MR        R-1      0.15 $   57,815     $  116,025       67%   D       1    1    1
    280155021   MR        R-1      0.09 $  242,250     $  242,250       50%   D       1    1    1
    280155022   MR        R-1      0.09 $   64,377     $   96,568       60%   D       1    1    1
    280155031   MR        R-1      0.09 $   58,590     $   87,889       60%   D       1    1    1
    280155032   MR        R-1      0.09 $   61,338     $   92,009       60%   D       1    1    1
    280155041   MR        R-1      0.11 $   53,914     $  100,136       65%   D       1    1    1
    280155042   MR        R-1      0.09 $   20,201     $   71,742       78%   D       1    1    1
    280161015   MR        R-1      0.23 $   21,680     $   61,471       74%   D       1    1    1
    280161025   MR        R-1      0.23 $   13,498     $  111,200       89%   D       1    1    1
    280161035   MR        R-1      0.23 $  192,775     $  200,790       51%   D       1    1    1
    280161045   MR        R-1      0.23 $   87,553     $  181,349       67%   D       1    1    1
    280161055   MR        R-1      0.23 $  129,563     $  243,524       65%   D       1    1    1
    280161065   MR        R-1      0.25 $  152,338     $  228,508       60%   D       1    1    1
    280161075   MR        R-1      0.46 $  105,699     $  189,921       64%   D       1    2    1
    280161085   MR        R-1      0.27 $  222,561     $  222,561       50%   D       1    2    1
    280161095   MR        R-1      0.23 $  124,369     $  276,216       69%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-52                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    280161105   MR        R-1      0.23 $  119,132     $  178,699       60%   D       1    1    1
    280161115   MR        R-1      0.23 $   13,498     $  168,245       93%   D       1    1    1
    280161125   MR        R-1      0.23 $  328,950     $  328,950       50%   D       1    1    1
    280161135   MR        R-1      0.23 $   37,360     $  236,648       86%   D       1    1    1
    280161145   MR        R-1      0.31 $  142,648     $  213,973       60%   D       1    2    1
    280161155   MR        R-1      0.24 $   70,116     $  133,936       66%   D       1    1    1
    280161165   MR        R-1      0.24 $  250,647     $  290,201       54%   D       1    1    1
    280161175   MR        R-1      0.24 $   13,793     $   82,963       86%   D       1    1    1
    280161185   MR        R-1      0.23 $   13,498     $  149,781       92%   D       1    1    1
    280162015   MR        R-1      0.23 $   13,671     $   85,422       86%   D       1    1    1
    280162025   MR        R-1      0.23 $  112,613     $  168,923       60%   D       1    1    1
    280162035   MR        R-1      0.23 $  100,108     $  150,164       60%   D       1    1    1
    280162045   MR        R-1      0.23 $   60,334     $  137,814       70%   D       1    1    1
    280162055   MR        R-1      0.23 $   13,793     $   72,122       84%   D       1    1    1
    280162065   MR        R-1      0.23 $   62,229     $  115,583       65%   D       1    1    1
    280162075   MR        R-1      0.23 $   65,790     $  122,186       65%   D       1    1    1
    280162085   MR        R-1      0.23 $   64,999     $  131,685       67%   D       1    1    1
    280162095   MR        R-1      0.23 $  155,676     $  161,904       51%   D       1    1    1
    280162105   MR        R-1      0.23 $  330,225     $  330,225       50%   D       1    1    1
    280162115   MR        R-1      0.23 $  121,369     $  205,675       63%   D       1    1    1
    280162125   MR        R-1      0.27 $  355,000     $  355,000       50%   D       1    2    1
    280162135   MR        R-1      0.36 $   14,005     $   62,225       82%   D       1    2    1
    280162145   MR        R-1       0.3 $   13,671     $   82,575       86%   D       1    2    1
    280162155   MR        R-1      0.25 $  100,891     $  187,376       65%   D       1    1    1
    280171010   MR        R-1      0.24 $  307,500     $  307,500       50%   D       1    1    1
    280171020   MR        R-1      0.22 $   69,962     $  129,936       65%   D       1    1    1
    280171030   MR        R-1      0.22 $  342,291     $  342,291       50%   D       1    1    1
    280171040   MR        R-1      0.24 $   87,907     $  163,269       65%   D       1    1    1
    280171050   MR        R-1      0.24 $   81,491     $  156,855       66%   D       1    1    1
    280171060   MR        R-1      0.24 $   82,495     $  153,216       65%   D       1    1    1
    280171070   MR        R-1      0.24 $  113,621     $  211,020       65%   D       1    1    1
    280171080   MR        R-1      0.22 $   33,137     $  124,204       79%   D       1    1    1
    280171090   MR        R-1      0.22 $   33,137     $  145,723       81%   D       1    1    1
    280171100   MR        R-1      0.25 $  220,478     $  375,408       63%   D       1    1    1
    280171110   MR        R-1      0.25 $  363,619     $  363,619       50%   D       1    1    1
    280171120   MR        R-1      0.22 $  133,198     $  199,800       60%   D       1    1    1
    280171130   MR        R-1      0.22 $   63,822     $   47,044       42%   D       1    1    1
    280171140   MR        R-1      0.24 $  151,215     $  263,179       64%   D       1    1    1
    280171150   MR        R-1      0.24 $   86,170     $  167,477       66%   D       1    1    1
    280171160   MR        R-1      0.24 $   33,137     $  122,549       79%   D       1    1    1
    280171170   MR        R-1      0.24 $   94,742     $  175,967       65%   D       1    1    1
    280171180   MR        R-1      0.22 $  428,400     $  428,400       50%   D       1    1    1
    280171190   MR        R-1      0.22 $   91,284     $  169,541       65%   D       1    1    1
    280171200   MR        R-1      0.25 $   13,498     $  124,236       90%   D       1    1    1
    280171210   MR        R-1      0.24 $   13,498     $  100,396       88%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-53                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    280171220   MR        R-1      0.23 $  449,055     $  449,055       50%   D       1    1    1
    280171230   MR        R-1      0.23 $  154,368     $  231,553       60%   D       1    1    1
    280171240   MR        R-1      0.23 $  136,283     $  204,427       60%   D       1    1    1
    280171250   MR        R-1      0.34 $   33,137     $  124,204       79%   D       1    2    1
    280171260   MR        R-1      0.23 $  147,461     $  264,097       64%   D       1    1    1
    280171270   MR        R-1      0.23 $  182,079     $  425,841       70%   D       1    1    1
    280171280   MR        R-1      0.24 $  116,415     $  174,627       60%   D       1    1    1
    280172010   MR        R-1      0.23 $   16,887     $  103,789       86%   D       1    1    1
    280172020   MR        R-1      0.22 $   18,578     $   92,790       83%   D       1    1    1
    280172030   MR        R-1      0.28 $   86,905     $  161,403       65%   D       1    2    1
    280172040   MR        R-1      0.22 $   33,292     $  101,695       75%   D       1    1    1
    280172050   MR        R-1      0.23 $   49,541     $  148,663       75%   D       1    1    1
    280172060   MR        R-1      0.23 $  190,767     $  286,150       60%   D       1    1    1
    280172070   MR        R-1      0.22 $  322,524     $  372,674       54%   D       1    1    1
    280172080   MR        R-1      0.25 $  123,945     $  225,597       65%   D       1    1    1
    280172090   MR        R-1      0.28 $  147,523     $  221,290       60%   D       1    2    1
    280172100   MR        R-1      0.22 $   30,804     $   92,648       75%   D       1    1    1
    280172110   MR        R-1      0.23 $  144,880     $  217,321       60%   D       1    1    1
    280172120   MR        R-1      0.24 $  199,245     $  362,518       65%   D       1    1    1
    280172130   MR        R-1      0.28 $  151,891     $  227,836       60%   D       1    2    1
    280172140   MR        R-1      0.25 $  250,860     $  298,913       54%   D       1    1    1
    280172150   MR        R-1      0.22 $   13,498     $   81,296       86%   D       1    1    1
    280172160   MR        R-1      0.23 $  185,933     $  314,601       63%   D       1    1    1
    280173010   MR        R-1      1.54 $  367,096     $  139,380       28%   D       1    7    1
    280173020   MR        R-1      0.27 $   33,137     $  105,902       76%   D       1    2    1
    280173030   MR        R-1      0.27 $   89,194     $  165,657       65%   D       1    2    1
    280173040   MR        R-1      0.27 $   40,887     $   48,780       54%   D       1    2    1
    280173050   MR        R-1      0.27 $   96,744     $  179,681       65%   D       1    2    1
    280173060   MR        R-1      0.27 $  142,260     $  222,792       61%   D       1    2    1
    280173070   MR        R-1      0.26 $  105,388     $  223,852       68%   D       1    2    1
    280173080   MR        R-1      0.23 $  126,657     $  189,988       60%   D       1    1    1
    280173090   MR        R-1      0.22 $  211,879     $  317,818       60%   D       1    1    1
    280173100   MR        R-1      0.34 $  404,715     $  406,755       50%   D       1    2    1
    280173110   MR        R-1      0.35 $   83,826     $  155,693       65%   D       1    2    1
    280173120   MR        R-1      0.22 $  116,372     $  174,561       60%   D       1    1    1
    280173130   MR        R-1      0.22 $  114,421     $  171,632       60%   D       1    1    1
    280173140   MR        R-1      0.22 $  340,170     $  340,170       50%   D       1    1    1
    280181065   MR        R-1      0.27 $   74,309     $  170,923       70%   D       1    2    1
    280181075   MR        R-1      0.22 $   71,425     $  285,728       80%   D       1    1    1
    280181085   MR        R-1      0.22 $  703,800     $  192,780       22%   U       1    1    1
    280181095   MR        R-1      0.28 $  309,641     $  222,131       42%   D       1    2    1
    280181105   MR        R-1      0.28 $  625,000     $  160,000       20%   U       1    2    2
    280181115   MR        R-1      0.23 $  112,042     $  219,895       66%   D       1    1    1
    280181125   MR        R-1      0.22 $  196,820     $  224,936       53%   D       1    1    1
    280181135   MR        R-1      0.22 $   75,796     $       -         0%   V            1    1
                                                 B-54                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    280182015   MR        R-1      0.22 $   80,137     $  272,643       77%   D       1    1    1
    280182025   MR        R-1      0.22 $  229,434     $  134,102       37%   D       1    1    1
    280182035   MR        R-1      0.23 $  238,358     $  175,331       42%   D       1    1    1
    280182045   MR        R-1      0.23 $  279,840     $  239,303       46%   D       1    1    1
    280182055   MR        R-1      0.22 $  652,800     $  182,580       22%   U       1    1    1
    280182065   MR        R-1      0.22 $  650,000     $  230,000       26%   D       1    1    1
    190140015   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   87,183     $  130,775       60%   D       1    2    1
    190140025   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  237,150     $  237,150       50%   D       1    2    1
    190140035   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   59,520     $  178,575       75%   D       1    2    1
    190140045   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  115,279     $  172,919       60%   D       1    2    1
    190140055   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  109,122     $  163,685       60%   D       1    2    1
    190140065   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  110,597     $  165,894       60%   D       1    2    1
    190140075   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  107,266     $  160,900       60%   D       1    2    1
    190140085   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  236,640     $  236,640       50%   D       1    2    1
    190140095   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   98,302     $  147,455       60%   D       1    2    1
    190140105   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  108,101     $  162,152       60%   D       1    2    1
    190140115   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  229,500     $  229,500       50%   D       1    2    1
    190140125   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  115,655     $  173,484       60%   D       1    2    1
    190150015   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  126,705     $  187,722       60%   D       1    2    1
    190150025   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  219,300     $  219,300       50%   D       1    2    1
    190150035   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   83,139     $  154,404       65%   D       1    2    1
    190150045   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  226,287     $  226,287       50%   D       1    2    1
    190150055   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  130,111     $  195,165       60%   D       1    2    1
    190150065   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   47,207     $  179,409       79%   D       1    2    1
    190150075   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   95,901     $  143,854       60%   D       1    2    1
    190150085   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   89,478     $  134,217       60%   D       1    2    1
    190150095   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   81,106     $  121,658       60%   D       1    2    1
    190150105   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  216,403     $  216,403       50%   D       1    2    1
    190150115   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  118,910     $  178,367       60%   D       1    2    1
    190160015   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  206,664     $  206,664       50%   D       1    2    1
    190160025   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  116,134     $  174,201       60%   D       1    2    1
    190160035   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  105,531     $  158,299       60%   D       1    2    1
    190160045   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  116,415     $  174,626       60%   D       1    2    1
    190160055   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   16,249     $   55,163       77%   D       1    2    1
    190160065   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   75,746     $  140,684       65%   D       1    2    1
    190160075   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   84,097     $  156,190       65%   D       1    2    1
    190160085   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  166,464     $  166,464       50%   D       1    2    1
    190160095   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   32,604     $   69,795       68%   D       1    2    1
    190160105   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   33,278     $   72,000       68%   D       1    2    1
    190160115   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  123,666     $  185,501       60%   D       1    2    1
    190160125   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   76,957     $  142,935       65%   D       1    2    1
    190160135   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  190,502     $  190,502       50%   D       1    2    1
    190160145   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  234,750     $  234,750       50%   D       1    2    1
    190160155   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   29,728     $   57,960       66%   D       1    2    1
    190160165   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  148,097     $  222,148       60%   D       1    2    1
                                                 B-55                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    190170015   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  171,666     $  171,666       50%   D       1    2    1
    190170025   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  204,510     $  204,510       50%   D       1    2    1
    190170035   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  103,775     $  155,665       60%   D       1    2    1
    190170045   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   75,568     $  113,355       60%   D       1    2    1
    190170055   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   69,580     $  123,700       64%   D       1    2    1
    190170065   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  118,699     $  178,049       60%   D       1    2    1
    190170075   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   14,052     $   58,879       81%   D       1    2    1
    190170085   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   25,586     $   75,907       75%   D       1    2    1
    190170095   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  190,250     $  190,250       50%   D       1    2    1
    190170105   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  180,000     $  180,000       50%   D       1    2    1
    190170115   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  132,651     $  132,651       50%   D       1    2    1
    190170125   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   43,527     $   65,294       60%   D       1    2    1
    190170135   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   12,524     $   44,819       78%   D       1    2    1
    190170145   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  138,835     $  208,254       60%   D       1    2    1
    190170155   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   58,352     $  195,583       77%   D       1    2    1
    190170165   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  121,512     $  182,268       60%   D       1    2    1
    190170175   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   43,093     $   63,899       60%   D       1    2    1
    190180090   MHR       R-2      6.48 $       -      $       -         0%   V           57   43
    190190010   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  104,967     $  157,452       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190020   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  106,612     $  159,925       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190030   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   18,912     $   67,090       78%   D       1    2    1
    190190040   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  151,342     $  229,413       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190050   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  190,913     $  190,913       50%   D       1    2    1
    190190060   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   95,718     $  143,578       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190070   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  116,749     $  175,123       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190080   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  203,918     $  203,918       50%   D       1    2    1
    190190090   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  138,369     $  207,553       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190100   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   46,406     $  139,241       75%   D       1    2    1
    190190110   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   86,445     $  129,669       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190120   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   69,746     $  104,620       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190130   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  122,515     $  183,772       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190140   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   30,244     $   90,772       75%   D       1    2    1
    190190150   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   46,325     $  138,982       75%   D       1    2    1
    190190160   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   18,912     $   55,092       74%   D       1    2    1
    190190170   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  199,236     $  199,236       50%   D       1    2    1
    190190180   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   89,936     $  134,906       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190190   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   67,483     $  125,330       65%   D       1    2    1
    190190200   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  127,177     $  190,767       60%   D       1    2    1
    190190210   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  205,479     $  205,479       50%   D       1    2    1
    190200010   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   34,154     $  102,504       75%   D       1    2    1
    190200020   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  228,888     $  228,888       50%   D       1    2    1
    190200030   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   47,351     $  142,073       75%   D       1    2    1
    190200040   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   26,880     $   57,380       68%   D       1    2    1
    190200050   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   43,749     $  131,261       75%   D       1    2    1
    190200060   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  184,671     $  184,671       50%   D       1    2    1
                                                  B-56                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    190200070   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   79,572     $  119,359       60%   D       1    2    1
    190200080   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   81,195     $  150,795       65%   D       1    2    1
    190200090   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  221,085     $  221,085       50%   D       1    2    1
    190200100   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  212,189     $  212,189       50%   D       1    2    1
    190200110   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  221,850     $  221,850       50%   D       1    2    1
    190200120   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   83,798     $  125,699       60%   D       1    2    1
    190200130   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  112,340     $  168,511       60%   D       1    2    1
    190200140   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   42,134     $  126,430       75%   D       1    2    1
    190200150   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   54,905     $  101,982       65%   D       1    2    1
    190200160   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  219,300     $  219,300       50%   D       1    2    1
    190200170   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  142,260     $  213,392       60%   D       1    2    1
    190200180   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   88,795     $  133,194       60%   D       1    2    1
    190200190   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   57,524     $  106,843       65%   D       1    2    1
    190200200   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  219,300     $  223,176       50%   D       1    2    1
    190200210   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   93,501     $  140,253       60%   D       1    2    1
    190200220   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   27,398     $   82,245       75%   D       1    2    1
    190200230   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  142,015     $  213,023       60%   D       1    2    1
    190200240   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   22,189     $   93,798       81%   D       1    2    1
    190200250   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   26,180     $   62,531       70%   D       1    2    1
    190200260   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   92,619     $  138,930       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210010   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  112,246     $  168,371       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210020   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  187,272     $  187,272       50%   D       1    2    1
    190210030   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   69,552     $  104,331       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210040   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  116,966     $  175,449       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210050   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   90,414     $  135,623       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210060   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   33,464     $   75,894       69%   D       1    2    1
    190210070   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  226,950     $  226,950       50%   D       1    2    1
    190210080   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   70,203     $  105,308       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210090   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   18,912     $   49,848       72%   D       1    2    1
    190210100   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  249,900     $  249,900       50%   D       1    2    1
    190210110   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  172,219     $  172,219       50%   D       1    2    1
    190210120   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   53,186     $  159,574       75%   D       1    2    1
    190210130   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   65,067     $   97,603       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210140   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   88,209     $  132,314       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210150   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   38,650     $  106,696       73%   D       1    2    1
    190210160   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  120,819     $  184,128       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210170   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   99,961     $  185,645       65%   D       1    2    1
    190210180   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   18,941     $   69,061       78%   D       1    2    1
    190210190   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   73,778     $  110,667       60%   D       1    2    1
    190210200   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   23,981     $   49,848       68%   D       1    2    1
    190210210   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   67,771     $  112,394       62%   D       1    2    1
    190210220   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   95,731     $  143,598       60%   D       1    2    1
    200071120   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  158,822     $   61,227       28%   D       2    2    2
    200071130   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  161,209     $   67,801       30%   D       1    2    1
    200071140   MHR       R-2      0.33 $  484,500     $  127,500       21%   U       2    3    3
                                                 B-57                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    200071160   MHR       R-2      0.35 $  216,203     $   81,365       27%   D       1    4    1
    200071200   MHR       R-2      0.19 $  116,837     $   88,728       43%   D       1    2    1
    200071210   MHR       R-2      0.38 $   93,811     $   18,880       17%   U       1    4    3
    200071220   MHR       R-2      0.38 $  173,801     $   42,127       20%   U       1    4    3
    200071370   MHR       R-2      3.52 $  420,624     $  603,304       59%   D       1   31    1
    200071390   MHR       R-2      0.19 $   26,180     $  102,320       80%   D       1    2    1
    200071400   MHR       R-2      0.42 $   75,796     $  104,601       58%   D       1    4    1
    200071450   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   48,733     $   96,669       66%   D       1    2    1
    200071460   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   25,667     $  131,777       84%   D       1    2    1
    200071470   MHR       R-2      0.48 $  233,678     $  583,032       71%   D      10   10   10
    200072010   MHR       R-2      0.34 $  206,655     $   69,751       25%   U       1    3    3
    200072030   MHR       R-2      0.22 $   70,594     $   62,413       47%   D       1    2    1
    200072050   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  535,500     $  107,100       17%   U       2    2    2
    200072065   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   61,945     $   92,919       60%   D       1    1    1
    200072075   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   51,206     $   76,814       60%   D       1    1    1
    200072085   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   54,119     $   81,178       60%   D       1    1    1
    200072095   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   29,811     $   89,459       75%   D       1    1    1
    200072105   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   53,483     $   80,226       60%   D       1    1    1
    200072115   MHR       R-2      0.06 $  149,557     $  149,557       50%   D       1    1    1
    200072125   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   52,040     $   78,063       60%   D       1    1    1
    200072135   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   49,716     $   92,345       65%   D       1    1    1
    200201010   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  395,352     $   99,246       20%   U       1    2    2
    200201120   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  264,955     $   13,776        5%   U       1    2    2
    200201130   MHR       R-2      0.27 $   78,083     $  109,320       58%   D       3    3    3
    200201140   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   48,733     $   93,416       66%   D       1    2    1
    200201150   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   66,877     $   81,740       55%   D       1    2    1
    200201160   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   13,421     $   34,045       72%   D       1    2    1
    200201170   MHR       R-2      0.18 $   13,439     $   20,622       61%   D       1    2    1
    200201210   MHR       R-2      1.55 $  285,728     $  285,728       50%   D       1   14    1
    200240015   MHR       R-2         0 $  124,331     $  186,497       60%   D       1    1    1
    200240025   MHR       R-2         0 $  105,081     $  157,621       60%   D       1    1    1
    200240035   MHR       R-2         0 $   71,619     $  221,368       76%   D       1    1    1
    200240045   MHR       R-2         0 $  122,215     $  183,324       60%   D       1    1    1
    200240055   MHR       R-2         0 $  189,873     $  189,873       50%   D       1    1    1
    200240065   MHR       R-2         0 $   67,748     $  203,274       75%   D       1    1    1
    210011190   MHR       R-2      1.79 $   23,929     $  189,483       89%   D       1   16    1
    210011200   MHR       R-2      0.07 $   10,404     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    210011215   MHR       R-2      8.23 $  307,904     $  688,310       69%   D       1   72    1
    210011225   MHR       R-2      2.01 $   75,255     $       -         0%   V           18   14
    210011235   MHR       R-2      2.02 $   75,713     $       -         0%   V           18   14
    210031030   MHR       R-2      0.13 $  200,756     $   68,828       26%   U       1    2    1
    210031040   MHR       R-2      0.15 $   12,524     $   18,793       60%   D       1    2    1
    210031050   MHR       R-2      0.15 $  197,977     $  109,545       36%   D       1    2    1
    210031070   MHR       R-2       0.1 $  111,932     $   93,275       45%   D       1    1    1
    210031080   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  652,800     $  147,900       18%   U       1    2    2
                                                 B-58                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210031090   MHR       R-2      0.32 $  140,210     $   181,104       56%   D       2    3    2
    210031100   MHR       R-2      0.29 $  269,923     $   157,455       37%   D       2    3    2
    210031150   MHR       R-2      0.28 $  116,841     $   261,087       69%   D       1    3    1
    210031160   MHR       R-2      0.82 $  309,288     $   824,491       73%   D            8    0
    210031190   MHR       R-2      0.53 $   17,124     $   133,195       89%   D       3    5    3
    210032010   MHR       R-2      0.24 $  466,321     $   153,674       25%   U       1    3    2
    210032020   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  109,404     $     48,619      31%   D       2    2    2
    210032030   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  107,260     $     47,668      31%   D       2    2    2
    210032040   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  192,960     $    38,590       17%   U       1    1    1
    210032050   MHR       R-2      0.34 $   16,122     $     27,787      63%   D       1    3    1
    210032080   MHR       R-2      0.12 $  105,156     $   130,861       55%   D       1    2    1
    210032090   MHR       R-2      0.19 $  137,659     $   120,451       47%   D       1    2    1
    210032100   MHR       R-2      0.24 $   78,565     $     79,994      50%   D       1    3    1
    210033010   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   71,425     $   125,713       64%   D       1    2    1
    210033020   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  168,702     $     44,985      21%   U       1    2    2
    210033030   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  480,000     $   125,000       21%   U       1    2    2
    210033050   MHR       R-2      1.02 $  457,137     $  1,032,655      69%   D      21   21   21
    210034080   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   80,138     $     81,595      50%   D       2    2    2
    210034090   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  105,156     $   119,647       53%   D       1    2    1
    210034100   MHR       R-2      0.22 $   13,421     $   187,578       93%   D       2    2    2
    210034110   MHR       R-2      0.11 $    9,838     $     18,794      66%   D       1    1    1
    210034170   MHR       R-2      0.69 $  520,200     $  1,144,640      69%   D            6    0
    210034190   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  183,546     $   189,283       51%   D       4    4    4
    210034210   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   51,622     $     34,412      40%   D       1    2    1
    210034220   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  143,397     $   229,435       62%   D       4    4    4
    210034230   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  143,397     $   229,435       62%   D       4    4    4
    210041020   MHR       R-2      0.46 $   28,674     $     50,199      64%   D       3    5    3
    210041030   MHR       R-2      0.22 $   32,345     $     25,707      44%   D       2    2    2
    210041040   MHR       R-2      0.22 $  209,500     $     82,696      28%   D       2    2    2
    210041055   MHR       R-2      0.02 $    8,772     $         -        0%   V            1    1
    210042010   MHR       R-2      0.34 $  188,470     $   121,221       39%   D       1    3    1
    210042030   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   10,828     $     18,082      63%   D       1    2    1
    210042050   MHR       R-2       0.1 $  253,605     $   107,181       30%   D       1    1    1
    210042060   MHR       R-2      0.43 $   80,137     $     95,137      54%   D       1    4    1
    210042070   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   11,976     $     47,215      80%   D       1    2    1
    210042080   MHR       R-2      0.08 $  286,110     $     26,010       8%   U       1    1    1
    210042100   MHR       R-2      0.15 $  416,160     $     88,258      17%   U       1    2    2
    210042110   MHR       R-2      0.26 $  191,196     $   101,219       35%   D       2    3    2
    210042120   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  137,659     $     58,550      30%   D       1    2    1
    210042130   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  195,019     $     91,771      32%   D       2    2    2
    210043010   MHR       R-2      0.13 $       -      $         -        0%   V            2    1
    210043020   MHR       R-2      0.14 $       -      $         -        0%   V            2    1
    210043030   MHR       R-2      0.29 $   23,298     $         -        0%   V            3    2
    210043040   MHR       R-2      0.31 $  157,322     $   218,360       58%   D       4    4    4
    210043050   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  152,230     $   152,230       50%   D       1    2    1
                                                  B-59                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210043120   MHR       R-2      0.34 $  423,928     $     84,784      17%   U       1    3    3
    210043140   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   91,168     $     96,636      51%   D       1    2    1
    210043150   MHR       R-2      0.18 $  318,516     $   105,122       25%   U       2    2    2
    210043160   MHR       R-2      0.15 $   62,462     $   119,530       66%   D       1    2    1
    210044020   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  153,989     $     10,044       6%   U       1    2    2
    210044060   MHR       R-2       0.2 $   11,917     $     72,460      86%   D       1    2    1
    210044070   MHR       R-2      0.21 $  109,404     $     97,246      47%   D       1    2    1
    210044080   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  307,348     $     54,050      15%   U       1    2    2
    210044090   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   10,621     $     83,490      89%   D       3    3    3
    210044100   MHR       R-2      0.25 $   37,269     $     11,579      24%   U       1    3    2
    210044110   MHR       R-2      0.25 $  202,442     $   575,559       74%   D       9    9    9
    210044130   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  121,560     $     61,992      34%   D       2    2    2
    210044180   MHR       R-2      0.94 $  380,589     $   959,090       72%   D      14   14   14
    210044190   MHR       R-2      0.51 $  238,358     $   489,830       67%   D      10   10   10
    210044200   MHR       R-2      0.51 $       -      $         -        0%   D      10   10   10
    210044215   MHR       R-2         0 $   82,683     $   124,026       60%   D       1    1    1
    210044225   MHR       R-2         0 $   79,646     $   119,470       60%   D       1    1    1
    210044235   MHR       R-2         0 $   93,845     $   140,768       60%   D       1    1    1
    210051040   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   10,732     $         -        0%   V            2    2
    210051050   MHR       R-2      0.22 $   13,159     $     36,837      74%   D       1    2    1
    210051080   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  155,275     $     54,144      26%   U       1    2    2
    210051090   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  171,580     $     81,827      32%   D       2    2    2
    210051100   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  307,348     $     42,391      12%   U       1    2    2
    210051170   MHR       R-2      0.23 $  317,947     $   422,781       57%   D       1    3    1
    210051190   MHR       R-2      0.51 $   73,692     $   239,043       76%   D       2    5    2
    210051200   MHR       R-2      0.51 $   21,496     $     39,442      65%   D       2    5    2
    210051235   MHR       R-2      0.27 $   18,395     $     25,336      58%   D       1    3    1
    210051240   MHR       R-2      0.31 $   87,423     $   228,777       72%   D       2    3    2
    210051250   MHR       R-2      0.26 $   83,373     $   333,538       80%   D       4    4    4
    210051260   MHR       R-2      1.05 $  247,169     $  1,394,910      85%   D           10    0
    210051270   MHR       R-2      0.18 $   16,675     $     64,632      79%   D            2    0
    210052010   MHR       R-2      0.22 $   75,796     $   204,669       73%   D       3    3    3
    210052020   MHR       R-2      0.26 $   16,107     $     31,357      66%   D       1    3    1
    210052030   MHR       R-2      0.26 $  112,042     $     92,433      45%   D       1    3    1
    210052040   MHR       R-2      0.34 $  335,529     $     88,434      21%   U       1    3    3
    210052050   MHR       R-2      1.35 $   41,232     $    86,075       68%   D       4   12    4
    210052060   MHR       R-2      1.96 $  621,120     $  1,631,967      72%   D      21   21   21
    210082060   MHR       R-2      0.19 $   10,828     $     77,797      88%   D       4    4    4
    210082070   MHR       R-2      0.19 $   12,145     $     98,052      89%   D       1    2    1
    210082080   MHR       R-2      0.19 $   65,565     $     32,104      33%   D       1    2    1
    210082090   MHR       R-2      0.23 $   56,861     $     48,733      46%   D       2    3    2
    210082100   MHR       R-2      0.23 $   72,004     $     60,100      45%   D       1    3    1
    210082110   MHR       R-2      0.22 $   68,216     $     60,629      47%   D       2    2    2
    210082120   MHR       R-2      0.21 $   11,625     $         -        0%   V            2    2
    210082160   MHR       R-2      0.38 $  728,280     $   988,380       58%   D      16   16   16
                                                  B-60                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                       Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value   Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210082170   MHR       R-2      0.13 $        -      $         -        0%   V            2    1
    210091010   MHR       R-2      0.18 $    17,008     $     50,199      75%   D       4    4    4
    210091020   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  464,100      $     61,200      12%   U       1    1    1
    210091030   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  143,342      $     41,347      22%   U       1    1    1
    210091040   MHR       R-2      0.11 $    26,076     $     35,405      58%   D       1    1    1
    210091050   MHR       R-2       0.1 $    95,341     $    47,668       33%   D       1    1    1
    210091060   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  440,000      $     55,000      11%   U       1    1    1
    210092010   MHR       R-2       0.2 $    17,008     $     46,610      73%   D       4    4    4
    210092020   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  216,203      $     67,021      24%   U       1    1    1
    210092030   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  162,152      $     37,834      19%   U       1    1    1
    210092040   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  154,368      $     46,860      23%   U       1    1    1
    210092050   MHR       R-2      0.11 $    46,378     $     57,979      56%   D       1    1    1
    210092060   MHR       R-2      0.11 $    93,470     $     66,011      41%   D       1    1    1
    210092070   MHR       R-2      0.29 $    14,319     $     51,988      78%   D       2    3    2
    210092080   MHR       R-2      0.32 $    15,183     $     28,582      65%   D       1    3    1
    210092090   MHR       R-2      0.13 $  374,544      $     70,747      16%   U       1    2    1
    210131010   MHR       R-2      2.16 $ 1,000,082     $  1,857,304      65%   D      34   34   34
    220022040   MHR       R-2      0.28 $  430,707      $   200,460       32%   D       2    3    2
    220022070   MHR       R-2      0.35 $    19,737     $     26,003      57%   D       1    4    1
    220022080   MHR       R-2      0.32 $        -      $         -        0%   D       5    5    5
    220022090   MHR       R-2      0.18 $    92,180     $    72,928       44%   D       1    2    1
    220022100   MHR       R-2      0.19 $  745,000      $   237,500       24%   U       1    2    2
    220023020   MHR       R-2      5.46 $ 1,203,420     $  1,166,049      49%   D           48    0
    220024020   MHR       R-2      0.14 $    13,764     $     61,903      82%   D       2    2    2
    220024030   MHR       R-2      0.12 $     8,940     $     15,427      63%   D       1    2    1
    220024040   MHR       R-2       0.3 $  121,427      $   117,854       49%   D       2    3    2
    220024050   MHR       R-2      0.27 $  582,902      $   122,409       17%   U       1    3    2
    220025010   MHR       R-2      0.22 $  145,872      $   161,661       53%   D       1    2    1
    220025020   MHR       R-2      0.27 $    39,761     $     51,368      56%   D       2    3    2
    220025040   MHR       R-2      0.29 $  147,494      $   142,212       49%   D       1    3    1
    220025050   MHR       R-2      0.24 $    93,470     $   146,052       61%   D       1    3    1
    220025060   MHR       R-2      0.22 $  198,473      $     38,590      16%   U       1    2    2
    220025100   MHR       R-2      0.16 $  520,200      $     61,200      11%   U       1    2    2
    220025110   MHR       R-2       0.2 $    10,748     $     26,919      71%   D       1    2    1
    220025120   MHR       R-2       0.2 $    10,732     $     15,210      59%   D       1    2    1
    220025150   MHR       R-2      0.19 $  459,000      $     81,600      15%   U       1    2    2
    220025180   MHR       R-2      0.24 $  123,586      $   167,855       58%   D       1    3    1
    220025190   MHR       R-2       0.5 $  112,468      $   326,159       74%   D            5    0
    220025200   MHR       R-2      0.22 $  364,140      $   186,136       34%   D       2    2    2
    220090010   MHR       R-2      0.22 $  317,947      $   104,560       25%   U       2    2    2
    220090250   MHR       R-2      0.89 $    64,554     $   218,857       77%   D       8    8    8
    220090260   MHR       R-2      0.87 $    34,045     $     72,622      68%   D       1    8    1
    220090270   MHR       R-2      0.17 $    11,625     $     19,705      63%   D       1    2    1
    220090280   MHR       R-2      0.51 $  184,367      $   186,062       50%   D       3    5    3
    220090420   MHR       R-2       0.3 $  143,014      $   182,612       56%   D       2    3    2
                                                   B-61                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    220090430   MHR       R-2      0.44 $  273,365     $  287,670       51%   D            4    0
    220090460   MHR       R-2       0.3 $  191,953     $       -         0%   V            3    2
    220090470   MHR       R-2      0.01 $   14,305     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    220140030   MHR       R-2      0.29 $   60,629     $   65,938       52%   D       1    3    1
    220140040   MHR       R-2      0.25 $   11,625     $   27,769       70%   D       1    3    1
    220140050   MHR       R-2      0.25 $  475,000     $   60,000       11%   U       1    3    2
    220140060   MHR       R-2      0.26 $   10,732     $   26,880       71%   D       1    3    1
    220140080   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   53,052     $   59,114       53%   D       1    2    1
    220140100   MHR       R-2      0.17 $  302,048     $   52,990       15%   U       1    2    2
    220140110   MHR       R-2      0.17 $   10,732     $   22,389       68%   D       1    2    1
    220140120   MHR       R-2      0.15 $  118,150     $   62,181       34%   D       1    2    1
    220140130   MHR       R-2      0.18 $   11,625     $   23,288       67%   D       1    2    1
    220140140   MHR       R-2      0.18 $   65,565     $  103,454       61%   D       1    2    1
    220140150   MHR       R-2       0.2 $  137,659     $  149,740       52%   D       1    2    1
    220140160   MHR       R-2      0.19 $  164,778     $  107,790       40%   D       2    2    2
    220140170   MHR       R-2      0.23 $  133,147     $   35,079       21%   U       1    3    2
    220140180   MHR       R-2      0.22 $   11,625     $   19,705       63%   D       1    2    1
    220140190   MHR       R-2      0.19 $   11,625     $   47,596       80%   D       2    2    2
    220140200   MHR       R-2      0.19 $  161,545     $  132,602       45%   D       1    2    1
    220140210   MHR       R-2      0.19 $  164,777     $  174,390       51%   D       1    2    1
    220140220   MHR       R-2      0.18 $  107,260     $   53,627       33%   D       1    2    1
    220140230   MHR       R-2      0.24 $   21,496     $   71,733       77%   D       1    3    1
    220140490   MHR       R-2      0.23 $   87,422     $  116,565       57%   D       2    3    2
    220140500   MHR       R-2      0.21 $  161,746     $  155,275       49%   D       1    2    1
    220140510   MHR       R-2      0.36 $  126,053     $  215,694       63%   D       3    4    3
    220140520   MHR       R-2      0.22 $  147,490     $  153,636       51%   D       4    4    4
    220140530   MHR       R-2      0.15 $  101,484     $   98,814       49%   D       1    2    1
    220140540   MHR       R-2      0.13 $  238,459     $   71,537       23%   U       1    2    1
    220140550   MHR       R-2      0.13 $  194,582     $   53,508       22%   U       1    2    1
    220140560   MHR       R-2      0.13 $  106,361     $   43,605       29%   D       1    2    1
    220140570   MHR       R-2      0.13 $  435,000     $   55,000       11%   U       1    2    1
    220140580   MHR       R-2      0.13 $   46,378     $   91,207       66%   D       1    2    1
    280151011   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   25,165     $   92,330       79%   D       1    1    1
    280151012   MHR       R-2      0.05 $   82,782     $  124,174       60%   D       1    1    1
    280151021   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  140,425     $  140,425       50%   D       1    1    1
    280151022   MHR       R-2       0.1 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
    280152011   MHR       R-2         0 $   82,549     $  123,825       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152012   MHR       R-2         0 $   20,201     $   69,265       77%   D       1    1    1
    280152021   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
    280152022   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   99,622     $  149,434       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152031   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   83,810     $  125,715       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152032   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   91,038     $  136,558       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152041   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    8,940     $   30,461       77%   D       1    1    1
    280152042   MHR       R-2       0.1 $  108,949     $  163,423       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152051   MHR       R-2       0.1 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
                                                 B-62                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    280152052   MHR       R-2       0.1 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
    280152061   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   53,739     $   99,817       65%   D       1    1    1
    280152062   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   65,547     $   98,325       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152071   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   63,780     $   95,672       60%   D       1    2    1
    280152072   MHR       R-2      0.12 $   61,898     $   92,849       60%   D       1    2    1
    280152081   MHR       R-2      0.16 $   72,957     $  125,084       63%   D       1    2    1
    280152082   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    9,316     $   34,951       79%   D       1    1    1
    280152091   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   87,740     $  131,613       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152092   MHR       R-2      0.08 $  239,190     $  239,190       50%   D       1    1    1
    280152101   MHR       R-2      0.05 $   62,164     $   93,247       60%   D       1    1    1
    280152102   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   20,201     $   62,635       76%   D       1    1    1
    280152111   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  152,418     $  152,418       50%   D       1    1    1
    280152112   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   26,866     $   80,634       75%   D       1    1    1
    280153011   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  209,100     $  209,100       50%   D       1    1    1
    280153012   MHR       R-2       0.1 $    8,935     $   30,404       77%   D       1    1    1
    280153021   MHR       R-2      0.08 $  218,535     $  218,535       50%   D       1    1    1
    280153022   MHR       R-2      0.12 $   48,991     $   90,995       65%   D       1    2    1
    280153031   MHR       R-2      0.11 $   64,650     $   96,979       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153032   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   20,201     $   60,148       75%   D       1    1    1
    280153041   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   62,657     $   93,986       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153042   MHR       R-2      0.14 $   54,683     $  101,565       65%   D       1    2    1
    280153051   MHR       R-2      0.08 $   66,533     $   99,801       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153052   MHR       R-2      0.11 $  107,667     $  161,502       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153061   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   57,250     $   85,875       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153062   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  245,000     $  245,000       50%   D       1    2    1
    280153071   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   63,557     $   95,338       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153072   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  155,420     $  180,856       54%   D       1    1    1
    280153081   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   62,180     $   93,275       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153082   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  102,696     $  154,044       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153091   MHR       R-2       0.1 $  220,320     $  220,320       50%   D       1    1    1
    280153092   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   10,637     $   34,185       76%   D       1    1    1
    280153101   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   70,854     $  106,280       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153102   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  242,000     $  242,000       50%   D       1    1    1
    280153111   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
    280153112   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
    280153121   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   61,643     $   92,465       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153122   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   37,634     $   69,907       65%   D       1    1    1
    280153131   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
    280153132   MHR       R-2      0.04 $    8,940     $   32,258       78%   D       1    1    1
    280153141   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    9,012     $   38,135       81%   D       1    1    1
    280153142   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   60,280     $   90,423       60%   D       1    1    1
    280153151   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  156,060     $  156,060       50%   D       1    1    1
    280153152   MHR       R-2      0.14 $  287,500     $  287,500       50%   D       1    2    1
    280153161   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   36,580     $   15,588       30%   D       1    1    1
    280153162   MHR       R-2      0.12 $  195,075     $  195,075       50%   D       1    2    1
                                                 B-63                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    280153171   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   56,462     $  104,870       65%   D       1    1    1
    280153172   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   62,661     $   93,994       60%   D       1    1    1
    280154011   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   63,407     $   95,111       60%   D       1    1    1
    280154012   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   60,755     $   91,134       60%   D       1    1    1
    280154021   MHR       R-2      0.08 $  148,374     $  148,374       50%   D       1    1    1
    280154022   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   66,992     $  100,490       60%   D       1    1    1
    280154031   MHR       R-2      0.05 $   10,379     $   56,084       84%   D       1    1    1
    280154032   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    9,012     $   32,517       78%   D       1    1    1
    280154041   MHR       R-2      0.09 $  105,557     $  158,336       60%   D       1    1    1
    280154042   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   10,122     $   69,301       87%   D       1    1    1
    280154051   MHR       R-2      0.09 $    8,940     $   40,745       82%   D       1    1    1
    280154052   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   62,312     $   93,471       60%   D       1    1    1
    280154061   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   42,830     $   79,550       65%   D       1    1    1
    280154062   MHR       R-2      0.06 $   55,384     $  111,471       67%   D       1    1    1
    280154071   MHR       R-2      0.18 $   99,378     $  149,069       60%   D       1    2    1
    280154072   MHR       R-2      0.12 $   64,114     $   96,174       60%   D       1    2    1
    280154081   MHR       R-2       0.1 $   66,992     $  100,490       60%   D       1    1    1
    280154082   MHR       R-2      0.09 $   61,971     $   92,957       60%   D       1    1    1
     9.01E+09   MHR       R-2           $       -      $   28,200      100%   D       1    1    1
    200202070    HR       R-3      0.25 $  264,631     $   94,825       26%   U       1    4    2
    200202080    HR       R-3      0.25 $  145,089     $  140,625       49%   D       1    4    1
    200203050    HR       R-3      0.25 $  201,936     $  176,132       47%   D       1    4    1
    200203060    HR       R-3      0.17 $   11,813     $   76,060       87%   D       4    4    4
    210101010    HR       R-3       0.3 $   14,319     $    8,030       36%   D       1    5    1
    210101090    HR       R-3      0.34 $  183,546     $   93,234       34%   D       2    5    2
    210102010    HR       R-3      0.31 $   26,885     $   79,750       75%   D       1    5    1
    230075185    HR       R-3         0 $  100,769     $  151,155       60%   D       1    1    1
    230075195    HR       R-3         0 $  101,894     $  152,843       60%   D       1    1    1
    230075205    HR       R-3         0 $  113,791     $  170,686       60%   D       1    1    1
    230120040    HR       R-3      0.14 $   11,173     $  187,128       94%   D       2    3    2
    230120170    HR       R-3      0.21 $       -      $       -         0%   V            4    2
    230120180    HR       R-3      0.19 $       -      $       -         0%   V            3    2
    230120190    HR       R-3      0.18 $   91,168     $  127,637       58%   D       1    3    1
    230120200    HR       R-3      0.18 $  650,000     $  235,000       27%   U       2    3    2
    230120210    HR       R-3      0.19 $   60,709     $  277,172       82%   D       3    3    3
    230120220    HR       R-3      0.18 $   60,709     $  153,097       72%   D       2    3    2
    230120230    HR       R-3      0.07 $    5,452     $  152,267       97%   D       2    2    2
    230180010    HR       R-3      0.04 $   73,508     $  110,262       60%   D       1    1    1
    230180020    HR       R-3      0.04 $   62,935     $  116,880       65%   D       1    1    1
    230180030    HR       R-3      0.04 $  178,245     $  178,245       50%   D       1    1    1
    230180040    HR       R-3      0.04 $   36,393     $   67,598       65%   D       1    1    1
    230180050    HR       R-3      0.04 $  143,075     $  143,075       50%   D       1    1    1
    230180060    HR       R-3      0.04 $  195,000     $  195,000       50%   D       1    1    1
    230180070    HR       R-3      0.04 $   17,712     $   50,199       74%   D       1    1    1
    230180080    HR       R-3      0.04 $   46,733     $   70,102       60%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-64                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230180090    HR       R-3      0.01 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230172030    HR      R-S        4.4 $  111,560     $  934,826       89%   D       0   64    0
    200071230   VMU      VMU       0.08 $   47,311     $   52,571       53%   D       3    1    3
    200071240   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  171,580     $   98,983       37%   D       1    2    1
    200071250   VMU      VMU       0.28 $   17,922     $   28,674       62%   D       1    3    1
    200071260   VMU      VMU       0.25 $   14,342     $   39,499       73%   D       1    2    1
    200071270   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  119,177     $  113,216       49%   D            2    0
    200071280   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   11,625     $   24,183       68%   D       1    2    1
    200071290   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  147,492     $   65,140       31%   D       1    1    1
    200071300   VMU      VMU       0.05 $  408,000     $   35,700        8%   U       1    1    1
    200071310   VMU      VMU       0.24 $  143,014     $  145,994       51%   D       1    3    1
    200201030   VMU      VMU       0.15 $  104,075     $   66,960       39%   D            2    0
    200201040   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  137,659     $   73,708       35%   D       1    1    1
    200201050   VMU      VMU       0.12 $   12,145     $   71,732       86%   D       1    1    1
    200201060   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  190,289     $   88,544       32%   D       1    2    1
    200201070   VMU      VMU       0.29 $   16,107     $   21,496       57%   D       9    3    9
    200201090   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  272,585     $   28,921       10%   U       1    2    2
    200201100   VMU      VMU       0.15 $   80,137     $  118,195       60%   D       1    2    1
    200201190   VMU      VMU        0.2 $  312,120     $   46,818       13%   U       1    2    2
    200201200   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  312,120     $   64,933       17%   U       1    2    2
    210061010   VMU      VMU       0.48 $  219,859     $  183,558       46%   D       1    4    1
    210061020   VMU      VMU       0.23 $  319,564     $  174,678       35%   D            2    0
    210061030   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  231,553     $  270,144       54%   D       1    2    1
    210061040   VMU      VMU       0.41 $  690,000     $  160,000       19%   U       1    4    4
    210061050   VMU      VMU       0.22 $   71,261     $  176,293       71%   D            2    0
    210062010   VMU      VMU       0.29 $  253,722     $  107,826       30%   D       1    3    1
    210062020   VMU      VMU       0.15 $   10,748     $   16,131       60%   D       1    2    1
    210062040   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  209,948     $  118,534       36%   D       1    2    1
    210062050   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   11,813     $   32,940       74%   D       1    2    1
    210062060   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  328,544     $   74,195       18%   U       1    2    2
    210063010   VMU      VMU       0.14 $   24,840     $   62,961       72%   D       1    2    1
    210063020   VMU      VMU       0.31 $   13,671     $   69,422       84%   D       1    3    1
    210063030   VMU      VMU       0.25 $   60,629     $  126,551       68%   D            2    0
    210063040   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  158,030     $   48,620       24%   D       1    2    1
    210063050   VMU      VMU       0.18 $   55,747     $   55,265       50%   D       1    2    1
    210063080   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  332,928     $   72,828       18%   U       1    1    1
    210063090   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  468,180     $  118,605       20%   U       1    2    2
    210063100   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  297,712     $  120,186       29%   D       1    2    1
    210063110   VMU      VMU       0.24 $  202,442     $  269,923       57%   D       7    7    7
    210063120   VMU      VMU       0.24 $  248,633     $   83,015       25%   D       1    2    1
    210064010   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  245,363     $  103,983       30%   D       1    2    1
    210064020   VMU      VMU       0.14 $   91,036     $   93,860       51%   D       1    2    1
    210064030   VMU      VMU       0.15 $  105,156     $   64,125       38%   D       1    2    1
    210064040   VMU      VMU       1.63 $   71,660     $  571,670       89%   D      14   14   14
    210071010   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  121,560     $   87,886       42%   D       2    2    2
                                                  B-65                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210071020   VMU      VMU       0.14 $   98,038     $  126,052       56%   D       1    2    1
    210071030   VMU      VMU       0.36 $  124,940     $   93,700       43%   D       1    4    1
    210071040   VMU      VMU       0.21 $  242,579     $  105,651       30%   D       1    2    1
    210071060   VMU      VMU       0.15 $  281,173     $  123,713       31%   D       1    2    1
    210071070   VMU      VMU       0.15 $  545,000     $   65,000       11%   U       1    2    2
    210071080   VMU      VMU       0.45 $  194,497     $  461,115       70%   D       4    4    4
    210071090   VMU      VMU        0.3 $  206,490     $  125,040       38%   D            3    0
    210071100   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  137,659     $   47,317       26%   D       1    2    1
    210072010   VMU      VMU       0.13 $   66,877     $   52,010       44%   D       1    2    1
    210072020   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  248,092     $   67,258       21%   D       1    2    1
    210072030   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  122,907     $   61,450       33%   D       6    2    6
    210072040   VMU      VMU       0.25 $  126,859     $  147,156       54%   D            2    0
    210072060   VMU      VMU       0.34 $  359,899     $  989,728       73%   D       9    9    9
    210072070   VMU      VMU       0.34 $   19,705     $   17,922       48%   D       1    3    1
    210072080   VMU      VMU       0.21 $   65,221     $  353,588       84%   D       1    2    1
    210072090   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  186,941     $  115,668       38%   D            2    0
    210072100   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  248,633     $   37,834       13%   U       1    1    1
    210072110   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  191,934     $   60,015       24%   D            1    0
    210073020   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   11,625     $   22,389       66%   D       1    2    1
    210073030   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  292,199     $  192,960       40%   D       2    2    2
    210073060   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  291,450     $  132,476       31%   D       1    2    1
    210073070   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  202,442     $   69,728       26%   D       1    2    1
    210073100   VMU      VMU       0.16 $  126,856     $   55,814       31%   D       1    2    1
    210073110   VMU      VMU       0.16 $  122,907     $   40,556       25%   D       1    2    1
    210073120   VMU      VMU       0.16 $   10,637     $    8,950       46%   D       1    2    1
    210073130   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  123,581     $   48,053       28%   D       1    1    1
    210073140   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  362,100     $   40,800       10%   U       1    1    1
    210073150   VMU      VMU       0.14 $    4,444     $    5,351       55%   D       1    2    1
    210073160   VMU      VMU       0.37 $   33,166     $    2,670        7%   U            3    3
    210073170   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  110,617     $   70,669       39%   D       1    1    1
    210073180   VMU      VMU       0.32 $  233,685     $  216,158       48%   D       2    3    2
    210073200   VMU      VMU       0.19 $   65,565     $  104,912       62%   D       1    2    1
    210073210   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  171,580     $   65,986       28%   D       1    2    1
    210073220   VMU      VMU       0.21 $  172,076     $  369,660       68%   D       1    2    1
    210073230   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  530,000     $   70,000       12%   U       1    2    2
    210073240   VMU      VMU       0.24 $  168,215     $   38,815       19%   U       1    2    2
    210073250   VMU      VMU       0.32 $  219,976     $  485,249       69%   D       5    5    5
    210074020   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  124,470     $  170,973       58%   D       1    2    1
    210074030   VMU      VMU       0.45 $  134,213     $  215,129       62%   D       1    4    1
    210074040   VMU      VMU        0.4 $   16,107     $   32,258       67%   D       1    4    1
    210074050   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   74,309     $  162,006       69%   D       1    2    1
    210074060   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  198,473     $   46,860       19%   U       1    2    2
    210074070   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   11,813     $   37,170       76%   D       1    2    1
    210074090   VMU      VMU        0.2 $   49,744     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    210074100   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   10,732     $   19,705       65%   D       1    2    1
                                                 B-66                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210074110   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    71,425     $   88,472       55%   D            2    0
    210074120   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  155,275      $   91,867       37%   D       1    2    1
    210074130   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  188,474      $   64,614       26%   D       1    2    1
    210074140   VMU      VMU       0.28 $    31,612     $  183,522       85%   D      10   10   10
    210074150   VMU      VMU       0.14 $    55,747     $   89,694       62%   D       1    2    1
    210074160   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  416,160      $  145,656       26%   D       1    4    1
    210074170   VMU      VMU       0.14 $    10,621     $   29,901       74%   D       1    2    1
    210074180   VMU      VMU       0.21 $  442,170      $  176,139       28%   D            2    0
    210074190   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    35,609     $   63,793       64%   D       1    2    1
    210081030   VMU      VMU       0.76 $ 1,040,400     $   61,383        6%   U       2    7    6
    210081080   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  457,776      $   69,706       13%   U       1    2    1
    210081120   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  188,474      $   70,404       27%   D       1    2    1
    210081130   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  123,581      $  109,850       47%   D       1    2    1
    210081140   VMU      VMU        0.2 $  332,928      $   72,828       18%   U       1    2    2
    210081150   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  405,756      $   36,414        8%   U       1    2    1
    210081170   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  192,960      $   37,273       16%   U       1    2    2
    210081180   VMU      VMU       0.17 $     8,940     $    8,030       47%   D       1    2    1
    210081240   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  198,473      $   55,681       22%   D       1    2    1
    210081250   VMU      VMU       0.19 $    47,283     $  274,633       85%   D       1    3    1
    210081335   VMU      VMU            $  130,110      $  195,165       60%   D       1    1    1
    210081345   VMU      VMU            $    85,806     $  128,711       60%   D       3    1    3
    210081355   VMU      VMU            $  270,504      $  270,504       50%   D       1    1    1
    210081365   VMU      VMU            $  112,421      $  168,632       60%   D       1    1    1
    210081375   VMU      VMU            $  215,030      $  254,920       54%   D       1    1    1
    210081385   VMU      VMU            $    95,816     $  143,728       60%   D            1    0
    210081395   VMU      VMU            $    90,573     $  135,861       60%   D       1    1    1
    210081405   VMU      VMU            $  154,368      $  231,553       60%   D       1    1    1
    210092110   VMU      VMU        0.2 $    95,023     $  142,537       60%   D       1    2    1
    210092120   VMU      VMU       0.25 $  118,781      $  208,065       64%   D       2    2    2
    210101020   VMU      VMU        0.2 $    37,269     $  153,297       80%   D       1    3    1
    210101050   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  297,279      $  118,910       29%   D       1    2    1
    210101080   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  119,177      $  114,606       49%   D       1    2    1
    210101100   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    14,052     $   97,589       87%   D       1    2    1
    210101110   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  134,658      $  250,302       65%   D       1    2    1
    210101120   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    56,861     $  123,482       68%   D       1    2    1
    210101130   VMU      VMU       0.34 $  676,260      $  312,120       32%   D       1    3    1
    210102040   VMU      VMU       0.22 $    66,877     $  115,272       63%   D       1    2    1
    210102090   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  253,605      $  110,262       30%   D       1    2    1
    210102100   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  580,000      $  115,000       17%   U       1    2    2
    210103020   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  322,524      $  489,600       60%   D       2    2    2
    210103030   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    60,629     $   71,243       54%   D       1    2    1
    210103040   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    66,854     $   79,012       54%   D      14    2   14
    210104010   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  209,500      $   71,670       25%   D            1    0
    210104020   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  307,348      $   86,904       22%   D       2    1    2
    210104030   VMU      VMU       0.11 $    72,858     $   94,717       57%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-67                                December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    210104040   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  275,400     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    210104050   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   25,336     $   47,820       65%   D       1    2    1
    210104060   VMU      VMU       0.25 $  402,900     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    210105010   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  345,924     $   74,588       18%   U       1    2    2
    210105040   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   60,776     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    210105050   VMU      VMU       0.51 $  593,100     $  118,000       17%   U       1    5    4
    210105060   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   23,435     $  122,520       84%   D       4    4    4
    210105070   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  448,800     $   58,140       11%   U       1    2    2
    210105080   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  105,156     $  266,496       72%   D       1    2    1
    210105090   VMU      VMU       0.11 $   58,416     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    210105100   VMU      VMU       0.34 $   97,246     $  254,716       72%   D       1    3    1
    210105110   VMU      VMU       0.11 $   55,747     $  115,742       67%   D       1    1    1
    210105120   VMU      VMU       0.11 $   56,861     $   73,107       56%   D       1    1    1
    210111010   VMU      VMU       0.27 $   13,528     $   36,969       73%   D       1    3    1
    210111030   VMU      VMU       0.27 $  591,600     $  173,400       23%   D       1    3    1
    210111040   VMU      VMU       0.27 $   50,702     $  122,912       71%   D       1    3    1
    210111050   VMU      VMU        0.2 $  131,095     $  303,196       70%   D       3    2    3
    210111060   VMU      VMU       0.13 $   93,833     $       -         0%   V            2    1
    210111070   VMU      VMU       0.27 $  134,960     $  157,455       54%   D       1    4    1
    210111080   VMU      VMU       0.13 $   13,528     $   31,612       70%   D       1    2    1
    210111100   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  535,500     $   91,800       15%   U       2    2    2
    210111110   VMU      VMU        0.2 $   15,089     $  173,861       92%   D            2    0
    210111120   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  201,365     $       -         0%   V            2    1
    210113040   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   11,625     $   15,210       57%   D       1    2    1
    210113050   VMU      VMU       0.16 $   95,341     $   53,627       36%   D       1    2    1
    210113060   VMU      VMU       0.17 $   12,824     $   47,312       79%   D       1    2    1
    210113070   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  448,800     $   61,200       12%   U       1    2    2
    210113090   VMU      VMU       0.18 $       -      $       -         0%   V            2    2
    210113100   VMU      VMU       0.29 $  587,826     $  156,060       21%   D       1    3    1
    210113110   VMU      VMU       0.22 $  155,275     $   84,104       35%   D       1    2    1
    210113120   VMU      VMU       0.28 $  166,452     $  365,344       69%   D       2    3    2
    210113130   VMU      VMU       0.25 $   89,358     $  154,362       63%   D       1    2    1
    210113140   VMU      VMU       0.86 $  101,485     $  132,141       57%   D       1    7    1
    210113150   VMU      VMU        0.4 $  294,135     $  126,052       30%   D       1    4    1
    210113180   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  127,437     $  159,302       56%   D       1    2    1
    210113200   VMU      VMU       0.42 $  229,434     $  326,945       59%   D       1    4    1
    210113230   VMU      VMU       0.18 $   57,958     $  145,658       72%   D       3    2    3
    210113250   VMU      VMU       0.91 $  416,191     $  905,406       69%   D       1    8    1
    210113260   VMU      VMU       0.55 $  426,564     $  995,662       70%   D       1    5    1
    210113270   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  411,060     $  195,840       32%   D            2    0
    230073050   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  184,778     $  110,886       38%   D       1    2    1
    230073060   VMU      VMU       0.13 $  126,856     $   50,737       29%   D       1    2    1
    230073070   VMU      VMU       0.12 $   10,732     $   25,086       70%   D       1    1    1
    230073080   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  171,580     $   66,241       28%   D       1    1    1
    230073090   VMU      VMU       0.12 $   10,732     $   25,967       71%   D       1    1    1
                                                  B-68                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                      Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                              Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value      Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230075210   VMU      VMU       0.29 $  154,868      $       -         0%   V            3    3
    230075220   VMU      VMU       0.26 $  137,054      $  257,871       65%   D       7    3    7
    230077060   VMU      VMU       0.06 $    57,357     $  239,601       81%   D       1    1    1
    230100080   VMU      VMU       0.25 $  118,157      $  443,049       79%   D       1    2    1
    230100090   VMU      VMU       0.51 $    38,167     $  139,169       78%   D       2    5    2
    230100100   VMU      VMU        0.5 $ 1,122,000     $   46,920        4%   U       2    4    4
    230100140   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    49,743     $   12,432       20%   U       1    2    2
    230100150   VMU      VMU       0.13 $     9,833     $   12,524       56%   D       1    2    1
    230100160   VMU      VMU       0.15 $   67,511      $   52,505       44%   D      10    2   10
    230100170   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    55,305     $   36,866       40%   D       1    2    1
    230100180   VMU      VMU       0.24 $  231,553      $   33,077       12%   U       1    2    2
    230100190   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  245,006      $   93,605       28%   D       1    2    1
    230100200   VMU      VMU       0.09 $    18,430     $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230100285   VMU      VMU       0.03 $        -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230110040   VMU      VMU       0.45 $    19,705     $    8,030       29%   D       1    4    1
    230110150   VMU      VMU       0.32 $    15,356     $   28,379       65%   D       1    3    1
    230110160   VMU      VMU       0.21 $  106,842      $       -         0%   V            2    2
    230110170   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    98,852     $   79,068       44%   D       1    2    1
    230110180   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    71,425     $   57,137       44%   D       1    2    1
    230110190   VMU      VMU       0.17 $     9,833     $   14,208       59%   D       1    2    1
    230110200   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  353,736      $   61,383       15%   U       1    1    1
    230110210   VMU      VMU       0.11 $    98,426     $  174,025       64%   D       1    1    1
    230110220   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  561,000      $  102,000       15%   U       1    1    1
    230110230   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  216,203      $   54,050       20%   U       1    1    1
    230110240   VMU      VMU       0.12 $     9,833     $   12,524       56%   D       1    1    1
    230110250   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  123,713      $   22,492       15%   U       1    1    1
    230110260   VMU      VMU       0.17 $  205,393      $   52,968       21%   U       1    2    2
    230110270   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    10,956     $   78,586       88%   D       1    2    1
    230110280   VMU      VMU       0.17 $    84,031     $   49,014       37%   D       1    2    1
    230110290   VMU      VMU       0.23 $    70,594     $   29,713       30%   D       1    2    1
    230110310   VMU      VMU       0.32 $  469,200      $   86,700       16%   U       1    3    3
    230110320   VMU      VMU       0.16 $    70,888     $    4,971        7%   U            2    2
    230110330   VMU      VMU       0.16 $     9,833     $   13,421       58%   D       1    2    1
    230110340   VMU      VMU       0.16 $    38,350     $   56,423       60%   D       1    2    1
    230110370   VMU      VMU       0.62 $    81,738     $   66,880       45%   D       1    5    1
    230110390   VMU      VMU       0.69 $    60,976     $  111,253       65%   D       1    6    1
    230110460   VMU      VMU       0.37 $  260,715      $   27,554       10%   U            3    3
    230110470   VMU      VMU       0.46 $  322,185      $   78,425       20%   U            4    4
    230120090   VMU      VMU       0.25 $  468,180      $   92,787       17%   U       1    2    2
    230120105   VMU      VMU       0.25 $     9,833     $   24,183       71%   D       1    2    1
    230120110   VMU      VMU       0.22 $  160,604      $   67,682       30%   D       1    2    1
    230120120   VMU      VMU       0.18 $        -      $       -         0%   V            2    2
    230132050   VMU      VMU       0.17 $     8,917     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    230132070   VMU      VMU       0.94 $    22,406     $   20,878       48%   D       1    8    1
    230132160   VMU      VMU       0.35 $  540,509      $  116,897       18%   U       1    3    3
                                                   B-69                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                             Table B-3
                  Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.    GP      Zoning   Acres    Land Value     Impr. Value  Ratio  AA     BB   CC   DD
    230132170   VMU      VMU       0.34 $  126,801     $  148,818       54%   D       1    3    1
    230132180   VMU      VMU       0.78 $  292,196     $  414,599       59%   D       1    7    1
    230141010   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  438,600     $  171,360       28%   D            2    0
    230141020   VMU      VMU       0.29 $  102,972     $  171,623       63%   D       4    3    4
    230141030   VMU      VMU       0.16 $  175,011     $   69,998       29%   D            2    0
    230141040   VMU      VMU       0.09 $   50,991     $   43,708       46%   D       1    1    1
    230141050   VMU      VMU       0.15 $    8,940     $   17,622       66%   D       1    2    1
    230141060   VMU      VMU       0.23 $   63,951     $  200,501       76%   D       2    2    2
    230141070   VMU      VMU       0.16 $   10,459     $    8,767       46%   D       1    2    1
    230141080   VMU      VMU       0.12 $   10,121     $   35,685       78%   D       1    1    1
    230141090   VMU      VMU       0.11 $   60,709     $   69,624       53%   D       1    1    1
    230141100   VMU      VMU       0.16 $  364,140     $  130,050       26%   D            2    0
    230141110   VMU      VMU       0.12 $   45,469     $   62,147       58%   D       1    1    1
    230141120   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  312,603     $   36,746       11%   U       1    1    1
    230141130   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  183,772     $  113,505       38%   D       1    1    1
    230141170   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  296,749     $   96,594       25%   D       2    2    2
    230141200   VMU      VMU       0.14 $  101,219     $  135,415       57%   D            2    0
    230141210   VMU      VMU       0.27 $    9,833     $   25,967       73%   D       1    3    1
    230141220   VMU      VMU       0.27 $  116,841     $   46,617       29%   D       1    3    1
    230141230   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  140,585     $   70,543       33%   D       1    2    1
    230141240   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  194,582     $  112,802       37%   D       1    2    1
    230141250   VMU      VMU       0.18 $   91,168     $   42,542       32%   D       1    2    1
    230141260   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  353,736     $   88,434       20%   U       1    2    2
    230141270   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  134,127     $   68,774       34%   D       1    2    1
    230141280   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  137,659     $   63,092       31%   D       1    2    1
    230141310   VMU      VMU       0.34 $  154,932     $  216,923       58%   D       1    4    1
    230141330   VMU      VMU        0.4 $  119,251     $  177,459       60%   D       6    6    6
    230141360   VMU      VMU       0.05 $       -      $       -         0%   V            1    1
    230141380   VMU      VMU       0.15 $   86,480     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    230141390   VMU      VMU       0.34 $   70,102     $    3,501        5%   U            3    3
    230141400   VMU      VMU       0.46 $   79,157     $   60,053       43%   D       2    4    2
    230141410   VMU      VMU       0.76 $  238,685     $   97,290       29%   D       1    7    1
    230141420   VMU      VMU       0.22 $  357,000     $       -         0%   V            2    2
    230142010   VMU      VMU       0.12 $  280,908     $   62,944       18%   U       1    1    1
    230142020   VMU      VMU       0.13 $    9,833     $   19,705       67%   D       1    2    1
    230142030   VMU      VMU       0.19 $  157,913     $   88,563       36%   D       1    2    1
    230142040   VMU      VMU       0.32 $   10,732     $   28,674       73%   D       1    3    1
    230142050   VMU      VMU       0.18 $   10,956     $   60,765       85%   D       7    2    7
    230142060   VMU      VMU       0.18 $   48,733     $   41,818       46%   D       1    2    1
    230142070   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  237,823     $   56,211       19%   U       1    2    2
    230142080   VMU      VMU       0.18 $  317,947     $  127,177       29%   D            3    0
    230142090   VMU      VMU       0.55 $   35,859     $   93,264       72%   D      10   10   10
    230142150   VMU      VMU       0.11 $  465,000     $   59,000       11%   U       1    1    1
    230200015   VMU      VMU       0.08 $  108,556     $  120,617       53%   D       4    1    4
    230200025   VMU      VMU       0.09 $  118,407     $  118,407       50%   D       4    1    4
                                                  B-70                               December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                           Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                                             Table B-3
                   Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.     GP         Zoning       Acres          Land Value             Impr. Value       Ratio       AA BB  CC   DD
    230200035   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 123,707                   $ 127,869              51%       D   1   1    1
    230200045   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 118,407                   $ 118,407              50%       D       1    0
    230200055   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 123,707                   $ 126,359              51%       D   1   1    1
    230200065   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D       1    0
    230200075   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 118,407                   $ 118,407              50%       D       1    0
    230200085   VMU            VMU          0.08 $ 118,407                   $ 121,528              51%       D       1    0
    230200095   VMU            VMU          0.11 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D       1    0
    230200105   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 118,444                   $ 118,444              50%       D   1   1    1
    230200115   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D   1   1    1
    230200125   VMU            VMU           0.1 $ 118,407                   $ 118,407              50%       D       1    0
    230200135   VMU            VMU           0.1 $ 118,407                   $ 118,407              50%       D   1   1    1
    230200145   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D       1    0
    230200155   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 118,436                   $ 118,436              50%       D       1    0
    230200165   VMU            VMU          0.09 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D   2   1    2
    230200175   VMU            VMU           0.1 $ 116,238                   $ 116,238              50%       D   2   1    2
    230200185   VMU            VMU           0.1 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D   2   1    2
    230200195   VMU            VMU          0.08 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D   1   1    1
    230200205   VMU            VMU          0.08 $ 118,407                   $ 118,407              50%       D   1   1    1
    230200215   VMU            VMU          0.08 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D   1   1    1
    230200225   VMU            VMU          0.08 $ 118,407                   $ 118,407              50%       D   1   1    1
    230200235   VMU            VMU          0.08 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D   3   1    3
    230200245   VMU            VMU          0.08 $ 123,707                   $ 123,707              50%       D   2   1    2
    230200250   VMU            VMU          0.15 $ 211,964                   $ 14,254                 6%      U   1   2    2
    230200260   VMU            VMU          0.02 $ 12,059                    $       -                0%      V       1    1
    230210045   VMU            VMU                    $ 415,650              $ 415,650              50%       D   3   1    3
    230210065   VMU            VMU                    $ 499,800              $ 499,800              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210075   VMU            VMU                    $ 494,700              $ 494,700              50%       D   4   1    4
    230210085   VMU            VMU                    $ 573,750              $ 573,750              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210095    CM            VMU                    $ 184,785              $ 180,735              49%       D   1   1    1
    230210105   VMU            VMU                    $ 612,000              $ 612,000              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210115   VMU            VMU                    $ 192,865              $ 465,809              71%       D   1   1    1
    230210125   VMU            VMU                    $ 143,014              $ 324,184              69%       D   1   1    1
    230210135   VMU            VMU                    $ 499,800              $ 499,800              50%       D  10   1   10
    230210145   VMU            VMU                    $ 428,400              $ 428,400              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210155   VMU            VMU                    $ 586,500              $ 586,500              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210165   VMU            VMU                    $ 41,137               $ 232,068              85%       D   1   1    1
    230210175   VMU            VMU                    $ 433,500              $ 433,500              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210185   VMU            VMU                    $ 425,850              $ 425,850              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210195   VMU            VMU                    $ 433,500              $ 433,500              50%       D       1    0
    230210205   VMU            VMU                    $ 179,552              $ 202,178              53%       D   1   1    1
    230210215   VMU            VMU                    $ 448,800              $ 448,800              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210225   VMU            VMU                    $ 428,400              $ 428,400              50%       D   1   1    1
    230210235   VMU            VMU                    $ 41,133               $ 231,048              85%       D   1   1    1
 NOTES:
     1. See “Development Potential by Zone District” for an explanation of terms and methodology.
     2. Column AA classifies the development status of each parcel according to the following abbreviations:
                                                                 B-71                                           December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                            Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                                            Table B-3
                     Vacant and Underutilized Moderate and Above-Moderate Sites
  Parcel No.       GP        Zoning        Acres        Land Value            Impr. Value         Ratio      AA       BB  CC   DD
                   D = Developed
                   U = Underutilized
                   V = Vacant
     3.   Columns BB through DD classify the development potential of each parcel according the following abbreviations:
                   E = Existing Development (No. of Residential Units)
                   M = Maximum Development Potential (No. of Residential Units)
                   R = Realistic Development Potential (No. of Residential Units)
                                                                 B-72                                                 December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                     Appendix C – Public Participation Summary
                                           Appendix C
                                 Public Participation Summary
Public participation is an important component of the planning process in Ojai, and this update
to the Housing Element has provided residents and other interested parties numerous
opportunities for involvement. Five public meetings were held between July and December
2013 to consider the Housing Element. Public notices of all workshops and hearings were
published in the local newspaper in advance of each meeting, as well as posting the notices
on the City’s website. The document was also circulated to housing advocates and nonprofit
organizations representing the interests of lower-income persons and special needs groups (see
Table C-1 containing a list of organizations notified of opportunities for participation). After
receiving comments on the draft Housing Element from the State Housing and Community
Development Department, a proposed final Housing Element was prepared and made
available for public review prior to adoption by the City Council.
The following is a list of opportunities for public involvement in the preparation of this Housing
Element update. Public meetings were televised on Channel 10, the local public access
channel.
        Joint City Council/Planning Commission study session          July 8, 2013
        Planning Commission hearing                                   August 21, 2013
        City Council hearing                                          September 10, 2013
        Planning Commission hearing                                   November 20, 2013
        City Council hearing                                          December 10, 2013
Following its adoption by the City Council on December 10, 2013, the Housing Element was
transmitted to HCD for review.
Issues raised at the public workshops and hearings along with a description of how these issues
have been addressed are summarized in Table C-2.
                                                  C-1                                  December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                              Appendix C – Public Participation Summary
                                                  Table C-1
                                      Housing Element Notification List
 Housing Organizations                               County of Ventura
    • House Farmworkers                                • Planning Department
    • Cabrillo Economic Development Corporation        • LAFCO
    • Ventura County Areawide Housing Authority      Each School District Operating within the City
    • Peoples Self Help Housing                        • Ojai Unified School District
    • Ventura County Tri-Counties Regional Center    Association of Governments
    • Many Mansions                                    • Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
    • Ventura County Homeless Coalition                • Ventura County Association of Governments (VCOG)
    • Habitat for Humanity Ventura County            Special Districts Operating within the City
    • Amcal Housing                                    • Ojai Valley Sanitary District
                                                       • Watershed Protection District
                                                       • Casitas Municipal Water District
                                                       • Ventura County Regional Sanitation District
 Persons Asking to be Notified                       Utility Companies
    • Cal Trans                                        • Southern California Gas
    • John Broesamle                                   • Southern California Edison
    • Jim Ruch                                       SB 18 Consultation
    • Bill Miley                                       • Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians
                                                       • Coastal Band of the Chumash Indian
                                                     Miscellaneous
                                                       • Ojai Basin Groundwater Management Agency
                                                       • Golden State Water Company
                                                       • Air Pollution Control District
                                                       • Ventura County Public Works (Transportation Division)
                                                      C-2                                              December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element                                               Appendix C – Public Participation Summary
                                                              Table C-2
                                     Housing Element Public Comment Summary
Comment                                                        Response
Are the program actions described in the Housing Plan          No, state law requires that the Housing Element be adopted by February
required to be completed by February 2014?                     2014 in order to avoid the requirement for future updates on a 4-year cycle
                                                               rather than the normal 8-year cycle.
Can different height limits be established for different       Yes, zoning regulations can be tailored to apply different development
properties?                                                    standards to different properties on the basis of different site characteristics.
With regard to resource limitations (water, etc.) must the     In order to minimize constraints on affordable housing, cities often exempt
restrictions be applied equally to all projects?               affordable housing from certain restrictions that apply to market-rate housing.
Can the Housing Element include a program regarding            Yes, the Housing Element can include a statement of intent to adopt an
Inclusionary Housing even though there is not sufficient time  Inclusionary Housing Ordinance with the details to be established as part of
to work out the details prior to the adoption deadline?        the Code amendment process after the Housing Element is adopted.
Since conceptual plans have shown that 2-story                 Conceptual plans for specific sites provide strong evidence that a 2-story
development is feasible at the required density of 20          height limit does not pose an unreasonable constraint to affordable housing
units/acre, will that be enough to support the establishment   development in Ojai. This information, together with other factors such as the
of a 2-story height limit?                                     City’s permit procedures, fees, and efforts to facilitate affordable housing will
                                                               contribute to HCD’s determination of whether the City’s regulations provide
                                                               reasonable opportunities for development.
The City should try to encourage construction of more new      Program 3 in the draft Housing Element includes a provision to consider
2nd units in addition to its efforts to legalize unpermitted   refinements to the standards for new 2nd units in order to encourage more
units. Additional 2nd units can provide more affordable        property owners to take advantage of this option.
housing options to reduce the need for large projects.
Water supply and traffic congestion are critical problems in   State law delegates responsibility for allocating housing needs to state and
the Ojai Valley. Our housing plans and programs should         regional planning agencies. In Ventura County, SCAG is the agency with
take these limitations into account.                           responsibility for preparing the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
                                                               (RHNA). Preparation of the RHNA is a multi-year process that provides
                                                               opportunities for local governments to submit information regarding local
                                                               issues such as water supply and traffic. The RHNA for the 2014-2021 period
                                                               is final, and there is no opportunity to change the allocation to Ojai for the
                                                               current planning cycle. However, SCAG updates the regional growth forecast
                                                               every 4 years, and Ojai should work cooperatively with VCOG and SCAG to
                                                               ensure that future forecasts and RHNA allocations accurately reflect
                                                               environmental constraints such as water supply and road capacity.
Our focus should be on facilitating affordable housing         The focus of the Housing Element is on housing at the low- and moderate-
development, not market-rate housing.                          income levels. While statewide policies such as the RHNA process include
                                                               identification of needs for above-moderate-income housing, most of the
                                                               analysis and policy emphasis in the Housing Element is on the needs of
                                                               lower-income households and persons with special housing needs, such as
                                                               those with disabilities.
City-owned property could be used for affordable housing.      The City does own property that could potentially be developed for affordable
The City should form partnerships with non-profits and use     housing. The City Council is responsible for balancing a variety of public
grant funds to assist affordable housing production.           needs including public services, infrastructure, and sound fiscal planning as
                                                               well as affordable housing. The City will continue to work cooperatively with
                                                               non-profit developers to seek funding assistance and suitable locations for
                                                               affordable housing.
                                                                     C-3                                                     December 2013

City of Ojai 2014-2021 Housing Element     Appendix C – Public Participation Summary
This page intentionally left blank
                                       C-4                             December 2013

            Qperi Space Element
            INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE ELEMENT
            The Open Space Element of the City of Ojai General Plan was prepared in
            conformance with State law and pursuant to overall City goals, objectives and
            policies. It is consistent with other Elements of the Ojai General Plan.
                 The purpose of the Open Space Element is to incorporate resource,
                  conservation, recreational, aesthetic and safety goals, policies, and
                 programs into a comprehensive Open Space Plan for the City.
            This Element was created in conjunction with the formation of the Conservation
            and Recreation Elements of the Ojai General Plan (1986). The Conservation and
            Open Space Element may be adopted as one Element or separately under General
            Plan Law. The Ojai Open Space Element has been developed separately from the
            Ojai Conservation Element. This has occurred because of the unique character of
            the Ojai area and the importance of open space to the community.
            The Open Space Element is a product of research conducted for the Ojai General
            Plan Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) and the Conservation and
            Recreation Elements and field work in the Ojai community. The Element is based
            in part on data contained in the Ojai MEA. From the MEA inventory of
            important resources of the City, various goals, policies and programs were set forth
            in the Conservation Element. These were formulated to ensure the sound
            management and proper conservation and utilization of all resources of the City
            and to preserve Ojai's unique living environment.
            Recreational resources and opportunities are also identified in the MEA. The
            Recreation Element identifies existing and potential future Parks, Trails, Specialized
            Facilities and Preserves. The Recreation Element also establishes goals, policies
            and programs to meet the long-term recreational needs of the community. These
            needs include recreational open space. The Recreation Element's concepts have
            therefore been incorporated into the General Plan Open Space Element.
            In summary, resource conservation goals from the Conservation Element were
            incorporated into the Open Space Plan and long-term recreational goals were
            derived from the Recreation Element. Other relevant open space issues pertaining
            to aesthetics and public safety were considered and evaluated. A series of open
            space geographical overlays were then created, incorporating the identification of
            natural, cultural and aesthetic resources, recreational opportunities and safety
            hazards. This work effort resulted in the product of the City's Open Space
            Element Plan. The combined purpose of these Elements is to guide the long-term
             0IAI GENERAL PLAN                          1                           MAY13,1987
            Qpeil Space Element
            management of the City's resources and establish City policy guidelines in the Ojai
            Planning Area to reserve naturnl, recreational and scenic resources and amenities.
ASSUMPrrONS!DEFINITIONS
            The Ojai Open Space Element is a product of the conservation, recreational, safety
            and aesthetic concerns of the Ojai community. Definitions, explanations and
            inventories of data pertaining to open space issues are provided in various section
            of the General Plan and MEA. Within the Introduction section of the General
            Plan and Index Matrix references sections within General Plan documents (i.e.,
            MEA, various General Plan Elements) where specific information regarding open
            space may be obtained. Definitions and categorization unique to the Open Space
            Element are provided below and on the following pages under "Legal Authority".
            California State General Plan law generally defines Open Space as any parcel or
            area of land or water that is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space
            use, and that is designated on a local, regional or state open space plan.
            The categories of Open Space in Ojai that are referenced throughout this Element
            and illustrated on the Open Space Element Plan are listed below.
             A&ricultural Open Space
            Land currently used as, or available for, farmland production is classified and given
            various value by the California Department of Conservation. These lands are
            categorized and considered for agricultural preservation in the Department's
            "Important Farmland Inventory". The Ojai MEA (Geology and Soils sections) and
            Conservation Element identify these "Important Farmlands" in Ojai that are
            utilized for agriculture and which possess prime or important soils for agricultural
            production. Important Farmlands are defined in detail in the MEA Soils section
            and in the Conservation Element under "Important Farmland". They are depicted
            as Conservation Open Space on the Open Space Element Plan.
            Another type of open space related to agricultural land use is rangeland. Rangeland
            is land used for grazing by ranch animals, usually cattle. Policies and conservation
            of open space set forth in this Element are reflective of community desires to
            preserve important rangeland.
            Bioloeical Open Space
            As discussed in the Ojai MEA and Conservation Element, certain biological
            habitats are identified with "high" or "moderate" biological significance. These
            biologically "significant" areas are precisely defined in the MEA and Conservation
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                             2                        MAY13,1987
 Qpen Space Element
Element under "Biological Resources" and are shown on the Open Space Element
Plan as Conservation Open Space. Open space and conservation policies reflect
the preservation of these important habitats.
Cultural Open Space
Archaeological and historical resources are also defined and identified in the MEA
and Conservation Elements. (See "Cultural Resources" sections.) They pertain to
properties that were, are, or may be significant in local and American history,
regional architecture, archaeology, and/or culture. Policies for their preservation
are set forth in the Conservation Element. Historical resources are designated on
the Open Space Element Plan.
Recreational Open Space
Recreational Open Space is defined as an open parcel of natural or landscaped land
that is intended for outdoor recreation and the enjoyment of nature. Parks, Trails,
Specialized Recreation Facilities and Preserves defined in the Recreation Element
are applied in this Element and shown on the Open Space Element Plan            •,
as Recreational Open Space.                                                ~
Scenic Open Space                                                            ~
Scenic Open Space is defined as those areas that establish the aesthetic and visual
character of the community. It relates to every aspect of the City of Ojai and its
associated views of natural scenery. This type of open space is difficult to
specifically identify and is considerably subjective. Within this Element, Scenic
Open Space pertains to views of and from the Ojai, the aesthetic quality of the
Valley's ridgelines illustrated in Exhibit OS-1 of the City of Ojai MEA, and areas
valued to protect and enhance the scenic character of the Ojai. Open space values
may relate to community identity, "entrance" themes or the appearance at City
perimeters or any portion of land which may otherwise portray "The Ojai".
Scenic Open Space is illustrated on the Open Space Element Plan.
Public Safety Open Space
Open space retention is necessary for certain land that has characteristics
hazardous to public health and safety. Such public safety risks primarily consist of
geologic hazards (e.g., seismic faults, landslides, etc.), hydrological hazards (e.g.,
flooding) and fire hazards. Public safety definitions and evaluations are provided
in the Ojai MEA under the specific topical sections: Traffic/Circulation; Geology;
Hydrology/f1ooding; and Public Services.
 DJM GENERAL PLAN                            3                          MAY 13, 1987

 Qpen Space Element
Element under "Biological Resources" and are shown on the Open Space Element
Plan as Conservation Open Space. Open space and conservation policies reflect
the preservation of these important habitats.
Cultural Open Space
Archaeological and historical resources are also defined and identified in the MEA
and Conservation Elements. (See "Cultural Resources" sections.) They pertain to
properties that were, are, or may be significant in local and American history,
regional architecture, archaeology, and/or culture. Policies for their preservation
are set forth in the Conservation Element. Historical resources are designated on
the Open Space Element Plan.
Recreational Open Space
Recreational Open Space is defined as an open parcel of natural or landscaped land
that is intended for outdoor recreation and the enjoyment of nature. Parks, Trails,
Specialized Recreation Facilities and Preserves defined in the Recreation Element
are applied in this Element and shown on the Open Space Element Plan            ••
as Recreational Open Space.                                                ~
Scenic Open Space                                                           -~ .
Scenic Open Space is defined as those areas that establish the aesthetic and visual
character of the community. It relates to every aspect of the City of Ojai and its
associated views of natural scenery. This type of open space is difficult to
specifically identifY and is considerably subjective. Within this Element, Scenic
Open Space pertains to views of and from the Ojai, the aesthetic quality of the
Valley's ridgelines illustrated in Exhibit OS-l, and areas valued to protect and
enhance the scenic character of the Ojai. Open space values may relate to
community identity, "entrance" themes or the appearance at City perimeters or any
portion ofland which may otherwise portray "The Ojai". Scenic Open Space is
illustrated on the Open Space Element Plan.
Public Safety Open Space
Open space retention is necessary for certain land that has characteristics
hazardous to public health and safety. Such public safety risks primarily consist of
geologic hazards (e.g., seismic faults, landslides, etc.), hydrological hazards (e.g.,
flooding) and frre hazards. Public safety definitions and evaluations are provided
in the Ojai MEA under the specific topical sections: Traffic/Circulation; Geology;
Hydrology/Flooding; and Public Services.
 0IAI GENERAL PLAN                          3                           MAYll,1987

            Qpen Space Element
LEGALAUI7fDRITY
            Under State Law (Section 65302) a City is required to adopt an open space plan for
            the "comprehensive and long-range preservation and conservation of open space
            within its jurisdiction".
                   As established under State Law, open space may be designated on an Open
                  Space Plan as any of the following:
                   1. Open space for the preservation of natural resources, including but not
                        limited to, areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life,
                        including habitat for fish and wildlife species; areas required for ecologic
                        and other scientific study purposes; rivers, streams, bays, and estuaries;
                        and coastal beaches, lakeshores, banks of rivers and streams, and
                        watershed lands.
                    2. Open space used for the managed production of resources, including
                        but not limited to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands, and areas
                        of economic importance for the production of food or fiber; areas
                        required for recharge of ground water basins; bays, estuaries, marshes,
                        rivers, and streams that are important for the management of
                        commercial fisheries; and areas containing major mineral deposits,
                        including those in short supply.
                    3. Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, areas
                        that have outstanding scenic, historic, and cultural value; areas
                        particularly suited for park and recreation purpose, including access to
                        lake shore, beaches, rivers and streams; and areas which serve as links
                        between major recreation and open space reservations, including utility
                        easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails and scenic highway
                        corridors.
                    4. Open space for public health and safety, including but not limited to,
                        areas that require special management or regulation because of
                        hazardous or special conditions such as earthquake fault zones unstable
                        soils areas, flood plains, watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks,
                        areas required for the protection of water quality and water reservoirs
                        and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality.
            The Index Matrix within the Introduction of this General Plan provides an
            index/reference of State General Plan requirements and under which sections of
            the Ojai General Plan each State requirement is fulfilled.
             DJM GENERAL PLAN                             4                            MAY13,1987
             Qpen Space Element
             ISSUES AND NEEDS
OVERVIEW
             Open Space issues in Ojai are numerous, complex and overlapping with other
             General Plan issues. Categories of Open Space have been established within the
             Element to clarify and simplify complex issues. In this manner the reader may
             easily find and reference a specific concern whether it relates to preservation of
             agricultural farmland, seismic safety open space, biological habitat, or parkland
             issues among others.
             The Ojai Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) provides a data base for this
             Element. The Conservation and Recreation Elements further explain reasoning
             and substantiation behind policies, programs and geographical open space overlays
             of the Open Space Element Plan. The Introduction Index Matrix of the General
             Plan provides a section reference within the General Plan where various open
             space-related terms and issues are explained.
             Major issues pertaining to each Open Space category of this Element are briefly
             discussed below.
AGRICULTURAL OPEN SPACE
             "Important Farmlands" identified in the Ojai MEA and Conservation Element are
             utilized in agriculture and have "Prime" or "Important" soils for agricultural
             production. Rangeland utilized in grazing is also considered valuable under this
             open space category. Retention of these areas for open space and agricultural
             production is a significant issue in Ojai City Policy.
BIOLOGICAL OPEN SPACE
             Biologically significant areas identified in the MEA and Conservation Element are
             also shown on the Open Space Element Plan. Biological open space/conservation
             and associated preservation policies for these important biological habitats are of
             major concern in the Ojai community.
CULTURAL OPEN SPACE
             Issues pertaining to cultural open space primarily relate to areas with known or
             potential existence of archaeological and historical resources. Goals, Policies, and
             Programs ofthe Conservation Element are established to preserve these resources.
             These policies have been applied to the Open Space Element to herein reflect
             conservation goals.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                              5                       MAY13,1987
              Qpen Space Element
RECREATIONAL OPEN SPACE
             Recreation is an important aspect of Ojai's living environment. The Recreation
             Element establishes Goals, Policies and Programs to ensure the longevity of Ojai's
             recreational opportunities. Components of the Recreation Element (parks, Trails,
             Specialized Recreation Facilities and Preserves) are identified in this Element as
             Recreational Open Space.
SCENIC OPEN SPACE
             Scenic Open Space in Ojai is highly valued to protect and enhance the scenic
             character of Ojai. Major community issues include the protection of major
             surrounding ridgelines, establishment of buffer zones between other open space
             and urban areas, coordination of Scenic Corridors with Scenic Highways adopted
             with the Circulation Element, and most importantly, the preservation of views to
             and from the Ojai Valley.
             Scenic Open Space is the most difficult open space in Ojai to define and address
             objectively. Areas within or surrounding the City that are characterized with a
              feeling of "community identity" or are associated with the aesthetic, natural
             character of Ojai are highly valued in the community. Policies within this Element
             reflect the desires of the community to retain these special places as open space.
PUBLIC SAFETY OPEN SPACE
             State General Plan law requires cities to adopt a Public Safety Element. The City
             of Ojai has adopted the County of Ventura Public Safety Element. This Open
             Space Element's Public Safety Open Space is reflective of the Ventura County
             Public Safety Element and public safety/hazard issues addressed in the Ojai MEA.
             The need to create an Ojai Public Safety Element or updated County Element
             should be considered in the near future. The Element would establish specific Ojai
             City and County of Ventura combined Policy, define acceptable levels of public
             safety risks and would adopt mitigation methods to reduce these hazards to the
             established, acceptable levels.
              O]M GENERAL PLAN                            6                         MAY13,1987
            Qpen Space Element
           GOAlS, POUCIES AND IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS
INTRODUCTION
           This section of the Open Space Element sets forth City Goals, Policies, and
            Implementing Programs for the long-term retention of open space in Ojai. As
           previously mentioned, open space issues in Ojai are numerous and complex and
           involve other Elements of the Ojai General Plan. The Open Space Element has
            been organized in a format providing easy reference to other General Plan
           sections.
           Where necessary and appropriate, all or a portion of an open space category's
            Goals, Policies and Programs are cross referenced to another General Plan
           Element (i.e., Conservation, Recreation Elements). In such cases the referenced
            Element's Goals, Policies, and Programs are incorporated in the Open Space
           Elemen t by reference and by their application to the Open Space Plan.
           The fIrst category ("GENERAL") provides overall open space Goals, City Policies
           and Implementing Programs. The GENERAL section is then followed by specifIc
           open space issue sections.
GENERAL
           IT SHALL BE THE INTENTION OF THE CI'IY OF OJAl TO
           PROVIDE FOR THE LONG-TERM RETENTION OF IDENTIFIED
           AND POTENTIALLY SIGNIFICANT OPEN SPACE IN OJAl SO AS TO
           MAINTAIN AND ENHANCE THE QUALI'IY OF THE ENVI-
           RONMENT. SUCH OPEN SPACE INCLUDES BUT IS NOT UMITED
           TO THOSE AREAS IDENTIFIED AS SIGNIFICANT OR
           POTENTIALLY SIGNIFICANT IN THE OJAl GENERAL PLAN
           CONSERVATION AND RECREATION ELEMENTS.
               Policy. The City shall formally recognize open space areas in 0iai and
               shall establish measures to preserve the identified open space.
                   Program: Data contained in the Ojai Master Environmental Assessment
                   (MEA) shall be utilized to the maximum extent feasible in formulation of
                   an Open Space Plan for the Ojai General Plan. As the MEA data is
                   periodically updated and reflned, any changes in the MEA will be
                   considered for possible implications to the Open Space Element.
                   Program: Any data that is not within the MEA but is considered relevant
                   by the City in open space planning shall be considered and utilized in
            OJM GENERAL PLAN                           7                       MAY~1987
Qpen Space Element
      preparation of the Open Space Plan and associated policies.
      Program: Appropriate standards and criteria will be established by the City
      for the preservation and use of open space lands. Specifically, pursuant to
      State law the following provisions for consistency with the Ojai Open Space
      Plan are hereby adopted by the City of Ojai.
         "65566. Any action by a county or city by which open space land or any
         interest therein acquired or disposed of or its use restricted or regulated,
         whether or not pursuant to this part, must be consistent with the local
         open-space plan.
         "65567. No building permit may be issued, no subdivision map
         approved, and no open-space zoning ordinance adopted, unless the
         proposed construction, subdivision or ordinance is consistent with the
         local open space plan",
      Program: Community/neighborhood open space systems will be included
      in specific plans, planned residential districts and any other planned
      development where appropriate.
      Program: The City shall adopt a resolution formally recognizing Article
      13b, Section 8 of the California State Constitution which directs the
      assessor to consider open space so as to "preserve its use for food and
      fiber, use and enjoyment of natural resources and scenic beauty and
      recreation" .
      Program: Existing and potential new land use and zoning provisions shall
      be pursued by the City to regulate land use in Ojai as it relates to open
      space. Such planning tools include but are not limited to:
         o Agricultural zoning;
         o Flood plain zoning;
         o Subdivision for public open space;
         o Development fees for acquisition of land for recreational open
             space uses;
         o Overlay zones in special open space areas or critical areas of the
              community;
DJAI GENERAL PLAN                          8                           11£4YLJ, 1987

Qpen Space Element
          o   Acquisition of tax deed lands; and
          o Private and public golf course for future security as permanent open
             space.
  Policy. The Open Space Element and its Open Space Plan shall be
  recognized as an official and adopted policy document in the assessment
  of future development proposals in the City.
      Program: The Open Space Element and Plan shall be used in initial
      environmental assessments and during subsequent environmental
      documentation in City planning.
      Program: The Open Space Element and its base data shall be periodically
      reviewed to improve the content and effectiveness in guiding sound
      development policies and programs, and in soliciting maximum public input
      during community planning procedures.
  Policy. The City shall consider cooperative programs with other involved
  agencies and organizations for the acquisition, improvement,
  maintenance and/or preservation of open space.
      Program: The City shall actively pursue open space programs in
      cooperation with the Federal, State, Regional, County and special district
      agenCIes.
      Program: The City shall encourage private and quasi-private landowners to
      provide open space for preservation of natural features, landscaping,
      recreation, and other appropriate open space uses where feasible. This will
      include city support for a land bank program.
      Program: The State Code on Open Space Easements will be complied
      with and pursued by the City. The Code provides that a city or county
      having a General Plan may accept grants of open space easements in which
      the owner relinquishes to the public, in perpetuity or for a term of 20 years
      or more, the right to construct improvements on it. The easement
      agreement may also contain a covenant against the extraction of natural
      resources, cutting trees or growth except for preservation or other
      unfriendly activities. It must be consistent with the Open Space Element of
      the General Plan and must be in the best interest of the state/county/city
      and important to the public for the employment of scenic beauty, use of
      natural resources, recreation, or production of food and fiber.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           9                         .MAY11, 1987
Qpen Space Element
  Policy: Open Space designations for preservation of all types of open
  space identified in this Element and throughout the General Plan shall be
  coordinated and integrated into a comprehensive, coordinated open
  space network through the City.
     Program: Multiple use of open space and connecting open space areas shall
     be pursued by the City by combining appropriate compatible open space
     land uses (i.e., hiking and riding trails along flood control channels; picnic
     sites and view points along scenic highways; multiple use of school
     playfields).
     Program: The selection and use of open space shall be coordinated with
     other public agencies (i.e., park and school sites; flood control storm drains
     and municipal water treatment facilities) to maximize the efficiency of open
     space uses.
  Policy; The City shall establish conformity between the General Plan
  Open Space/Conservation Elements and zoning.
      Program: The City will evaluate its zoning criteria for conformity with
      the Open Space and Conservation Elements. Conflicts in zoning will
      be resolved as expeditiously as possible, by revisions or additions of new
      and amended sections to the subdivision and other related ordinances.
      Program: The City will establish an equitable process for resolving
      conflicting open space and related property uses by:
      1.  Reviewing all development proposals with consideration of the
          environmental review process (CEQA) and the relationship with
          the Open Space Element and all other General Plan Elements;
      2   Public noticing, public discussions and making available text and
          maps depicting open spaces and open space issues;
      3. Providing opportunity for comment on the Open Space Element
          prior to future revisions.
  Policy: The City shall support provisions for open space via density
  transfers, development clustering, and open space dedications where
  considered appropriate and feasible for the City to conserve open space
  lands.
OJM GENERAL PLAN                             10                         MAYn,1987
              Qpen Space Element
                      Program: During development review processing, the City shall consider
                      alternative methods to conserve important or significant open space lands.
                      Such alternative actions would or would not be permitted at the City's
                      discretion and may include development clustering, density transfers, open
                      space dedications or easements and other similar actions.
                  Policy: Achieving open space amenities in the R-2 and R-3 zones in the
                  City of Ojai shall be a high priority to the community.
                      Program: The City shall investigate land use element changes to establish
                      small open space opportunities within these areas.
AGRICULTURAL, BIOLOGICAL AND CULTURAL OPEN SPACE
              Goals, Policies, and Implementing Programs relating to agricultural preservation
              (Important Farmlands), biological resources, and cultural resources are presented
              in the Conservation Element of the General Plan. The intentions and measures of
              the Conservation Element are hereby incorporated into the Open Space Element.
             They are further included in this Element by application to the Open Space Plan
              (map) as Agricultural Open Space, Biological Open Space and Cultural Open
              Space.
RECREATIONAL OPEN SPACE
             The Recreation Element of the General Plan sets forth Goals, Policies and
             Implementing Programs relating to Recreation in Ojai. Recreation issues in that
             Element are divided into the following topics: Parks, Trails, Specialized Recreation
              Facilities and Preserves. Each of the topical sections relate to recreational open
             space in various ways. The provisions of the Recreation Element as they pertain
             to recreational open space are hereby incorporated into the Ojai Open Space
             Element. Programs and provisions of the Recreation Element have further been
             incorporated into this Element by their application to the Open Space Plan (map)
             as Recreational Open Space.
SCENIC OPEN SPACE
             The City of Ojai shall support the maintenance and enhancement of the scenic,
              natural quality of Ojai by preserving as open space any parcel ofland, ridgeline, or
              other qualified scenic element of the city or its planning area, to provide for the
              short-and long-term aesthetic health of Ojai.
             The City of Ojai shall support the preservation of any unique or aesthetically
              valued aspect or character of Ojai by retaining open space that illustrates or
              OJM GENERAL PLAN                            11                         .MAY~1987
Qpen Space Element
protects those unique and natural characteristics that make Ojai a desirable place
to live.
    PoliCY: The natural featwes and general environmental characteristics of
    Ojai's hillsides and ridgelines shall be permanently preserved.
         Program: No development or alteration to the natural condition of
         prominent ridgelines or adjacent/nearby areas shall be permitted by the City
         of Ojai. This program shall apply to the areas identified on the Open Space
         Plan as "Scenic Open Space" or "Scenic Points of Interest".
         Program: The City shall work with all appropriate jurisdictions to restrict
         all development visible from the valley on the south face of the slopes of
         Los Padres National Forest.
         Program: The City shall work with all interested parties to prohibit
         development visible from the valley on the north face of the Black
         Mountain and Sulphur Mountain. Development not visible would be
         permitted consistent with the intent of the general plan, its policies and
         programs.
         Program: The Open Space Plan shall formally designate open space areas
         that will maintain and enhance the hillsides and ridgelines and provide a
         buffer between development and open space or agriculture.
         Program: The City shall formulate and adopt a Hillside Development
         Ordinance in keeping with the Goals and Policies of this Element and the
         Conservation Element. The Ordinance will protect valuable hillside lands
         from exposure to development. It should also provide for hillside grading,
         standards and other restrictions.
         Program: Areas adjacent to open space and agricultural lands will be
         carefully scrutinized during any development proposal's review for
         compatibility with the open space. Buffer zones and screening of
         development are examples of provisions for appropriate blending in
         transition between land uses.
         Program: The City shall pursue the creation of a "Greenbelt Agreement"
         with the County of Ventura, City of Santa Paula and LAFCO to preserve
         open space and agricultura1 between Ojai and surrounding communities.
    Policy: In establishing City policy and in other decision making efforts,
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                            12                           MAY13,1987
              Qpen Space Element
                 the City will consider and highly value any open, natural, or special open
                 space characteristic of a particular area. That characteristic will bear
                 more weight than potential economic or other values which may result
                 from the development or alteration of the land.
                     Program: The City shall incorporate an aesthetic open space provision in
                     its development processing review. The provision shall require formal
                     consideration of the aesthetic qualities of a site or its surroundings during a
                     project's review.
                     Program: The City shall review its zoning code and incorporate
                     appropriate mandatory "findings" related to the preservation of Aesthetic
                     Open Space in the City.
                     Program: The City shall establish specific "finding" requirements related to
                     the future subdivision of all lands under its jurisdiction related to open
                     space within and adjacent to the City.
PUBLIC SAFETY OPEN SPACE
             The City of Ojai shall provide for the public health and safety by isolating
              hazardous or potentially hazardous areas in open space by providing open space
              buffers between hazardous or potentially hazardous areas and urban or rural
              neighborhoods.
                 Policy: The City shall identify and limit the extent and intensity of land
                 uses and development in hazardous areas such as, but not limited to:
                 steep slopes, streambeds, flood plains, fault zones and erosive or
                 landslide areas.
                     Program: Data within the Ojai MEA and other sources will be utilized to
                     officially identify areas hazardous to public safety in Ojai and to formulate
                     a Public Safety Element for the 0iai General Plan. The Public Safety
                     Element should be created and adopted as soon as a feasible.
                     Program: Areas such as but not limited to flood plains, flood control
                     channels, fault zones and fire breaks will be identified in the Public Safety
                     Element. These areas will be reserved under the Element for permanent
                     open space or compatible non-risk uses to protect public safety in Ojai.
                 Policy: Areas currently or potentially under uses containing any public
                 health or safety hazard shall be adequately buffered as expeditiously as
                 feasible to protect public safety.
              OJAI GENERAL PLAN                            13                           MAY13,1987
Qpen Space Element
      Program: Industrial and other uses with potential for public health/safety
      hazards shall be located appropriately and be adequately buffered with open
      space to absorb noise and other nuisances or dangers. These buffer areas
      will be assessed and provided on a project-specific basis, as proposed
      development is reviewed by the City.
      Program: The City, in preparing its Public Safety Element, will identify
      land uses that potentially threaten public health and/or safety. The
      Elementwill further disallow or restrict the identified uses as is appropriate
      and will require adequate open buffer areas to protect the public health and
      safety. These provisions will become policy within the Public Safety
      Element and applied to the Open Space Plan as Public Safety Open Space.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                          14                           MAYlJ,1987
CITY OF ORINDA GENERAL PLAN
Volume 1: Plan Policies
Adopted General Plan
May 20, 1987
Amended as follows:
Resolution Number    Date of Adoption
             63-89   10-10-89
              4-90   1-25-90
             49-92   8-11-92
             51-92   8-11-92
             35-93   5-26-93
             39-93   5-25-93
             81-94   11-15-94
TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                                      PAGE
1.0    BACKGROUND                                                                                           1
1.1       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY OF ORINDA                                                                     1
1.2       NATURE OF THE GENERAL PLAN                                                                        1
1.3       CITY BOUNDARY AND PLANNING AREA                                                                   2
1.4       PUBLIC PARTICIPATION                                                                              2
1.5       REPORT ORGANIZATION                                                                               3
2.0    LAND USE AND CIRCULATION SECTION                                                                     4
2.1       LAND USE ELEMENT                                                                                  4
2.1.1            Land Use: Guiding Policies                                                                 5
2.1.2            Land Use: Implementing Policies                                                            6
2.1.3            Downtown: Guiding Policies                                                                 8
2.1.4            Downtown: Implementing Policies                                                            8
2.1.5            Gateway Valley: Guiding Policies                                                           9
2.2       OPEN SPACE, PARKS, SCHOOLS AND UTILITIES ELEMENT                                                11
2.2.1            Open Space and Parks: Guiding Policies                                                    11
2.2.2            Open Space and Parks Implementing Policies                                                12
2.2.3            Schools: Guiding Policies                                                                 13
2.2.4            Utilities: Guiding Policies                                                               13
2.3       CIRCULATION ELEMENT                                                                             13
2.3.1            Circulation: Guiding Policies                                                             13
2.3.2            Circulation: Implementing Policies                                                        14
                                       (1)
3.0    HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                    16
3.1       INTRODUCTION                                                                                    16
3.1.1            Housing Issues                                                                            16
3.1.2            State Requirements and Organization                                                       17
3.1.3            Public Participation and Plan Consistency                                                 17
3.2       SETTING: POPULATION AND HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS                                                 17
3.2.1            Population and Household Characteristics                                                  17
3.2.2            Jobs/Housing Balance                                                                      21
3.2.3            Existing Housing Stock                                                                    22
3.2.4            Subsidized Housing in Orinda and Contra Costa County                                      24
3.3       HOUSING NEEDS                                                                                   25
3.3.1            Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) Housing Needs Determinations                   25
3.3.2            Projected Housing Needs and Housing Needs Met, 1988 to l99O                               27
3.3.3            Existing Housing Need                                                                     28
3.3.4            Needs of Special Groups                                                                   29
3.3.5            City Housing Goals                                                                        31
3.3.6.           Housing Policies                                                                          31
3.3.7            Review of Effectiveness of Housing Policies and Progress in Implementation                37
3.3.8            Status of Existing Assisted Housing                                                       38
3.3.9            Consistency with General Plan and Appropriateness of the Goals, Objectives and Policies   38
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                                 i
Table of Contents
3.4       LAND INVENTORY                                                                38
3.5       CONSTRAINTS TO THE PRODUCTION OF HOUSING                                      40
3.5.1.           Governmental Constraints                                                41
3.5.2            Nongovernmental Constraint                                              42
3.6.        OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION                                       43
4.0    ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT SECTION                                       44
4.1       CONSERVATION ELEMENT                                                          44
4.1.1            Conservation Element: Guiding Policies                                  46
4.1.2            Conservation Element: Implementing Policies                             46
4.2       SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                47
4.2.1            Safety Element: Guiding Policies                                        48
4.2.2            Safety Element: Implementing Policies                                   49
4.3       NOISE ELEMENT                                                                 49
4.3.1            Noise Element: Guiding Policies                                         51
4.3.2            Noise Element: Implementing Policies                                    51
5.0    GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT                                                        52
5.1       PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY                                                         52
5.1.1            Purpose                                                                 52
5.1.2            Authority                                                               52
5.2       PUBLIC PARTICIPATION                                                          52
5.3       TRAFFIC SERVICE STANDARDS AND PROGRAMS                                        52
5.3.1            Introduction                                                            52
5.3.2            Standards and Related Policies                                          53
5.3.3            Implementing Policies and Programs: General (Required)                  55
5.3.4            Implementing Policies and Programs: Review of Development Applications  56
5.4       OTHER PERFORMANCE STANDARDS                                                   56
5.4.1            Introduction                                                            56
5.4.2            Performance Standards                                                   57
5.4.3            Implementation Policies and Program- for Capital Projects               57
Glossary of Terms                                                                        58
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                              ii
Table of Contents
LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES
Figure Number:                                  Reference Page:
1.    General Plan                                           4
2.    Downtown Inset                                         4
3.    Existing and Proposed Trails                           13
4.    Sites for Housing Development                          40
5.    Mineral Resources                                      45
6.    Earthquake Faults                                      48
7.    Landslide and Other Surficial Deposits                 48
8.    1985 Noise Contours                                    50
9.    2005 Noise Contours                                    50
Table Number:                                                                        Page:
3.1   Median Household Income, 1970 & 1980                                              18
3.2   Racial Distribution                                                               19
3.3   City of Orinda - Population Characteristics                                       19
3.4   City of Orinda - Household Characteristics,1980                                   20
3.5   Place of Work: Orinda Workers Age 16 and Older, 1980                              21
3.6   Workers Age 16 and Older by Occupation, Orinda, 1980                              22
3.7   Housing Units by Tenancy and Year Of Construction                                 23
3.8   Housing Units by Number of Bedrooms and Occupancy Status, 1980                    23
3.9   Remaining Undeveloped lots in Residential Subdivisions without Approved Building
      Permits: City of Orinda, September, 1990                                          24
3.10 Housing Affordability by Income Group, 1990
      Alameda/Contra Costa County Four-Person Households                                27
3.11 Existing, Projected and Adjusted Housing Needs: 1988 - 1995                        27
3.12 Orinda Housing Payments Compared to Ability to Pay, 1979                           29
3.13 Sites Available for Development of Housing                                         39
4.1   Summary of Noise Measurements                                                     50
5.1   Minimum Traffic Level of Service for Basic Route Signalized Intersections         54
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                              iii
Table of Contents
CITY OF ORINDA
City Council (1995)                                   Planning Commission (1995)
Mayor Joyce Hawkins                                   Chair Victor Ryerson
Mayor Pro-Tem Gregg Wheatland                         Vice-Chair Nathaniel Taylor
Laura Abrams                                          Jack Chapman
Sargent Littlehale                                    Jennifer Coon
Allan Tabor                                           Peter Golze
                                                      Pat Uebel
                                                      Ted Urban
General Plan Committee (1987)
Co-Chairperson Robert Mills
Co-Chairperson Lily Regelson
Brandt Andersson                      Beverly Hamilton                Anne Meyers
Marianne Aude                         Nora Harlow                     James N. Roethe
Daphne Bertero                        Joyce Hawkins                   George Boscoe
Joyce R. Helsel                       Michael R. Silvey               Mary Chatton Brown
Marvin Kaplan                         Jinx Tyler                      Eleanor R. Sleeper
Kristine L. Chase                     Susan Kaufman                   Jack L. Wander
William Dickie                        Franklin Lew                    Florence Weber
Dennis Geyer                          Cathy Merrill
Liaison to the General Plan Committee (1987)
Rosalie Block                         John Fazel                      Trudy Reader
Janet Boreta                          Linda Knebel                    John Wyro
Bob Corsiglia                         Sargent Littlehale
City Manager (1994): Tom Sinclair
Planning Director (1995): Irwin Kaplan
Blayney-Dyett, Urban and Regional Planners
John Blayney                          Nicklaus von Rotz
Janice Stern                          Nicholas Gravina
Ellen Greenberg
DKS Associates, Transportation Planners and Engineers
Brent Ogden
Charles M. Saltar Associates, Inc., Consultants in Acoustics
Richard Illingworth
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                              iv
Table of Contents
1.0     BACKGROUND                                 in perpetuity primarily for open space uses in
                                                   accordance with the policies contained herein.
The community of Orinda incorporated on July 1,
1985, after 100 years of gradual development.      Highway 24 and BART divide the downtown,
One of the primary reasons cited by many           leaving the Village on the north and the
Orindans for supporting incorporation was the      Crossroads on the south. With a stable
desire for local decision making. Land use         population, retail floor area has remained
planning and development application review by     constant during the last 15 years, but Orinda's
local citizens was thought to be of primary        prestige and convenience as an office location has
importance. This feeling stemmed from a widely     brought a doubling of office space. Now, little
accepted desire to preserve the quality of the     land remains for additional development.
natural and man-made living environment that       Defining and maintaining downtown's "village
has evolved in Orinda.             The timing of   character" has been a major issue. Oversize
incorporation was crucial due to the extreme       buildings, parking shortages, lack of trees, and
regional pressure for more intensive development   possible loss of the landmark Orinda Theatre are
and redevelopment of the area.                     specific concerns.
The City of Orinda's first general plan,           Residential growth in Contra Costa County,
therefore, serves as more than a planning          particularly in Moraga, has brought peak-hour
document but also as an embodiment of many of      congestion to Highway 24 and Moraga Way.
the community's values and goals. The General      BART removes freeway trips, but not Moraga
Plan is also considered to be the consensus        Way/Camino Pablo trips, and overflow parking
"blueprint" for the future development of the      is a problem.
community.
                                                   Orinda's previous General Plan was adopted by
                                                   the Contra Costa County Board of Supervisors in
1 . 1 DEVELOPMENT HISTORY OF
                                                   1973. Desire for full local control over
ORINDA
                                                   development decisions was a leading issue in the
In the 1920's Orinda was a rural community as a    successful 1985 election to incorporate Orinda.
natural product of its topography and              This Orinda General Plan is the first
inaccessibility. The fog barrier created by the    comprehensive statement of the community's
Berkeley Hills made it an attractive summer        aspirations for its future physical development.
destination. With completion of the Broadway
Low Level (Caldecott) Tunnel in 1937, Orinda
                                                   1.2    NATURE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
became the most accessible "country" environment
in the East Bay. Between 1940 and 1970, more       The General Plan provides a policy framework
than 60 percent of Orinda's 6,300 homes were       for development decisions. It has three functions:
built, some in tracts, but many as custom homes on
                                                   1.    To document agreement between the Orinda
hillside lots with minimal grading. Most of
                                                         Planning Commission and the Orinda City
residential Orinda is comfortably mature, with
                                                         Council concerning long-range development
trees dominating roads and buildings.
                                                         policies;
Today, Orinda (excluding the Gateway Valley)
                                                   2.    To provide a basis for judging whether
has room for only 10 to 15 percent more homes and
                                                         specific private development proposals and
about two-thirds of these are already approved
                                                         public projects are in harmony with the
or are expected to be built on existing lots. The
                                                         policies; and
sites remaining are among the most difficult to
develop in harmony with the existing               3.    To allow other public agencies and private
community. Gateway Valley at the west edge of            developers to design projects that are
the City south of State Route 24 will be preserved       consistent with City policies.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                        1
1.0 Background
                                                    the social, economic, and environmental
The Plan must be:
                                                    character of the City and its Planning Area.
Long-range: However imperfect our vision of the
future is, almost any development decision has      1 . 3 CITY BOUNDARY AND PLANNING
effects lasting more than 20 years. The General     AREA
Plan planning period is 1987 to 2007. In order to
create a useful context for development decisions,  State of California Planning, Zoning, and
the Plan must look at least that far ahead.         Development Laws (1985) (Gov. Code Section
                                                    65300) direct each jurisdiction to include "any
Comprehensive: The Plan must coordinate a l l       land outside its boundaries which, in the
major components of the community's physical        planning agency's judgment, bears relation to its
development. The relationship between land-use      planning." Consequently, the Orinda Planning
intensity and traffic is the most obvious example.  Area as determined by the Planning Commission
General: Because it           is long-range and     and City Council includes the Siesta Valley and
comprehensive, the Plan must be general. The        other public and privately held lands west of the
Plan's purpose is to serve as a framework for       City which are currently in open space.         In
public and private development.                     addition to the City (12.8 square miles), the
                                                    Planning Area includes 2.9 square miles of
Since the Plan is general in nature, the public     unincorporated area.
infrastructure improvements and guiding and
implementing policies will require extensive
                                                    1.4   PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
policy, planning, engineering, environmental,
traffic, geotechnical and economic analysis before  Community desire for direct involvement in
consideration may be given as to whether a          planning decisions was a primary reason for
policy, ordinance, capital project or other         Orinda's incorporation. A strong history of public
implementing task may be feasible. Financial        activity in community affairs continued through
resources will be required to be identified before  the General Plan process, which was led by a 27-
the public infrastructure and other guiding and     member volunteer General Plan Committee
implementing tasks may be determined to be          appointed by the City Council. Significant
feasible. These resources will consist primarily    assistance was provided by liaison members from
of developer construction, developer fees, federal, the Planning Commission, Public Works, Parks
state or local funding programs, and voter          and Recreation Commission, and the Orinda
approved taxes or assessments. To a minimal         Union School District, and representatives from
extent, City monies may be available for this       the Orinda Association and the Orinda Chamber
purpose. This plan shall not be construed to        of Commerce.
require the City to study, plan or construct a
                                                    The General Plan Committee worked as a
public infrastructure or improvement. Such action
                                                    complete body and in five subcommittees:
shall be dependent upon the future analysis to be
                                                    residential       development;         commercial
conducted on each project contained in the plan.
                                                    development; traffic and circulation; open space,
This plan shall not be construed to create any
                                                    conservation and public facilities; and Gateway
obligation or liability on the part of the City.
                                                    Valley. In addition, there was a special study
The Plan policies (maps and text) can be amended    project on private roads. The subcommittees
as often as four times each year (Gov. Code Sec.    provided City staff, consultants and the full
65358 [b]) and should be revised at least every     Committee with information and proposed
five years. Since they were recommended by the      policies on their topics. The Commercial
Planning Commission and adopted by the City         Development Committee achieved further public
Council, the text and Plan maps in the Plan         participation through a survey of downtown
Policies Report constitute a guide for the day-to-  business and property owners.
day physical development decisions that shape
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                        2
1.0 Background
A memorandum on planning issues, Working
Paper 1: Existing Conditions, Planning Issues and
Options, and Working Paper 2: Analysis of
Alternative Sketch Plans were available to the
General Plan Committee members and general
public. Throughout the process, the Plan was
shaped by public meetings, starting with
identification of planning issues and including a
series of meetings on specific topics during which
Committee members voted on Sketch Plan
components to be included in the Draft General
Plan.
Planning Commission and City Council study
sessions, Plan adoption hearings, and the
environmental       review     process    provided
opportunities for public comments on the Draft
General Plan.
1.5     REPORT ORGANIZATION
The Orinda General Plan consists of the text and
Plan maps in Volume I. City of Orinda General
Plan: Plan Policies. Volume II. City of Orinda
General Plan: Technical Supplement and
Environmental Impact Report (EIR), contains the
background information on the issues that
resulted in the Plan policies. Volume I is referred
to as the "Plan Policies Report" and Volume II as
the "Technical Supplement/EIR." State planning
law calls for seven General Plan elements: Land
Use, Circulation, Housing, Conservation, Open
Space, Noise, and Safety. The elements are
grouped in three General Plan sections in Volume
I as follows:
     Land Use and Circulation Section
       Land Use, Circulation, Open Space, Parks,
       Schools, and Utilities elements
     Housing Section
       Housing Policies; the full Housing Element
       is     included     in    the     Technical
       Supplement/EIR
     Environmental Resources Management Section
       Conservation, Safety, and Noise elements
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                         3
1.0 Background
2.0 LAND USE AND CIRCULATION
SECTION                                           The phrase which best describes existing
                                                  residential development and development
The three state-mandated elements included in     envisioned by the Plan is "semi-rural
this section, Land Use, Open Space, and           character," which is defined as consisting of
Circulation, set the physical form of the         the following characteristics:
community. The Plan map is the primary                 -   Major visible undeveloped ridgelines
statement of policy, and is supported and                  and hillsides;
explained by the text policies.
                                                       -   Most houses small in relation to their
The Land Use Element must include "standards               lots;
of population density and building intensity" so       -   Heavy tree cover and other vegetation
that circulation, public facilities and services           dominating most lots;
needs can be determined. Parks, Schools and
                                                       -   Limited grading and disturbance of
Utilities (not mandatory element topics) are
                                                           existing land contours;
combined with the Open Space Element so that
all large present or potential open spaces or          -   Undisturbed creeks and creek beds;
recreational facilities can be discussed under         -   Diversity of hours placement;
one heading.                                           -   Visible vacant land within          and
                                                           adjacent to residential areas;
The Circulation Element is designed to serve
the proposed landuse pattern, but in Orinda and        -   Winding streets with limited traffic;
other largely developed communities, the               -   Few sidewalks and street lights;
difficulty in adding circulation capacity is a         -   Protected open space to the north and
major determinant of the intensity of land use.            west of the City .
The General Plan map (Figures 1 and 2) applies         [Map: City of Orinda General Plan 1987-
the policies of this section showing the detail        2007]
necessary to carry out the Plan's intent. Thus,
specific boundaries are          designated   for      [Map: Downtown Inset]
downtown development, but the location of         For consistency with the scale and nature of
development in the Gateway Valley is              Orinda, the retail and office districts should
indicated conceptually.                           have characteristics that can be described as
                                                  " village character." This can be defined as a
2.1     LAND USE ELEMENT                          commercial area of relatively low density with
                                                  a predominance of small-scale, low-lying
Orinda is a nearly built-out residential
                                                  buildings of varying architectural styles
community with large undeveloped watershed
                                                  (generally not exceeding two stories) fronting on
lands north and west of the City, a compact
                                                  streets or landscaped, plaza-like spaces.
downtown on both sides of Highway 24, and
some development potential in the Gateway
                                                  LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
Valley. The Gateway Valley consists of two
major parcels totaling about 1,000 acres, with    Residential — Very Low-Density, Single-
development which retains a substantial           Family (5 to 10 acres per unit): Sites five acres
portion of the valley in open space. Thus,        or larger, or clustered units at a similar low
specific boundaries are          designated   for average density are appropriate in several
downtown development and for the Gateway          areas that are adjacent to EBMUD watershed
Valley in accordance with the policies            or East Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD)
contained herein and as shown on the General      land, or have limited road access. Septic tanks
Plan Map.                                         could be considered where sewers are not
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      4
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element

available and soil and drainage conditions are     preservation of natural resources, managed
appropriate.                                       production of resources (e.g., grazing land), and
                                                   public health and safety. Within subdivisions,
The Large-Lot Residential designation and the
                                                   designated permanent open space that is of
Environmental Preservation areas on the North
                                                   sufficient size to warrant differentiation from
Orinda Specific Plan are consistent with the
                                                   adjoining uses is mapped.
Very Low-Density category.
                                                   Utility: EBMUD and PG&E facilities and
Residential — Low-Density, Single-Family (1
                                                   lands are mapped where they are of sufficient
to 2 units per acre): This density predominates
                                                   size to warrant differentiation from adjoining
in Orinda.         The Plan requires future
                                                   uses. In addition to primary utility purposes,
subdivisions to meet the Low-Density standard.
                                                   watershed, open space, and public recreational
Development on steep sites will be at lower
                                                   uses are appropriate to this designation.
density as determined by slope-density
                                                   Cultural uses are also appropriate, but only in
regulations.
                                                   areas specifically designated as "P" on the
Residential — Multi-Family (6 to 10 units per      General Plan map.
acre): This includes attached condominium and
apartment housing units. Housing limited to        2 . 1 . 1 Land Use: Guiding Policies
senior occupancy at a base density exceeding 10
units per acre is consistent with the Plan if the  A. Maintain         the   semi-rural  character    of
impacts do not significantly exceed those                 Orinda.
common to nonrestricted occupancy units within     B. Maintain the dominance of wooded and
the prescribed density range.                             open ridges and hillsides.
Downtown — Business and Professional Offices:      C. In downtown Orinda new commercial
Types of offices to be permitted at specific zones        development shall be limited to providing
are to be determined by ordinance .                       goods and services for local use and other
Downtown — Community Business:                This        small specialty retail stores.
includes retail stores and services needed         D. In        downtown       Orinda,    new     office
frequently by residents, a very limited amount            development shall be limited to offices
of personal service offices, and small specialty          generally supporting local residents and
retail stores. Retail services are defined as             businesses.
businesses primarily serving the local needs.
Types of establishments to be permitted are to     E. Places of religious assembly and preschools
be determined by ordinance.                               are appropriately located in residential
                                                          areas if served by arterial or collector
Public and Semipublic:            This category           roads, subject to review of impacts.
designates uses other than parks owned by a
public agency or semipublic institution that are   F. Child-care facilities are appropriately
of sufficient size to warrant differentiation             located in residential areas if sufficient
from adjoining uses. These are labeled on the             space is available for outdoor activity, and
Plan map. Examples are public and private                 traffic, parking and noise are controlled.
schools.                                           G. Development density in northwest Orinda
Parks and Recreation: This includes existing              areas between developed sections and open
and proposed public parkland, and private                 space may be specifically limited due to
recreation facilities of sufficient size to               traffic considerations, sensitivity of t h e
warrant differentiation from adjoining uses.              watershed, and the desire for transition
                                                          densities.
Open Space:        This includes existing and
proposed open space that is to be used for
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                           5
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element

                                                         -   Street design to avoid wide, straight
2 . 1 . 2 Land Use: Implementing Policies
                                                             streets;
A. Revise zoning regulations and map to be               -   House placement in relation to
       consistent with General Plan policies.                ridgelines to avoid or minimize
B. Very Low-Density: Require sites         of five or        visibility around designated ridges and
       more acres or clustered units       with an           scenic hillsides through the adoption
       average density of five or more     acres per         of an appropriate        hillside   and
       unit for sites on sensitive         reservoir         ridgeline     ordinance   giving     due
       watershed or at a transition         between          consideration to such ordinances from
       residential and open space.                           adjoining cities;
C. Low-Density: Maintain regulations t h a t             -   Height of new houses and additions;
       permit one to two single-family dwelling          -   Solar orientation of new houses.
       units per net acre on flat land and require
       progressively lower density as slope           F. The North Orinda Specific Plan adopted in
       increases consistent with the previously          1978 by the Orinda Area Planning
       existing slope density formula. Exceptions        Commission shall remain in force. Any
       are areas designated for multi-family             amendment to the North Orinda Specific
       housing on the Plan map.                          Plan shall be consistent with the General
                                                         Plan.
D. Subdivision Approval Process: To attain
       the best design on the remaining difficult     G. Develop residential subdivision       design
       subdivision sites suitable for five or more       guidelines for future developments.
       housing units, the City may require t h e
                                                      H. No major subdivision in the El Toyonal area
       proposal to be a planned unit development
                                                         shall be developed prior to the completion
       that does not increase the number of units.
                                                         of an extension of El Toyonal Road to
       However, the inclusion of senior units at a
                                                         Camino Pablo or Wildcat Canyon Road.
       greater density may be considered subject to
                                                         The connection to Camino Pablo is
       environmental review. This may require
                                                         preferred. If the Camino Pablo connection is
       clustering of attached or detached units and
                                                         provided, then land in the El Toyonal area
       preservation of prominent site features such
                                                         located east of El Toyonal Road, contained
       as    open    hillsides   and     woodlands.
                                                         in or surrounded by the Sullivan and
       Clustering proposals are subject to the same
                                                         Johnson Ranches and designated "Low
       semi-rural standards as other development.
                                                         Density" residential, may not be zoned or
       The number of attached houses in a cluster
                                                         developed more intensively than 1 unit per
       shall not exceed four.
                                                         acre.
E. Residential Area Design and House siting:
                                                         If the extension of El Toyonal Road to
       Consider ordinances to maintain semi-rural
                                                         Camino Pablo cannot be developed, then
       character with respect to the following:
                                                         the permitted housing density in the area
       -   Regulating the relationship of house          defined above, located east of El Toyonal
           size in relation to lot size to maintain      Road shall be further limited. The extent
           low-density character;                        of such limitation shall be based upon the
                                                         degree of traffic mitigation on El Toyonal
       -   Removal of natural vegetation;
                                                         Road.
       -   Disturbance of existing groundforms;
                                                         If no route other than the existing El
       -   Disturbance of creek corridors;               Toyonal Road alignment to W i l d c a t
                                                         Canyon Road can be provided, then t h e
                                                         areas defined above, located east of El
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                        6
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
     Toyonal Road shall be re-designated "Very      Professional Offices and 4) Public and Semi-
     Low Density" residential with a density        Public areas (see Figure 2).
     range of 5 - 10 acres/unit.
                                                    The Community Business area should be
     The density in the El Toyonal area may be      predominantly retail. There is concern that
     further limited by the City slope density      vacant retail space has frequently been
     ordinance.                                     converted to office use. Although a limited
                                                    amount of offices that meet the needs of local
     Land in the El Toyonal area located west of
                                                    residents and businesses are acceptable, they
     El Toyonal Road and designated "Very Low
                                                    should not displace retail stores and service
     Density" residential may not be zoned or
                                                    space.
     developed more intensively than 10
     acres/unit.                                    The Community Business area includes the
                                                    block bounded by Moraga Way, Bryant Way,
I.   Consideration should be given to t h e
                                                    Camino Pablo and Brookwood Road, where the
     adoption of a density transfer ordinance.
                                                    Crossroads Project is located. In return for the
J.   Prior to development plan or tentative         developer's restoration of the Orinda Theatre,
     subdivision map application submittal for      a building of historic significance to the
     the 43-acre Southwood Valley parcel, an        community, this project, which was approved
     environmental constraints study shall be       prior to the adoption of this General Plan and
     completed by the City at the expense of the    is thus not subject to its constraints, will include
     owner and upon request of the owner. The       more office space and a greater floor area ratio
     study shall address the developmental          than would ordinarily be allowed in the
     potential of the valley based upon a           Community Business area. It is also recognized
     thorough analysis of soil and geologic         that this project does not conform to the height
     conditions, on and off site storm drainage,    limit and to the land use constraints contained
     traffic, vehicular access to the site, natural in this Plan applicable to the rest of the
     systems (including creeks, wildlife habitat,   Community Business area. The General Plan
     trees, and other vegetation, etc.), and other  prohibits similar non-conforming uses in other
     appropriate environmental constraints.         locations in the Community Business area.
     Depending upon the results of the study,
                                                    Business and Professional Office areas should
     the maximum permitted housing density for
                                                    also conform to the "village character" of the
     the ten (10) acre low density area may be
                                                    entire downtown area, and should provide
     adjusted downward from twenty (20) lots.
                                                    office suites suitable for office uses supporting
     The thirty-three (33) acres designated as
                                                    local community residents and businesses,
     open space for the site on Figure 1 does not
                                                    rather than regional offices.
     carry any residential density and shall not
     be developed with buildings. Prior to any      Both large retail commercial uses intended to
     future subdivision of the forty-three (43)     serve regional markets and large office
     acre parcel, an environmental impact report    complexes serving regional or statewide needs
     shall be completed by the City at t h e        are discouraged in the Community Business
     expense of the owner and upon request of the   area. Such uses would seriously alter the
     owner.                                         character of the downtown area and create
                                                    unmanageable problems for an area already
DOWNTOWN                                            beset with severe parking and circulation
                                                    problems.
The downtown area of Orinda is divided into
four distinct        areas:     1)   Multi-Family   With a stable trade area population and
Residential, 2) Community Business which is         limited space to grow (without adding large
predominantly retail,          3) Business and      buildings that intrude on residential areas)
                                                    both the Village and the Crossroads must rely
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                           7
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
on more efficient traffic circulation and parking           Management contract is made with t h e
as well as design improvements to attract                   City.
increased business and a variety of retail shops.
                                                     2 . 1 . 4 Downtown: Implementing Policies
2 . 1 . 3 Downtown: Guiding Policies
                                                     A. Enhance architectural compatibility in
A. Enhance the "village character" of                       each sector of downtown by establishing
       downtown. Large, highly visible parking              design districts that provide guidelines and
       lots characteristic of strip shopping centers        a review process for site layouts,
       are inconsistent with village character.             architectural               design,   alterations,
                                                            landscaping, and signs. Sloping roofs are
B. Favor retail services needed frequently by
                                                            encouraged on new buildings in districts
       residents by limiting the amount of office
                                                            where such features are common.
       space in predominantly retail areas. Office
       space in retail areas should serve            B. Require planting and maintenance of trees
       Lamorinda uses and generally not exceed              and other plant material throughout
       retail space on any one lot.                         downtown, according to a comprehensive
                                                            landscape plan.
C. Limit development at the Orinda BART
       station to ground level and underground       C. Enact regulations that will ensure small-
       parking. Encourage BART to develop                   scale low-lying buildings by limiting
       additional ground level parking on off-site          height to 35 feet (generally not more than
       properties.                                          two stories) and total floor area to a
                                                            limited percent of lot area.
D. Maintain current boundaries between
       commercial and residential areas as           D. Enact regulations that will ensure retail or
       indicated on the Downtown Inset General              specified service occupancy of space within
       Plan map. The Plan does not envision any             the retail shopping area now occupied by
       expansion of the land area designated for            those uses, by all new ground-floor space,
       commercial or office use.                            and by all office uses which convert to
                                                            retail.
E. Make downtown shopping more attractive
       by diverting through traffic off local        E. Enact regulations that will ensure that the
       streets in the business district, providing          central business area will be predominantly
       more convenient circulation for shopping             retail and which permit only a limited
       traffic, managing the parking supply more            amount of offices that favor local use
       efficiently, creating safe and pleasant              needs.
       pedestrian routes, and developing and
                                                     F. Develop a               beautification     plan    for
       maintaining sufficient landscaping.
                                                            downtown to enhance the visual quality of
F. Businesses that generate heavy traffic such              the streetscape and creek area, including
       as financial institutions should front               guidelines for public improvements such as
       arterial streets. Small buildings should             landscaping, tree grate design, outdoor
       buffer adjoining residential areas.                  lighting, tree planting, and street furniture.
G. Develop a parking time limitation                 G. Public parking structures are a permitted
       ordinance which encourages retail and                land use in the downtown provided t h a t
       commercial customers to use the Downtown             they are adequately screened from public
       areas.                                               view.
H. Site proximity to the BART terminal               H. Regulate on-street parking to maintain
       should not be used to justify a reduction in         space a v a i l a b i l i t y for shoppers, and
       the standard requirement(s) for onsite               continue to study means of adding to t h e
       parking, unless a Transportation System              parking supply.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                                 8
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
                                                   Gateway Interchange on Highway 24 was built
I.   Study possible extension of Orinda W a y
                                                   when Caltrans proposed a freeway extending
     under Highway 24 to link with Moraga
                                                   south to connect with an east-west freeway in
     Way for the purpose of reconnecting local
                                                   Moraga. Both routes have been deleted from
     vehicular and pedestrian traffic between
                                                   the State's plan, but some state-owned right-
     Crossroads and Village areas.
                                                   of-way remains adjoining South Orinda.
Village Area Development
                                                   2 . 1 . 5 Gateway Valley: Guiding Policies
J.   In cooperation with the merchants and
     property owners, develop a plan for Orinda    A. The General Plan provides only a broad
     Way that will consolidate driveways,                 outline of Orinda's aspirations for t h e
     include a landscaped street median i f               Gateway Valley. The use designations
     feasible, and enrich the street's landscape          indicate the types of uses that are desired,
     character.                                           but available information on site conditions
                                                          allows only a range of density and intensity
K. Encourage property owners to make more                 to be stated.
     intensive use of the San Pablo Creek sides
     of their buildings by designating a"private   B. Development shall occur only if it meets
     street" with public access parallel to t h e         the following conditions:
     creek that would provide an alternative              1.  Development shall meet high quality
     connection for shoppers who must now turn                standards and be consistent with t h e
     on and off Orinda Way and/or enhance and                 semi-rural and village character of
     preserve     San     Pablo     Creek    with             Orinda.
     landscaping,      pathways      and    other
     pedestrian amenities, consistent with its            2.  Development must not impose a fiscal
     primary purpose as flood control.                        burden on Orinda and should y i e l d
                                                              revenues exceeding public capital and
L. Seek to obtain right-of-way and provide a                  service costs.
     public cross street connecting Orinda W a y
                                                          3.  Development shall be consistent w i t h
     and Camino Pablo between Black's and
                                                              and significantly assist        in t h e
     Vintage House.
                                                              improvement       of    the    Gateway
Crossroads Area Development                                   Boulevard interchange, as appropriate.
M. Study       traffic    improvement     projects C. (1) The following uses are permitted in
     indicated on the Downtown Inset General              conjunction with a Planned Development
     Plan map as priority study items.                    application for the Gateway Valley:
N. Improve the intersection of Camino Pablo               -   A maximum of 225 detached single-
     and Moraga Way.                                          family residential units, at a range of
                                                              densities not to exceed 4 dwelling units
O. Develop a master plan for               traffic            per acre, generally located within the
     circulation in the Crossroads area.                      area identified as sub-areas "A" and
     P. Pursue formation         of   a   parking             "B" on the Land Use Plan, which is
         assessment district.                                 north of the boundary line of the ridge
                                                              that has been referred to as t h e
                                                              Zuckerman Saddle and which marks
                                                              the approximate boundary of t h e
GATEWAY VALLEY                                                northern     2/3     of   the    valley.
This narrow valley, separated from the                        Alternatively,              multi-family
developed community by 300 foot-high hills, is                residential units may be developed in
Orinda's last major undeveloped area. The                     the Planning Area, provided that such
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                         9
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
         units qualify as "affordable", are t h e
                                                   (2) In addition, the following         policies
         subject of a Planned Development and
                                                       shall limit development:
         appropriate environmental review, and
         are located in sub-area "A" on the Land   -   Development, including significant
         Use Plan north of the area that h a s         grading, is generally prohibited on the
         been referred to as the Daly Saddle and       steeper slopes and ridges. Consistent
         which      marks      the   approximate       with maintaining the            semi-rural
         boundary of the northern 1/3 of t h e         character of Orinda, grading is
         valley, and do not result in more than        appropriate to allow development
         225 residential units.                        consistent with the goals and objectives
                                                       of this Plan, and to stabilize existing
         If, pursuant to the Development
                                                       geotechnical problems provided t h a t
         Agreement with Pacific New W a v e ,
                                                       grading results in a natural character
         the playfields are relocated to the East
                                                       which is consistent with the character
         Bay Municipal Utility District Lands,
                                                       of the undeveloped portions of t h e
         the City shall process an application to
                                                       Gateway Valley and the surrounding
         construct 20 additional residential units
                                                       hills.
         north of the existing transmission lines
         on the site of the playfields, according  -   No structural improvements, other than
         to the provisions and standards of the        structures ancillary to the recreational
         Development Agreement, and as shown           facilities, such as a small golf turnpoint
         on the Land Use Plan contained in the         facility, may be allowed in sub-area
         Development Agreement.                        "C" on the Land Use Plan, south of the
                                                       area referred to as the Zuckerman
         In the event that substantially all the
                                                       Saddle in the approximate southern
         property in the Planning Area is not
                                                       1/3 of the Gateway Valley.
         developed under a single Planned
         Development application, area may be      (3) The East Bay Municipal Utility
         developed for single family residential       District Land may be the subject of a
         use at a density which shall not exceed       separate development plan if and when
         one unit per five acres.                      such property is not to be used for
                                                       utility purposes. At such time, uses on
     -   An 18-hole golf course which may
                                                       this property shall be limited to
         include supporting facilities such as a
                                                       recreation, open space, "affordable"
         golf practice range, golf learning
                                                       multi-family housing or other uses as
         academy, golf turnpoint facility, and
                                                       may be approved by the City, subject to
         golf maintenance facilities.
                                                       approval of a plan for the site, and
     -    A golf clubhouse, which may include          appropriate environmental review.
         supporting facilities such as tennis
                                                   (4) To the extent appropriate or possible,
         courts, swimming pool, dining facilities
                                                       the following uses are desirable and/or
         and exercise rooms, located in t h e
                                                       may be required in any plan for
         vicinity of the Daly Saddle.
                                                       development of the Gateway Valley:
     -    Convenience commercial uses, but only
                                                   -   Playfields, which may include such
         to the extent that such uses primarily
                                                       facilities as soccer fields, baseball
         serving the residents of the valley.
                                                       diamonds, tot lots, restrooms and
     -    Improvement of the former quarry site        supportive parking areas.
         to meet safety and aesthetic objectives
                                                   -   Parks, such as may be located in t h e
         with cosmetic grading and planting.
                                                       vicinity of the terminus of Brookside
                                                       Road, which         may include such
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                   10
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
         facilities as a tot lot, restrooms, picnic space within the City by regulating the
         facilities and parking area.               location and intensity of new development.
                                                    Existing public open space for outdoor recreation
     -    School, on a portion of the Playfields
                                                    is far short of meeting needs or standards. The
         site in the Daly Saddle area for
                                                    Plan recommends development of additional
         approximately 300 K-5 students i f
                                                    parks to provide both playing fields and quiet
         necessary to accommodate additional
                                                    park areas.
         students from Gateway Valley.
                                                    The City's greatest recreational need is to
     -    Passive open space uses in the upslope
                                                    retain existing playing fields. The next highest
         areas such as above Brookside Road or
                                                    priority is to acquire a park in South Orinda.
         the Quarry site, which may include
         such facilities as trails, picnic and
                                                    2 . 2 . 1 Open Space and Parks: Guiding
         view sites.                                Policies
     -   Trails which       connect Orinda     and
                                                    A. Support preservation of EBMUD watershed
         EBRPD lands         for pedestrian    and
                                                           lands.
         equestrian use.
                                                    B. Because of the unstable soil conditions,
     -    Bicycle paths and landscaping along
                                                           retain large parcels near the edges of the
         public roads.
                                                           community as open space for parks, trails,
     -    Emergency Vehicle Access (EVA) roads             the managed production of resources
         connecting to areas outside t h e                 consisting primarily of livestock grazing,
         Gateway Valley to the east and south,             boarding,       and      equestrian-oriented
         such as to Brookside Road and                     residential development at Very Low-
         Edgewood Road, as well as EVA's as                Density, and the public infrastructures
         necessary to ensure safe emergency                required to support those uses.
         vehicular access between d e v e l o p e d
                                                    C. Retain steep or unstable slopes as open
         areas of Gateway Valley.
                                                           space.
D. Because of the terrain and unstable soil
                                                    D. Retain creeks and wildlife access corridors
     conditions, development will be a l l o w e d
                                                           as open space for preservation of natural
     only in a small part of the total land area.
                                                           resources, consistent with flood control.
2.2     OPEN SPACE, PARKS,                          E. Retain existing private              and public
SCHOOLS AND UTILITIES ELEMENT                              recreational open space, and acquire
                                                           additional     land    for     public     park
State planning law calls for policies for                  development to meet the needs of all sectors
preserving and managing four categories of                 of Orinda and all age groups in t h e
open-space lands:                                          community. A minimum of five acres of
     (1) Open space for the preservation of                land for each 1,000 city residents should be
         natural resources;                                devoted to public park and recreational
     (2) Open space for the managed production             purposes but more may be needed.
         of resources;
     (3) Open space for outdoor recreation;         F. Use present school sites as recreation areas
     (4) Open space for public health and                  where feasible.
         safety.                                    G. Preserve a nature study area at Wagner
Orinda's inspiring open-space setting is created           Ranch School.
by rugged topography and the adjoining              H. The Orinda Community Center is an
EBMUD watershed and EBRPD lands. General                   important recreational, educational and
Plan policies are intended to preserve open                public facility for this community and
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                           11
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
       before any major expansion or change in use
                                                         2) Trail - an unpaved strip, possibly with
       is permitted at such facility, full public
                                                             resilient surfacing, maintained in
       hearings for land use permits shall be held
                                                             graded and clear condition, designed for
       with the understanding that recreation and
                                                             pedestrian use. In undeveloped areas,
       education are the primary uses.
                                                             trails may also be used for equestrian
                                                             purposes and in developed areas, for
2 . 2 . 2 Open Space and Parks Implementing
           Policies                                          uses subject to limitations established
                                                             by ordinance. Trails may also be
A. Undertake a use-based analysis of park and                accessible to emergency fire fighting
       recreational needs taking into account t h e          apparatus.
       proposed sites on Table 2-8 of Volume 2.
                                                         3) Bicycle Lane - a lane on a roadway
       Following completion of the analysis, the
                                                             adjacent     to  the    traveled    way
       various uses should be correlated w i t h
                                                             designated by pavement markings and
       existing and potential sites and prioritized.
                                                             signs for the principal use of bicycle
B. Pursue a program of parkland acquisition                  traffic, with emergency parking of
       based on site cost, site availability, and            vehicles only.
       potential use.
                                                         4) Bicycle Route - a -route designated by
C. Seek to acquire playing fields at Pine Grove              appropriate signing (no pavement
       and Wagner Ranch schools if either or both            markings) for bicycle traffic.
       sites are declared surplus by the Orinda
                                                         5) Trail Corridor - a general route for a
       Union School District. Consideration w i l l
                                                             trail, the location of which shall be
       be given to the transfer of playfields to
                                                             determined by further study.
       other acceptable sites.
                                                      G. Where paths are shown along various
D. Set dedication and in-lieu fees required as a
                                                         roadways, they should provide for bicycle
       condition of tentative subdivision map
                                                         use if feasible. Until full development of
       approval by ordinance to enable acquisition
                                                         these paths is accomplished, bicycle lanes
       of needed parkland.
                                                         should be implemented.           Until  the
E. Develop ordinance that includes criteria to           designation of bicycle lanes becomes
       be applied in determining compliance with         feasible, these routes may be designated as
       open-space policies as conditions of              bicycle routes.
       approval of new projects.
                                                      H. Hacienda      Homes    trails    should   be
F. Through the use of public and private                 developed where possible.
       funds, acquire and develop trails, paths,
                                                      I. All roads in the downtown area (see Figure
       and bicycle facilities for safety and
                                                         2) shall have paths (sidewalks) on one or
       recreational purposes. Figure 3 shows t h e
                                                         both sides.
       location of existing and proposed routes.
       The various facilities shown thereon are       J. A pedestrian-only path should be provided
       defined as follows:                               along the creek easterly of Camino Pablo
                                                         that is separated from the "private street"
       1) Path - a paved strip, designed for
                                                         proposed for that area where feasible.
            pedestrian use, and, if feasible, bicycle
            use. Preferably, paths should be          K. Encourage community groups and adjacent
            separated from the traveled way of a         property owners to support, study and
            roadway, but may by adjacent to t h e        finance the construction of paths, walks or
            roadway if protected by a berm or other      sidewalks along Miner Road, Lombardy
            device from vehicular traffic.               Lane and Sleepy Hollow Lane from Casino
                                                         Pablo to Sleepy Hollow School.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      12
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
L. Establish a priority list for developing
       trails, and pedestrian and bicycle paths as    2.3       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
       shown on Figure 3.
                                                      All trips (except BART) through Orinda and
                                                      most trips within Orinda use the Highway 24
SCHOOLS                                               freeway (120,000 average daily traffic [ADT]
                                                      and Camino Pablo/Moraga Way (23,000 ADT).
2 . 2 . 3 Schools: Guiding Policies                   Half the traffic on Moraga Way and 85 percent
A. Designate existing public school sites for         of the traffic on Camino Pablo north of
       school use.                                    Highway 24 originates outside Orinda. Two
                                                      intersections are severely congested now:
B. In the event of public school site disposition     Camino Pablo/Brookwood (a.m. and p.m.) and
       and change of use, require a General Plan      Moraga Way/Glorietta (p.m.).
       amendment for each site.
                                                      Narrow           roads      serving       residential
                                                      neighborhoods         contribute    to     semi-rural
[Figure 3: EXISTING AND PROPOSED                      character. They do not provide adequate
TRAILS]                                               service for significant additional residential
       It is a guiding policy to maintain continuing  development.
       viability of our school system and a high      Downtown parking is inadequate in the
       quality school system for the community        Crossroads and barely adequate in the Village.
       and, therefore, due consideration shall be     Difficult traffic circulation within and around
       given to reasonable uses for school sites      both areas must be improved if downtown is to
       which accomplish such policies. Since          achieve its potential. Downtown circulation
       these     sites   are     public   properties, and parking policies are identified in Sections
       consideration shall be given to methods and    2.1.3 and 2.1.4.
       means of retaining a public interest in these
       properties.                                    2 . 3 . 1 Circulation: Guiding Policies
UTILITIES                                             A. Permit new development only when
                                                             adequate transportation systems and
Electrical power and water supply utilities are              parking are provided.
major land users and have significant visual
effects on the Orinda Planning Area.                  B. Design roadways to compliment semi-rural
                                                             character following natural contours, and
2 . 2 . 4 Utilities: Guiding Policies                        maintaining natural topography and
                                                             vegetation close to road edges, where such
A. Work with PG&E to prepare and                             can be done without compromising safety.
       implement a long-term program for reducing
                                                      C. Strive to retain the existing peak hour
       the impact of power transmission towers
                                                             level of service (LOS) of "C" or better a t
       and distribution poles           on Orinda's
                                                             those intersections where it now prevails
       landscape.
                                                             and improve the LOS at all other
B. Seek cooperation of PG&E and EBMUD in                     intersections.
       managing landholdings to            maximize
                                                      D. Develop plans to efficiently manage t h e
       community        benefit       and     visual
                                                             existing inventory of parking spaces in and
       attractiveness, consistent with utility
                                                             adjacent to the business district.
       needs.
                                                      E. Expand pedestrian and bicycle paths to
                                                             provide a safe alternative to auto use,
                                                             particularly to provide safe paths near
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                            13
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
       schools and in other locations where they
                                                        F. Reconnect Ed Toyonal Road as an
       are heavily used for circulation.
                                                           additional access to serve the upper E1
F. Make traffic control decisions to benefit               Toyonal area. First priority, however,
       local and discourage through traffic.               consistent with Land Use Policy (2.1.2(H))
                                                           is the connection of E1 Toyonal along a
G. It is the goal of the City of Orinda to
                                                           direct route to Camino Pablo. The
       preserve and retain, in the most natural
                                                           cooperation of property owners and t h e
       condition    possible,     scenic     vehicular
                                                           commitment of funds by Contra Costa
       entryways, routes and corridors in t h e
                                                           County for this connection should be
       community.
                                                           actively pursued by the City. A traffic
H. Establish routes for through traffic which              impact fee ordinance pertaining to all new
       minimize impacts on Orinda residents and            development of property served by Ed
       downtown shopping areas.                            Toyonal or its tributaries should be enacted
I.     Sidewalks, street lights, curbs and gutters         by the City. Funds should be used for re-
       and parking areas, when constructed in the          establishing vehicular access to the north
       public right-of-way, are the adjacent               end of Ed Toyonal Road. If no major
       property     owner's      responsibility     for    subdivisions occur, then the funds should be
       construction, maintenance and replacement.          directed to reconnecting, improving and
                                                           maintaining Ed Toyonal Road.
2 . 3 . 2 Circulation: Implementing Policies            G. Voluntary dedication of private        streets
                                                           will be considered for acceptance     by t h e
A. Consider            requiring        transportation
                                                           City on a case-bycase basis when       streets
       management system measures that may
                                                           and drainage systems are improved     to City
       include carpooling, vanpooling, shuttle
                                                           standards and present no expense       to t h e
       buses or staggered work hours to reduce
                                                           City upon dedication.
       traffic impacts where appropriate.
                                                        H. Adopt standards for pavement width and
B. Establish         a      transportation      system
                                                           other design features of roads in residential
       improvement fee to be paid as a condition of
                                                           areas that are consistent with the semi-
       approval of all development projects based
                                                           rural character of Orinda, utilizing
       on travel and parking demand generated by
                                                           progressively higher standards consistent
       the project and its location.
                                                           with intensity of use and public safety.
C. Discourage           new      intersections     and     Street lighting should not normally be
       driveways on arterial roads where access            required except where necessary for safety
       can be provided from another street or by           purposes.
       combining driveways.
                                                        I. Adopt     standards    for   roadways       in
D. Widen the eastbound Highway 24 off-ramp                 commercial, office and multi-family areas
       at Brookwood Road to four lanes.                    that are consistent with traffic and onsite
                                                           parking demand, and generally include
E. Improve Camino Pablo as A two-lane
                                                           curb, gutter, sidewalks and street lighting.
       arterial between Bear Creek and Miner
       Road by realigning where necessary to            J. Adopt new private road standards w h i c h
       enhance traffic flow and safety, signalizing        would be the same as those for new public
       appropriate       intersections,     separating     roads.
       vehicular     and       pedestrian      traffic,
                                                        K. Develop on-site parking standards for
       improving intersections with left turn lanes
                                                           single-family zoning districts w h i c h
       where feasible, and by coordinating a
                                                           require 1) a minimum of 4 onsite parking
       limitation on truck use based upon load size
                                                           spaces, and 2) a percentage of covered
       with the County.
                                                           parking. Also consider standards providing
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                          14
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
     for shared parking in the multi-tenant           natural environment to be maintained as
     commercial developments.                         the dominant visual element.
L. Develop traffic control measures             to T. Because Highway 24 is a freeway t h a t
     discourage freeway bypass traffic          on    bisects    Orinda,     it   merits     special
     Orinda roads.                                    consideration to maintain its integrity as a
                                                      California Scenic Highway as it passes
M. Do not make roadway improvements at the
                                                      through Orinda.
     expense of established          bicycle and
     pedestrian paths, except where in t h e       U. Further study should be given to t h e
     interest of public safety.                       vehicular access route through Dalewood
                                                      Drive and Sundown Terrace to H a p p y
N. Support bus transit, vanpools and carpool
                                                      Valley Road. Two primary options should
     service to reduce peak-hour traffic volumes.
                                                      be considered, including:
O. Although analysis of General Plan buildout
                                                      1) Maintenance of the existing Dalewood
     traffic conditions indicates it is unlikely,
                                                          Drive and Sundown Terrace street
     the one-hour CO, NOx and SOx standards
                                                          alignments; and
     could be exceeded as a result of gridlock on
     City streets. The City shall assess t h e        2) Extension of Dalewood Drive to
     potential for this condition and institute           Sundown Terrace through Dalewood
     appropriate traffic control and land-use             Park with a public street connection and
     control measures to avoid its occurrence.            a dead-end cul-de-sac at the end of
                                                          Sundown Terrace near Happy V a l l e y
P. The following routes are designated Scenic
                                                          Road.
     Corridors on the General Plan:
                                                   V. Develop an ordinance for regulating heavy
     1.  Moraga Way from its intersection with
                                                      truck traffic and for designating truck routes
         Camino Pablo south to the City limits;
                                                      with Camino Pablo given first priority for
     2.  Camino Pablo from its intersection with      such regulation.
         Santa Maria Way north to the City
         limits;
     3.  Highway       24, designated       as   a
         California Scenic Highway          within
         Orinda City limits.
Q. Special care shall be taken to provide a
     welllandscaped and open feeling along
     Scenic Corridors, especially at the entrance
     to the City, utilizing such techniques as
     generous landscaped setbacks and open-
     space acquisition, where appropriate.
R. Any proposed development or subdivision
     along a Scenic Corridor or Scenic Highway
     shall be designed to blend with and permit
     the natural environment to be maintained
     as the dominant visual element. It shall not
     lessen the scenic value of existing visual
     elements.
S. Where structures are permitted, they shall
     be designed to blend with and permit the
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                     15
2.0 Land Use and Circulation Element
                                   (1)
3.0 HOUSING ELEMENT                              development is acceptable, but would require a
                                                 General Plan Amendment. An application for a
                                                 Specific Plan for Gateway Valley has been
3.1       INTRODUCTION                           submitted.
3 . 1 . 1 Housing Issues                         High land costs and home values, as well as
                                                 significant geologic and topographic constraints
The Updated Housing Element of the Orinda        on many sites, make construction of affordable
General Plan incorporates changes which have     units particularly difficult in Orinda. Most
occurred since the City's first Housing Element  available building sites are priced in excess of
was adopted on May 20, 1987. In compliance       $300,000. The high cost of land is a result of the
with California state law, and reflecting the    high degree of natural beauty, the established
regional housing needs determinations of the     prestige of the community as an area of very
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG),      high-value homes, the relatively close access
a review and revision of housing information     to regional employment centers, the convenience
for Orinda has been prepared and included in     of the regional rapid transit system, the
this report. This report also enables the state  scarcity of available sites, and the high cost of
Department of Housing and Community              overcoming the geotechnical limitations on
Development to complete its review as required   construction. The soil conditions have been
by state law (Government Code Section 65585).    documented in the Technical Supplement to the
This document incorporates current figures on    General      Plan,    which      includes     the
the projected regional share of housing needs    Environmental Impact Report. The City of
that has been assigned to Orinda to be met in    Orinda consists of hills and valleys with
the five-year period 1990-1995. Because 1990     narrow, winding roads. Most of the level,
U.S. Census data are not currently available,    geologically stable sites for development have
the tables containing 1980 Census data have not  already been developed.              The    steep
been changed.                                    topography, soil instability and vulnerability
General Plan decisions relating to housing were  of the remaining sites to seismic occurrences
focused on methods of retaining Orinda's semi-   generally preclude high density development.
rural character while meeting the requirements   These remaining residential sites will have
of state law regarding providing housing for all high site preparation costs associated with
segments of the community. The major issues      them because of these factors.
considered in selecting alternatives for         Orinda is a suburban bedroom community with a
development sites were compatibility with        limited sales tax base. Income primarily comes
existing development, retention of open space,   from property taxes and subventions from the
impact on traffic capacity, and potential for    State of California. These constraints on its
multi-family dwellings.                          resources will severely limit Orinda's ability
Because only 6 percent of all housing units in   to assist financially in the development of
Orinda are multi-family units, the question of   affordable housing.
additional attached-unit construction (other     Without subsidies, the multiple family units
than single-family homes with yards on a l l     will likely be the least expensive units to be
sides) received considerable attention during    added in the Planning Area. However, if
the planning process. One site, behind the       Orindawoods (a clustered subdivision including
Santa Maria Church, is designated on the Plan    both attached and detached units) is used as a
for multi-family housing. Two others, Pine       model, all units added would probably be
Grove School and Gateway Valley, are             affordable only to above-moderate-income
identified as areas where multiple family        households. To ensure that some lower-cost
                                                 units are provided, the Plan incorporates
(1)
    Updated June 25, 1991 (Resolution No. 26-91) additional opportunities and incentives for
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                    16
3.0 Housing Element
increasing the supply of multiple family            and constraints to the production of housing, are
housing affordable to households with incomes       addressed in Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5,
from 50 to 120 percent of median. Additional        respectively, including analysis of data and
incentives are provided for developers of a l l     statements of goals, programs and objectives.
types of units to include additional affordable     Section 3 includes a summary of housing goals
units within their projects. Methods for adding     and programs, and identifies responsible
affordable senior housing, small single-family      agencies and required City actions for the
homes, and second units are detailed in this        achievement       of    the   housing   program
Updated Housing Element.                            established in this Updated Housing Element.
3 . 1 . 2 State Requirements and                    3 . 1 . 3 Public Participation and Plan
Organization                                        Consistency
Government Code Sections 65580 through 65589        The Housing Element Update was prepared
set forth requirements relating to the              pursuant to review comments received from the
preparation and content of Housing Elements.        state Department of Housing and Community
By law, the Housing Element must contain:           Development.         It updates and modifies
                                                    descriptions of programs and quantified
1) An assessment of housing needs and an
                                                    objectives according to changes that have
       inventory of resources and constraints
                                                    occurred since the original element was adopted
       relevant to the meeting of these needs;
                                                    in 1987.
2) A statement of the community's goals,
                                                    The City made a major effort to achieve
       quantified objectives, and policies relative
                                                    participation of all economic segments of the
       to the maintenance, improvement, and
                                                    community in the development of the Housing
       development of housing; and
                                                    Element Update. The Update was subject to a
3) A program that sets forth a five-year            joint study session before the Planning
       schedule of actions the local government is  Commission and City Council, and subsequent
       undertaking or intends to undertake to       hearings of the two bodies which were all open
       implement the policies and achieve the       to the public. Notification of these meetings
       goals and objectives of the Housing          and hearings was provided in a local
       Element.                                     newspaper. Also, special notices were provided
The housing program must: identify adequate         to residents of Orinda Senior Village, second
sites available for residential development for     unit owners, and the Santa Maria Church. A
a variety of types of housing for all income        general notification process was also carried out
levels; assist in the development of adequate       for the state-mandated environmental review
housing to meet the needs of low- and               document, in which citizens and other public
moderate-income          households;        address agencies had the opportunity to comment.
governmental constraints to the maintenance,
improvement, and development of housing;            3.2       SETTING: POPULATION AND
conserve and improve the condition of the                     HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS
existing affordable housing stock; and promote
housing opportunities for all persons. The          3 . 2 . 1 Population and Household
                                                    Characteristics
Table of Contents includes an index to state-
required Housing Element components.
                                                    In 1980 the boundary of what is now the City of
This Housing Element organizes the state-           Orindal included 16,825 persons and 6,001
mandated material into four main sections. The      housing units, according to U.S. Census figures.
inventory of housing resources is included in       The City has increased its housing units to 6,468
Section 3.2.3. Housing need, land inventory,        and has grown to a population in January 1990
                                                    of 17,751, according to the state Department of
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      17
3.0 Housing Element
Finance. This reflects a very slow annual              the county and almost double that of the nine-
growth rate (about one-half of one percent),           county Bay Region. (2 pg 43) The Association of
compared to the majority of Bay Area cities.           Bay Area Governments (ABAG) has estimated
Development in accord with the General Plan            that the Orinda 1990 mean household income is
Updated Housing Element will result in about           $91,300 in its Projections '90 report, while
7,429 dwelling units and 18,127 residents at full      equivalent figures for Contra Costa County and
buildout projected to occur by 2005, an 8 percent      the Bay Area are estimated at $49,600 and
increase over the 1980 population. Population is       $46,200, respectively. This represents a
projected to be 2.44 persons per household in          widening of the gap between Orinda household
2005. (1 pg 43)                                        incomes and the County and Bay Area incomes.
Since the final 1990 U.S. Census figures were not      Orinda's population is 95 percent white, with
available at the time of the 1990 Housing              the largest ethnic minority group being Asian,
Element update, earlier projections from other         at about 3.4 percent of the total, as shown in
sources, i.e., State Department of Finance, were       Table 3.2.    The population and household
relied upon. In this regard, it is important to        characteristics of Orinda are shown in Tables
note that 1990 U.S. Census data indicate that          3.3 and 3.4, respectively. Household size is
the total population in Orinda as of April 1,          relatively small, and the average age of
1991, is 16,642.                                       residents is comparatively old, reflecting the
                                                       fact many children born in Orinda have left the
Orinda's population is relatively affluent and
                                                       parental home. Turnover is low, and housing
ethnically homogeneous compared to Contra
                                                       additions have been averaging about one
Costa County and the wider Bay Region. As
                                                       percent per year since 1980.
shown in Table 3.1, the median household
income in 1980 in Orinda was over 170 percent of
  TABLE 3.1
  MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME, 1970 & 1980
                             1970a           1980     Average Annual
                                                           Increase
  Orinda                     $21,473b       $39,912          6.4%
  Contra Costa County         $10,992       $22,875          7.6%
  Bay Region                   $9,021       $20,607          8.6%
  a
     Median Income of “Families and Unrelated Individuals
  b
     Orinda Village only. Figures for South Orinda not available.
  Source: U.S. Census, 1970 and 1980
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                       18
3.0 Housing Element

TABLE 3.2
RACIAL DISTRIBUTION, 1980
Racial                                  Orinda             Contra Costa County          Bay Region
Group                           Number      Percent     Number         Percent      Number       Percent
White                            15,988         95.0       534,628         81.5     3,895,810         75.2
Black                                 99          0.6       60,172          9.2       467,016          9.0
American Indian a                     31          0.2        3,890          0.6        32,842          0.6
Asianb                              574           3.4       29,534          4.5       431,082          8.3
Other c                             133           0.8       28,156          4.3       353,034          6.8
Total                            16,825        100.0       656,380        100.0     5,179,784        100.0
                           d
Persons of Spanish Origin           323           1.9       55,820          8.5       632,542         12.2
a                                                       d
     Includes Eskimo and Aleut.                              Hispanics are counted as an ethnic, rather
b
     Includes Japanese, Chinese, Filipino, Korean            than a racial group, and included in the
     Asian-Indian, and Vietnamese                            various racial groups and in the total.
     c
          Includes Hawaiian, Guamanian, Samoan.         Source: U.S. Census, 1980.
TABLE 3.3
CITY OF ORINDA -- POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                                       Total             Percenta
Population, 1985b                                         16,984
Population, 1980                                          16,825
Households, 1980                                           5,871
Persons in Group Quarters                                     40
Age Characteristics, 1980
    Persons under 18                                       4,302             25.6
    Persons 18 to 61                                      10,585             62.9
    Persons 62 and older                                   1,938             11.5
Distribution of location of residence in 1975
persons older than 5 years
     Same house                                           10,517             62.5
     Different house, same county                          1,951             11.6
     Different house, different county                     2,417             14.4
     Different state                                         887               5.3
         Abroad                                              350               2.1
Total                                                     16,122             95.8
a
       May not equal 100 percent due to rounding.
b
       Derived from 1985 unit count assuming 2.77 persons per dwelling unit.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                            19
3.0 Housing Element
TABLE 3.4
CITY OF ORINDA -- HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS, 1980
                                                      Households          Percent
Total Households, 1980                                     5,871              100.0
1980 Households by Income
             Less than $10,000                               313                5.3
             $10,000 - 14,999                                262                4.5
             $15,000 - 19,999                                314                5.3
             $20,000 - 24,999                                420                7.1
             $25,000 - 29,999                                510                8.7
             $30,000 - 39,999                              1,094               18.6
             $40,000 - 49,999                                902               15.4
             $50,000 - 74,999                              1,093               18.6
             $75,000 or more                                 901               15.3
Total Households
     Reporting Income                                     5, 496              100.0
Median Household
     Income, 1980                                       $39,912
Households by Size, 1980
1-person households                                          592               10.1
2-person households                                        2,291               39.0
3-person households                                        1,167               19.9
4-person households                                        1,232               21.0
5-person households                                          414                7.1
6 or more person households                                  175                3.0
Average Household Size, 1980                                2.87
Single-Parent Households, 1980
     Female-Headed Households                                218                3.7
     Male-Headed Households                                   36                6.6
Female-Headed Households Below
     Poverty Levela (with children), 1979                     35                0.6
a
     Families and unrelated individuals in the census were classified as being below
or above the poverty level based on income in 1979 using and index which provides
“poverty thresholds.” These thresholds vary by size of family, number of children,
and age of the family, householder or unrelated individuals. The threshold used
for a four-person family, for example, was $7,412.
Source: 1980 U.S. Census.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                          20
3.0 Housing Element

                                                          city. Using the Projections '90 data, the ratio of
3 . 2 . 2 Jobs/Housing Balance                            jobs in the city to households in the city
                                                          (jobs/housing ratio) is calculated at 0.54:1.0.
State of California Planning, Zoning, and                 The estimated jobs/ housing ratio in 1980 was
Development Laws, 1990 edition (Gov. Code                 0.55:1.0. Buildout under the General Plan
Sec. 65913.1) requires that jurisdictions                 would result in very little change in the
"designate and zone sufficient vacant land for            jobs/housing ratio, and in maintenance of the
residential use with appropriate standards, in            prevailing      residential      character      of
relation to zoning for nonresidential use, and in         development in the city. As shown in Table
relation to growth projections of the General             3.5, the 1980 Census reported 8,448 Orinda
Plan to meet housing needs as identified in the           residents in the civilian labor force. The
General Plan." The relationship between land              Protections '90 report estimates that there are
designated for nonresidential and residential             currently 9,500 employed residents in Orinda,
uses is usually measured by a ratio relating the          and that an average of about 1.5 persons per
number of local jobs to the number of households          household are employed. Over 50 percent of
in a jurisdiction.                                        employed      residents    are    executives    or
According to ABAG's Projections '90, there are            professionals, as shown in Table 3.6.
currently 3,420 jobs located in Orinda, and an            Orinda's semi-rural environment, proximity to
estimated 16,900 persons in 6,320 households.             employment centers, and access to BART and
(3 pg 43)
          This report also estimates that in 1980         freeways make it an attractive residential
there were 3,184 jobs in the area now within the          location for individuals working elsewhere.
city limits, and that the population totalled             Some suburban cities in Alameda and Contra
16,223 persons in 5,798 households at that time.          Costa Counties that have traditionally been
For purposes of comparison, the U.S. Census               bedroom communities           have    experienced
reported a population figure of 16,825 in the             substantial development in the 1980s, but such
unincorporated area defined as the Orinda                 development is limited in Orinda by the
"census designated place."                                provisions of the General Plan, and it is
Orinda has traditionally been a residential               anticipated that Orinda will continue to have
community, with many more out-commuters                   a net out-commute.
than incommuters and residents working in the
TABLE 3.5
PLACE OF WORK: ORINDA WORKERS AGE 16 AND OLDER, 1980
                                                   Number                  Percent
Work in Orinda                                          1,018                     12
Work in Contra Costa County                             2,871                     34
Work in San Francisco-Oakland
       SMSA                                             7,236                     85
Work in California                                      7,395                     87
Not Reported                                            1,005                     12
Total                                                   8,494                   100
a
       Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area Consists of the following five counties:
San Francisco, Alameda, Marin, Contra Costa and San Mateo.
Source: U.S. Census, 1980
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                             21
3.0 Housing Element
TABLE 3.6
WORKERS AGE 16 AND OLDER BY OCCUPATION, ORINDA, 1980
                                                   Number           Percent
Executive, Administrative, Managerial                    2,121             25
Professional Specialty                                   2,475             29
Technicians and Related Support                            425              5
Sales                                                    1,132             13
Administrative Support                                   1,004             12
Services (Including Personal,
       Protective, Repair, Crafts)                         859             10
Machine Operators, Assemblers,
       Inspectors                                           48              1
Handlers, Helpers and Laborers                              82              1
Transportation and Material Moving                          84              1
Private Household                                          100              1
Farming, Fishing, Mining                                   118              1
Total                                                    8,448            100
Source: U.S. Census, 1980
                                                 former "summer cottages" still exist which
3 . 2 . 3 Existing Housing Stock                 were constructed in the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s.
                                                 Some of these do not currently meet building
The majority of housing units in Orinda are      code standards but are typically not in need of
singlefamily, owner-occupied homes, as shown     rehabilitation or replacement due to the
in Table 3.7. More than 60 percent of the units  manner in which they have been maintained
were built between 1950 and 1969. More than 84   over the years.
percent of the units as shown in Table 3.8, have
three or more bedrooms.                          Housing maintenance standards in Orinda are
                                                 typically very high and affordable units very
As of January 1990, Orinda had 6,468 dwelling    few, so rehabilitation dollars would not be as
units, about 95 percent of which are single-     effectively used as dollars spent on other
family homes on lots that are typically one-     proposed housing programs.
half acre. Two apartment buildings (now
condominiums) contain 63 units; there are 150    The 1980 Census reported an owner-occupied
Senior Village units; and Orindawoods, a         median house value of $178,100, compared to
clustered development, has 258 units. Fifty-two  Contra Costa County at $94,600. According to a
units are built as multiple family type          number of Orinda-area real estate sources, a
construction of three or more townhouses per     very few single-family homes in Orinda in
structure, while 50 are built as attached units. mid-1990 are available for between $350,000
The remaining 156 units are detached single      and $450,000, with some homes on smaller lots
family units.                                    or with smaller floor area at around $300,000.
                                                 Homes at much higher prices, over $500,000
Housing units which are in need of               and $1 million, are on the market in substantial
rehabilitation or replacement in Orinda are      numbers, and are more typical of market
nearly nonexistent. However, a small number of
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                  22
3.0 Housing Element
conditions in Orinda. As shown in Table 3.9,             available for around $200,000. Townhouse
there are very few lots available for                    prices in Orindawoods, with substantial open-
development       in   approved      residential         space amenities and a mixture of single-family
subdivisions.                                            detached homes ("patio homes" or zero-lot
                                                         line) and townhomes are listed at a minimum of
Condominium homes (two bedrooms, one bath)
                                                         $340,000.
on Brookwood Road, probably the least
expensive market-rate units in Orinda, are
TABLE 3.7
HOUSING UNITS BY TENANCY AND YEAR OF CONSTRUCTION, 1980
                             Units           Percent mf           Owner-          Renter-
                             Built         Existing Units        occupied        occupied
1979 to March 1980               142               2.4                100             5
1975-1978                        364               6.1                348            16
1970 to 1974                     299               5.0                292             0
1960-1969                      1,213              20.2              1,101            97
1950 to 1959                   2,433              40.5              2,220           168
1940-1949                      1,046              17.4                918           116
1939 or earlier                  504               8.4                438            52
Total a                        6,001            100.0               5,417           454
a
    Tenancy information applies only to occupied units. Vacancy rate was about 2 percent
in 1980.
Source: 1980 U.S. Census
TABLE 3.8
HOUSING UNITS BY NUMBER
OF BEDROOMS AND OCCUPANCY STATUS, 1980
                                   Total         Total occupied           Renter-occupied
None                                                           –                    –
One                                  104                     104                   63
Two                                  810                     792                  115
Three                              2,827                   2,761                  222
Four                               1,742                   1,713                   42
Five or More                         518                     501                   12
Total                              6,001                   5,871                  454
Source: 1980 U.S. Census
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                        23
3.0 Housing Element

                                                  3 . 2 . 4 Subsidized Housing in Orinda and
TABLE 3.9                                         Contra Costa County
REMAINING UNDEVELOPED LOTS IN
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS WITHOUT                  There are 1,140 units of Contra Costa County
APPROVED BUILDING PERMITS:                        Housing Authority public housing in the county.
CITY OF ORINDA, SEPTEMBER 1990                    Because of the very high land prices in Orinda,
                                                  limited sites available, and the expense of
Site                           Number of Lots     installing public facilities such as water, sewer
                                                  and roadways, it is very difficult for public
                                                  housing agencies and nonprofit housing
Orinda Highlands                       10
                                                  developers to acquire property for the
Orinda Downs                           20
                                                  development of subsidized housing, and partly
Other Undeveloped Lots                110
                                                  as a result there are no Housing Authority units
                                                  in Orinda. These agencies and developers have
Total                                 140         found their resources to be best utilized in areas
                                                  with lower land and infrastructure costs.
Source: City of Orinda
                                                  In addition to managing public housing, the
Note: Figures represent preliminary plan
                                                  County Housing Authority administers the
approvals granted by Contra Costa County
                                                  federal Section 8 certificate program that
prior to the incorporation of the City of
                                                  provides housing assistance for low- and very
Orinda. Approximately 80 of the "Other
                                                  low-income households by making direct
Undeveloped Lots" are estimated to be under
                                                  payments of a portion of the certificate
8,000 square feet.
                                                  holder's rent. There is a waiting list of 3,061
                                                  households, and the Contra Costa Housing
                                                  Authority has awarded 3,761 certificates as of
The rental share of the housing stock is small
                                                  September 1990. The number of certificates is
compared to other cities in the county (less than
                                                  expected to increase at a slow pace, and
8 percent of all units in the housing stock are
                                                  turnover results in some households on the
rented), and consists of single-family homes
                                                  waiting list receiving certificates.      Once a
and a small number of condominium units.
                                                  household has a certificate, it must find a unit
Median monthly gross rent was $501 in 1980,
                                                  renting for specified "Fair Market Rents"
compared to $294 for Contra Costa County.
                                                  (specified by the Contra Costa County Housing
Although no precise figures are available,
                                                  Authority) and an owner willing to enter into a
typical rents at the present time for
                                                  contract with the Housing Authority.
condominium homes on Brookwood Road are
between $850 and $950, while a three-bedroom      The Fair Market Rents in 1990 in Orinda were:
single-family home would rent at above $1,750.    one-bedroom unit, $688; two-bedroom unit, $810;
                                                  and three-bedroom unit, $1,012. (These are
Between 1975 and 1987, an average of about 100
                                                  rents exclusive of utility costs.) Because Orinda
units a year were added to Orinda's housing
                                                  is deemed a high-cost area, the Fair Market
supply. The 1990 Updated Housing Element
                                                  Rents are 10 percent above the base rent for the
policies envision an additional 608 units in new
                                                  county.
subdivisions. Approximately 200 units were
added between 1987 and 1990, reflecting a         The       maximum household          incomes for
somewhat decreasing rate of growth due            households qualifying for the Section 8
primarily to lack of available building sites.    program in Contra Costa County are shown
                                                  below.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                     24
3.0 Housing Element
                                                  includes maximum household income limits:
                                                  the applicants' income must be 120 percent or
Persons in               Maximum income
                                                  less of median income.         Tax-exempt bond
Household
                                                  interest rates have made these programs
           1                   $24,700            attractive to developers.
           2                     28,250           While local housing authorities currently build
           3                     31,750           relatively      little    affordable     housing
           4                     35,300           themselves, nonprofit housing advocacy and
           5                     37,500           development organizations are actively using
                                                  programs such as the County tax-exempt bond
Source: Department of Housing and Urban
                                                  program. Of the 240 multi-family units which
Development
                                                  have been built using these bonds, 40 are
                                                  maintained as affordable units. In the
Subsidized rental housing is currently provided   Lamorinda area of the county, 95 units (19
with the use of HUD 202 funds in the Senior       affordable) for the elderly have been built
Village for persons 62 years or older and         with these funds. No projects are currently
disabled persons. The financing of Senior         under construction or proposed using the
Village is firmly established for twenty years,   program.
and its bylaws, including the condition upon
which the land was provided, require that it      3.3       HOUSING NEEDS
continue to provide low and very-low income
housing for seniors and disabled persons.         3 . 3 . 1 Association of Bay Area
                                                  Governments (ABAG) Housing Needs
Some market-rate rentals are available in the     Determinations
condominiums on Brookwood Road, and in
single-family homes. Rent levels are generally    The assessment of need in the Housing Element
too high to qualify for Fair Market Rents. The    must consider the City's role in meeting
potential for adding affordable units through     regional housing demand, especially demand
such projects is very limited, because of the     for housing affordable by low and moderate-
substantially higher land cost characteristics    income households.
of Orinda.                                        Orinda's regional fair-share allocation is
The HUD program used to finance the Senior        specified in data presented in Housinq Needs
Village is still in operation, so the potential   Determinations – San Francisco Bay Reqion,
exists for additional affordable senior units.    January 1989, prepared by the Association of
Below-marketrate units also have been created     Bay Area Governments (ABAG).               Needs
in Contra Costa County through the County's       determinations were prepared for the nine Bay
Home Mortgage Revenue Bond and Multifamily        Area counties, their incorporated cities, and for
Bond programs which finance development of        the total unincorporated area in each county.
owner-occupied and rental units for families,     Projected Need is the total number of units
the elderly, and the disabled.            Orinda  needed to accommodate anticipated growth in
participates in these programs through annual     the city and provide for a desirable vacancy
resolutions of participation adopted by the       rate. As stated in the Housing Needs
City Council. These programs provide below-       Determination, the projected need figure is the
market-rate financing for first- time home        number of additional units that should be built
buyers, and for construction of rental units. The in the city from 1988 to 1995. Household
rental program requires that at least 20 percent  projections are described as reflecting the
of units be affordable by low- to moderate-       distribution of employment opportunities,
income households. The purchase program           availability of suitable sites, and commuting
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                    25
3.0 Housing Element

patterns. ABAG's determination of Orinda's
                                                 House prices and rents affordable by
1988 to 1990 projected need is 105 additional
                                                 households in these income categories are
housing units, which was nearly met by the 99
                                                 shown in Table 3.10. The "purchase prices" are
units built in the two-year period from January
                                                 based on a 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage at 10.0
1, 1988, to December 31, 1989 (Reference:
                                                 percent, one-third of income going to housing
Department of Finance E-5 report). The 1995
                                                 costs, and a 20 percent down payment. The
ABAG objective is for 164 additional units
                                                 "rent" figure assumes 30 percent of income is
beyond the 105 units to be built by 1990, or an
                                                 available for housing. Based on the
average of about 33 units per year.
                                                 calculations shown in Table 3.10, the maximum
Projected Need by Income Cateqory expresses a    unsubsidized purchase price affordable to a
redistribution of households throughout the      moderate-income household is $188,200.
region by income category. The objective of the
redistribution is to "avoid further impaction of
localities with relatively high proportions of
lower-income households" (Gov. Code Sec.
65584). To generate the figures, ABAG
averaged existing city percentages in each
income category with the existing county and
regional percentages. The housing need in each
income category is obtained from an average of
existing percentages of each category in Orinda,
Contra Costa County and the nine-county bay
area. For example, the percentage of very low-
income households at each geographical scale
(city-county-region) is averaged to identify the
percentage need for very low-income housing
units out of the total need identified.
Because the State of California has declared
that local governments have a responsibility to
facilitate the improvement and development of
housing for all economic segments of the
community, the analysis of existing and
projected housing needs is defined in four
categories: very low income (0 to 50 percent of
median income); low income (50 to 80 percent);
moderate income (80 to 120 percent); and above
moderate income (above 120 percent).
In Orinda, those income categories translate
into the following incomes for a family of four,
based on incomes in Contra Costa County, 1990,
as defined by the U.S. Dept. of Housing and
Urban Development and based on a median
income of $44,100:
Very Low Income         less than $22,500
Lower Income            $22,501 to $35,300
Moderate Income         $35,301 to $52,900
Above Moderate          above $52,900
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                 26
3.0 Housing Element
                                                          3 . 3 . 2 Projected Housing Needs and
TABLE 3.10                                                Housing Needs Met, 1988 to l99O
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
                                                          For the period from 1988 to 1995, ABAG has
BY INCOME GROUP, 1990
                                                          projected a need in Orinda for a total of 269
ALAMEDA/CONTRA COSTA COUNTY
                                                          housing units, consisting of 43 very low-, 32 low-
FOUR-PERSON HOUSEHOLDS
                                                          , 46 moderate-, and 148 above-moderate-income
                                                          units. Housing units affordable to very low-,
Income                      Purchase       Monthly        low-, moderate-, and above moderate-income
                              Price                       households built since 1988 can be subtracted
Category                     at 10%          Rent         from the 1988 to 1995 Needs Determinations.
                         Interest Rate                    The remaining units are termed the Adjusted
                                                          Projected Need (new construction) for the five-
Very Low                    Less than     Less than       year period, 1990 to 1995. The figures are
($22,500 or less)           $80,000       $560            presented in Table 3.11, and are shown in terms
                                                          of the components of need defined by ABAG in
Low                         $80,000-      $560            January 1989.
($22,501-$35,300)           $125,600      $880
                                                          Looking back at the comparable figures
Moderate                    $125,600-     $880            included in the 1987 Orinda Housing Element,
($35,301-$52,900)           $188,200      $1,320          the prior (1983) ABAG projections for housing
                                                          needs between 1980 and 1990 indicated a need
Above Moderate              More than     More than       for 61 very low-income and 42 low-income
(More than $52,900)         $188,200      $1,320          housing units, 58 units in the moderate-income
                                                          category and 159 units for the above-moderate
                                                          income category.
TABLE 3.11
EXISTING, PROJECTED AND ADJUSTED HOUSING NEEDS: 1988-1995
City of Orinda, California
Income Category &1990                     Existing  Estimated        Projected   Total        Housing      Adjusted
Income Ranges                             Need      Need             Need        Projected    Built        Projected
                                          1988b     1988-1990        1990-1995   Need         1988-1990d   Need
                                                                                 1988-1995                 1990-1995
Very Low:            Less than $22,500       7           17              26           43             9f          34
Low:                 $22,501-35,300          5           12              20           32              –          32
Moderate             $35,301-52,900          8           18              28           46              –          46
Above moderate       Above $52,900          25           58              90           48            117          31
TOTAL                                       45         105             164           269            126         143
Source:   Housing Needs Determination, San Francisco Bay Area, ABAG, January 1989
          Figures above total line in columns 1,2,3 are prorated from totals.
Notes: a     Income ranges defined by U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD), February 1990,
        for 4-person families. Median income for area (Contra Costa County) is $44,100.
        b                                                      e
             Base figures for needs determination                  August 1, 1990, through December 31, 1995.
        c
             Includes 1988 Existing Needs figures.             f
                                                                   Second units.
        d
             July 1, 1988, through July 31, 1990
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                              27
3.0 Housing Element

Between 1980 and the end of 1985, Contra Costa
County estimated that 370 units were added to      Units, 1980                            6,001
Orinda. Of these, 150 were in the Senior           Units built 1980-12/31/86                 324
Village, where occupancy is limited to singles     Units built 1987-12/31/89                 143
and couples who are over 62 years of age or are    Units approved and unbuilt
disabled, with very low household incomes                prior to 1990                        30
(125 units) and low incomes (25 units). These      Units approved in 1990,                    35
units made a significant contribution to meeting   7/31/90*
the low-income housing need. However, ABAG
does not recognize previous production of low      Total Units %                          6,533
income units in determining current housing
needs.                                             Anticipated additional
                                                   units,
Nine additional very low income housing units             1990-1995                          300
were added between 1987 and 1990 in the form
of second units on lots developed with existing   * Includes approved units not yet built or
single-family homes. It is expected that in the   completed.
1990-95 period an estimated 25 to 35 additional
second units will be built. A survey conducted
by the City of Orinda revealed that the units     3 . 3 . 3 Existing Housing Need
recently built are occupied by persons with
limited incomes, including three caretakers,      State law requires that the Housing Element
four retired relatives, and one student who       include an identification and analysis of
provides maintenance services in exchange for     existing and projected housing needs (Gov. Code
rent. The income levels of these residents are    Sec. 65583). Indicators of need include level of
confidential and cannot be revealed in            payment compared to ability to pay, analysis
deference to their rights to privacy. Specific    of special housing needs, vacancy rates and
rental levels have not been established, and      overcrowding of units.
most units are provided rent-free. However,       Table 3.12 shows that 421 Orinda households
since second unit residents are typically either  (119 renting households, and 302 owners)
on a fixed retirement income, employed part       earning less than $20,000 in 1979 paid 25
time, or employed in relatively low-paying        percent or more of their income to housing costs.
domestic service jobs, second units in Orinda     Households paying more than 35 percent of
have been designated as very low income           household income to housing costs numbered
housing.                                          322. Between 25 and 30 percent of income-to-
Orinda's housing stock, which increased by        housing costs is generally considered to be the
about 13 percent during the 1980s, is expected to maximum a lower- and moderate-income
expand at a decreasing rate during the 1990s, as  household should pay.
indicated     in    the     following    figures:
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      28
3.0 Housing Element
TABLE 3.12
ORINDA HOUSING PAYMENTS COMPARED TO ABILITY TO PAY, 1979
                                          Household Income
                                Less than    More than    House-     Percent of
                                $20,000a     $20,000      holds      Households
Percentage of Income
Paid as Gross Rent for
Renter-Occupied Units
Less than 25%                          27        220           247            58
25 -35%                                22         50            72            17
Over 35%                               97           7          104            25
Total
Renter-Occupied
Units                                146         277           423          100
Percentage of Income
Paid as Homeowner Cost
for Owner-Occupied Units
Less than 25%                        310       3,482         3,792            77
25 - 35%                               77        544           621            13
Over 35%                             225         291           516            10
Total
Homeowner Units                      612       4,317         4,929          100
Total Occupied units
Less than 25%                        337       3,702         4.039            75
25 - 35%                               99        594           693            13
Over 35%                             322         298           620            12
                                       12
Total-Occupied Units                 758       4,594        5,352 b         100
a
       A household income of $20,000 in 1979 represented approximately 82 percent of
       the county median household income, or the low end of "moderate income."
b
        Households reporting income and housing costs only.
Source: U.S. Census, 1980
3 . 3 . 4 Needs of Special Groups                         Housing for the Elderly. The 1980 Census
                                                          reported 1,968 Orinda residents age 62 or older.
The special housing needs of groups such as the
                                                          is represented 12 percent of the total
elderly,      handicapped,       large    families,
                                                          population, about the same as the nine-county
farmworkers, families with female heads of
                                                          Bay Area total of 12.6 percent. However,
household, and families and persons in need of
                                                          because the median age of Orinda residents is
emergency shelter is addressed below.
                                                          comparatively high, and 31 percent of residents
                                                          were aged 45 to 64 as compared to 21 percent in
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                           29
3.0 Housing Element
Contra Costa County and 20 percent in the Bay     transitional housing or shelters is extremely
Area, it is reasonable to expect that the elderly low, at the rate of one or two per year.
will represent an increasingly large share of     Infrequent requests for assistance from churches
the city's population.                            have chiefly consisted of persons passing
                                                  through Orinda seeking small handouts. Some
Housing for the elderly should respond to this
                                                  churches, such as St. Stephens (Episcopal),
group's need for relatively easy access to
                                                  maintain information which enables them to
downtown shops and services, and medical care,
                                                  refer individuals to appropriate public or
and to limitations on income and mobility.
                                                  private agencies elsewhere in Contra Costa
Typically, elderly individuals desire a small,
                                                  County.
secure, low-maintenance home.
                                                  Because of their high average income, Orinda
Housing for the Handicapped. The U.S. Census
                                                  residents typically have many more options for
in 1980 identified 145 persons in the area which
                                                  recovery after the loss of a home due to a
is currently incorporated in the City of Orinda,
                                                  natural disaster or financial difficulties. The
aged 16 to 64 with a public transportation
                                                  small number of residents that may be
disability, and another 140 persons 65 or older
                                                  displaced at a given time, (other than might
with the same type of disability. The number
                                                  occur in the event of a major natural disaster),
of all handicapped persons in Orinda in 1990 is
                                                  would not be sufficient to justify the
not known at this time, although an estimate
                                                  development of a shelter specifically for that
can be extrapolated if it is assumed they
                                                  purpose. Due to the demonstrated lack of direct
constituted the same percentage of the total
                                                  demand, coupled with the high cost of land in
population as was exhibited ion 1980 (about 1.7
                                                  Orinda, it is not practical to seek the
percent). Based on the current estimate of the
                                                  development of facilities in Orinda for persons
total population in Orinda (17,751), an
                                                  or families in need of emergency shelter.
estimated 302 handicapped persons may reside
in Orinda at the present time, about one-half of  Female-Headed Households. There were 352
whom are also 65 or older.                        female-headed households in Orinda in 1980: 6
                                                  percent of total households, compared with
The needs of handicapped persons are not
                                                  almost 10 percent reported for the nine-county
unlike those of the elderly in terms of their
                                                  Bay Area. Of these, 218 households had
need for accessibility to services, and for homes
                                                  children under 18, and 35 of these households
that are small and require little maintenance.
                                                  had incomes below the poverty level.
The Orinda Senior Village contains 15 units
incorporating such features.                      Because of the relatively higher incidence of
                                                  poverty among this group compared to other
Persons and Families in Need of Emergency
                                                  households, this group is considered to have
Shelter.     There are no U.S. Census figures
                                                  special     housing     needs.   Female-headed
indicating that any Orinda residents have been
                                                  households with children require housing
homeless on a long-term basis. The Orinda
                                                  suitable for child-rearing, and access to child
Police Department has indicated that it has no
                                                  care and schools. There are few such affordable
knowledge of any regular pattern of
                                                  units available in Orinda.
hopelessness in the city. Shelter Inc. in Walnut
Creek, a non-profit advocacy group which          Large Families. The 1980 Census reported that
directs homeless individuals and families in      there were 589 households with five or more
Contra Costa County to appropriate agencies       persons, or approximately 10 percent of a l l
for their short-term needs, has no recent record  households in Orinda. This was about equal to
of persons requesting their services who have     the county and the Bay Area where 11 percent
claimed residency in Orinda. Inquiries of local   of the households had five or more persons.
churches on requests for emergency shelter have
                                                  Although there has been and is a good housing
indicated that the need in the community for
                                                  choice for large families with above-moderate
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                    30
3.0 Housing Element
income in Orinda, lowand moderate-income          households, for conservation of housing stock,
large families are faced with particular          and for equal housing opportunity.
difficulties in finding adequate housing. Some
                                                  A. While       maintaining      the     semi-rural
of the single-family or condominium rentals
                                                      residential character of Orinda, provide
may meet the needs of this group. However,
                                                      for a greater diversity of housing types and
there are no alternative housing opportunities
                                                      prices to meet current and future needs of all
existing in apartments for this group in Orinda.
                                                      residents.
Small Households. Almost half of a l l
                                                  B. Work for equal housing opportunity and
households in Orinda in 1980 were composed of
                                                      access for all persons regardless of race,
one or two persons. A further 20 percent of all
                                                      religion,      national       origin,     sex,
households had three persons. Only 15 percent
                                                      marital/family status or other arbitrary
of housing units in Orinda have one or two
                                                      factors.
bedrooms . ( 4 p g 4 3 ) Where households stay in
larger units by choice, this shortage of smaller  C. Locate sites for multifamily housing near
units presents no problem. However, smaller           Downtown and in the Gateway Valley.
households with moderate or low incomes may
prefer to live in smaller units which are         3.3.6.Housing Policies
presently unavailable in Orinda.
                                                  A. Permit multiple family units at the Santa
Farmworkers. Contact with local service               Maria Church site, Pine Grove School site,
agencies indicates that the number of                 Gateway Valley, and other suitable sites.
farmworkers in Orinda has been and is
                                                  The General Plan designates a density range of
virtually zero.
                                                  6 to 10 units per acre for multiple family
Vacancy Rates. The 1980 Census showed 42 for-     housing. Three areas in the city are currently
sale units, and 21 for-rent units vacant. This    considered as potential sites for multiple
represented a vacancy rate of about 1 percent,    family housing.
below the Contra Costa County vacancy rate of
                                                  The Santa Maria Church surplus land site is
2.8 percent and the Bay Area rate of 2.5 percent,
                                                  designated for multiple family housing by the
and well below the desirable vacancy rate of 6
                                                  General Plan. If the 3.2 acre church site were
percent for rentals and 2 percent for for-sale
                                                  developed as an open-occupancy(5 pg 43) project, it
units supported by the California Department
                                                  could yield up to 32 multiple family dwelling
of Housing and Community Development.
                                                  units .
The California Department of Finance (Report
                                                  The Pine Grove School site is not presently
E-5) in 1990 has determined that the vacancy
                                                  designated for multiple family land use,
rate for Orinda is about 1.55 percent, with about
                                                  though if the site were declared surplus, a
100 vacant units as of January 1, 1990.
                                                  General Plan amendment would be favored
Overcrowding. An overcrowded housing-unit is      which would enable development of multiple
one in which there are more than 1.01 persons     family housing on the site. This 6.9 acre site
per room. There were only 31 such units or 0.5    could accommodate 69 multiple family units, if
percent of households in Orinda in 1980. This is  developed for open occupancy.
considerably lower than the rate for the county
                                                  General Plan policy 2.1.5 states that a General
(2.9 percent) and the Bay Region (4.8 percent).
                                                  Plan amendment for the Gateway Valley
                                                  which includes multifamily housing would be
3 . 3 . 5 City Housing Goals
                                                  encouraged. It is possible that the Gateway
The following goals direct the City's housing     Valley area will develop with housing and
programs for assisting the development of         other land uses as outlined in Section 2.1.5 of
housing for low- and moderate-income
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                     31
3.0 Housing Element
the General Plan during the next three to eight                  Zoning Ordinance amendment to
years.                                                           require 10 percent of affordable
                                                                 housing units to be equipped
Substantial effort toward the planning of
                                                                 with features for handicapped
Gateway Valley has been undertaken during
                                                                 residents; General Plan
the past three years. A 17 member Gateway
                                                                 amendment for Gateway Valley
Advisory Committee was appointed and
                                                                 within four years, and
completed a series of land use recommendations
                                                                 ultimately for the Pine Grove
for the valley. Upon recommendation by this
                                                                 School site.
committee, the Gateway Task Force was
appointed by the City Council to study and        Agency         Planning Commission, City
develop a recommendation regarding the            Responsible:   Council
possible acquisition of Gateway Valley for
public recreational use. In addition, the owner   Financial      No cost to City.
of Gateway Valley has submitted a specific        Impact on
plan application for partial development of       the City:
the valley.
                                                  B. Allow development of affordable senior
Policy          Designate sites for construction
                                                      housing on multifamily sites at densities
objective:      at higher, multiple-family
                                                      higher than those designated in the
                densities to increase the number
                                                      General Plan land-use categories if the
                of affordable units constructed,
                                                      City's environmental review process
                and obtain a lower land price
                                                      concludes that building bulk, traffic, and
                per unit.
                                                      other    adverse     impacts    would not
Quantified      The Santa Maria Church site           significantly exceed those of open-
objective:      could accommodate 32 units            occupancy units within the prescribed
                within five years. If the Pine        density range. In particular, allow up to 30
                Grove School site is declared to      units per acre on the Santa Maria Church
                be surplus land, its development      surplus land site for units which are
                potential would be 69 units, but      specifically designated as affordable
                no timetable can be at this time.     senior housing units.
                An additional 400 units could be
                                                  The need for senior units has               been
                built in Gateway Valley within
                                                  demonstrated. The Senior Village is built at a
                the time frame of 1993 to 1998.
                                                  density of approximately 50 units per acre, well
Actions         Santa Maria Church site           above the existing multiple family density
Taken:          designated for multiple family    range. Because the units are smaller, and
                use on the General Plan; a 17     vehicle trip generation is substantially less
                member citizen's advisory         than open occupancy housing development, a
                committee appointed by the        higher density for senior housing is
                City Council to study land use    appropriate and effective in meeting the
                alternatives including            housing needs of the elderly. Multiple family
                affordable housing for Gateway    housing near the Downtown would have the
                Valley.                           advantage of providing pedestrian access to
                                                  shopping and local and regional transit,
Actions         Zoning Ordinance amendment        reducing traffic impacts and enhancing
Needed:         consistent with Plan policies     Downtown commercial activity.
                and land-use designation to
                assure the provision of increased A density of up to 12.5 units per acre is
                density for affordable housing;   permitted, when combined with the 25 percent
                                                  density bonus provided for affordable senior
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                    32
3.0 Housing Element
housing. The City's policy will require that 10                     housing units to be equipped
percent of the affordable units will incorporate                    with features for handicapped
special design features for handicapped                             residents.
persons.
                                                    Agency          Planning Commission, City
The Santa Maria Church playfield area is            Responsible:    Council
designated in the General Plan for multiple
family housing, which allows for a density of       Financial       No cost to City.
between 6 and 10 units per acre. An increase in     Impact on
density to 30 units per acre for this site would be the City:
allowed for units which are within the very-
low, low and moderate income affordability          C. Provide greater variety of home sizes and
requirements as detailed in Table 3.10.           A     more affordable housing by limiting the
proposal which meets these criteria could               floor area of homes on smaller lots.
yield as many as 96 affordable senior housing
units on the 3.2-acre site.                         By limiting the floor area of residential
                                                    structures, some units affordable to moderate-
Policy          Allow construction at higher        income households might be built on the
objective:      densities (up to 30 units per acre  approximately 80 undeveloped lots that are
                on the Santa Maria Church site)     8,000 square feet or smaller.
                to make additional affordable
                senior housing feasible, when
                such units are within the           Policy          Increase the number of small
                appropriate affordability           objective:      houses in Orinda.
                requirements.
                                                    Quantified      80 units at plan buildout; 25 to 40
Quantified      Allow senior housing at             objective:      units during five-year planning
objective:      densities higher than that                          period.
                allowed for open occupancy
                housing because units are           Action          Policy in General Plan; Floor
                smaller and vehicular trip          Taken:          Area Ratio Ordinance adopted
                generation per household is                         and amended to further limit
                lower. The Santa Maria Church                       size of homes on smaller lots.
                site could accommodate 96 units
                                                    Action          Continue to implement Floor
                of affordable senior housing at a
                                                    Needed:         Area Ratio Ordinance, and
                density of 30 units per acre.
                                                                    monitor for effectiveness.
Action          Updated Policy allowing for a
                                                    Agency          Planning Commission, City
Taken:          density of up to 30 units per acre
                                                    Responsible:    Council
                at the Santa Maria Church site
                included in General Plan.           Financial       Substantial staff time.
                                                    Impact on
Action          Rezoning the 3.2 acre Santa
                                                    the City:
Needed:         Maria Church surplus land area
                from R-20/SD1 to Planned Unit       D. Provide greater variety of housing types by
                District on receipt of an               allowing for the development of second
                application for a specific              units.
                proposal which incorporates
                                                    Given the decreasing household size in Orinda
                affordable senior housing;
                                                    and the increasing cost of housing, second units
                Zoning Ordinance amendment to       added to existing single-family lots may be a
                require 10 percent of affordable    way to better use housing resources to provide
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                         33
3.0 Housing Element
needed new housing at minimum financial and           to moderate-, low and very-low-income
environmental costs. Single persons seeking           households      in Orinda      through      a
affordable housing in Orinda would include            combination of the following:
commercial and domestic employees, students
                                                  Land and construction costs in Orinda are
at St. Mary's College and John F. Kennedy
                                                  expensive       compared     to     neighboring
University, and seniors. Second units are a good
                                                  communities. Programs A, B. C, and D above
solution to these people's housing needs, and
                                                  seek to assist in developing units affordable to
many larger houses in Orinda can incorporate
                                                  low- and moderate-income households at
second units without adding floor area.
                                                  specific    locations    and    under    specific
While it is difficult to anticipate how many      circumstances. Program E differs in that it
second units could be developed in Orinda, if     offers a variety of economic and noneconomic
current trends continue, at least an additional   incentives which may be taken advantage of on
26 to 36 units would be added during the five-    virtually any site suitable for residential use.
year planning period through 1995. Nine second    These incentive programs can be used
units have been built and several more            individually or in combination to encourage the
approved since 1987. These units have been        provision of a greater variety and number of
identified as providing housing for persons       affordable housing units. Some of these
with limited income, such as gardeners,           programs are administrative in nature, while
students and retirees. These persons would        others are designed to provide relief from
otherwise be unable to reside in the area,        specific existing ordinance requirements and
where      their    employment,       educational will require legislative amendments.
activities, or family or community ties are
                                                  The Senior Village is currently the only rental
based.
                                                  project in Orinda, although a number of
Policy          Encourage efficient use of        condominiums and singlefamily homes are
objective:      housing stock; permit             rented. The difficulties of first-time home
                development of second units at    buying make rental units the only affordable
                low cost.                         housing for many moderate-income households
                                                  that do not have the assets to make a down
Quantified      Development of 25 to 35           payment on a home. Some households may
objective:      additional second units in        choose to rent for other than financial reasons.
                Orinda by 1995, as additions to   While the General Plan designates a
                the affordable housing stock.     multifamily housing site, and programs above
Actions         Policy in General Plan; Second    seek to develop smaller housing units and
Taken:          Unit Ordinance adopted in 1988.   subsidized units, there is no assurance of
                                                  additional rental units in the city apart from
Actions         Continue to implement and         second-unit production.
Needed:         monitor effectiveness of Second
                                                  The following programs are geared toward the
                Unit Ordinance.
                                                  production of additional affordable housing
Agency          Orinda Planning Commission.       units throughout the community.
Responsible:
                                                  1.  Reduce application processing costs for
Financial       Minimal staff time.                   multifamily projects containing affordable
Impact on                                             units through fasttracking, and by waiving
the City:                                             or reducing park, traffic, storm-drain, and
                                                      other impact fees applicable to such
E. Develop an ordinance and administration            affordable units. Establish the minimum
    procedures, as appropriate, to provide
                                                      length of time units are to remain
    additional opportunity and incentive for
                                                      affordable.
    increasing the supply of housing affordable
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                   34
3.0 Housing Element
                                                                   land and construction costs,
Specific        Encourage a greater number of                      making the inclusion of greater
Policy          applications containing a                          percentages of affordable units
objective:      higher percentage of affordable                    more feasible.
                units by offering mechanisms to
                save time in processing, and by    As noted above, these programs can be utilized
                reducing the costs of producing    individually or in combination. While the
                affordable units.                  specific focus of these incentive measures varies
                                                   (and has, therefore, been individually
2.  Assist potential developers of affordable      addressed),     their     implementation     may
    housing projects and second units with         otherwise be summarized as follows:
    updated information on Federal, State and
    County housing assistance programs.            Quantified      Facilitate the production of
                                                   objective:      between 30 and 40 additional
Specific        Take advantage of programs
                                                                   affordable units over the five-
Policy          offered through other
                                                                   year planning period;
objective:      governmental agencies to
                                                                   ordinances, policies, and
                supplement local programs.
                                                                   procedures to be developed
                Continue to implement the
                                                                   within one year
                City's local information and
                assistance service for smaller     Action          Inclusion of policy in General
                developers unfamiliar with         Taken:          Plan; initiation of draft
                such programs.                                     ordinance preparation to waive
                                                                   or reduce park, traffic and
3.  Establish a working relationship with a
                                                                   storm-drainage impact fees for
    nonprofit housing agency to coordinate and
                                                                   affordable housing in multi-
    encourage affordable housing.
                                                                   family projects; establishment
Specific        Encourage and facilitate the                       of a local information and
Policy          direct involvement of a                            assistance service for smaller
objective:      nonprofit agency in the                            developers unfamiliar with
                production and management of                       available housing programs;
                affordable housing. This should                    participation in the Contra
                be accompanied by establishing                     Costa County Home Mortgage
                a formal relationship between                      Finance Program; and
                the City and a local agency for                    participation in the Community
                the purpose of exchanging                          Development Block Grant
                housing information,                               Program.
                identifying and utilizing
                                                   Actions         Adoption of zoning ordinance
                available housing funding
                                                   Needed:         modifications, as part of an
                sources, and managing future
                                                                   affordable housing
                affordable housing units.
                                                                   implementation ordinance,
4.  Reduce production costs in project containing                  addressing measures 1 and 4 and
    affordable units by adjusting design                           setting the minimum period of
    standards (without jeopardizing safety) for                    time units are to remain
    building setbacks, lot coverage, street                        affordable; development of a
    width, and in the case of senior projects, for                 specific administrative work
    parking.                                                       program for interagency
                                                                   coordination, addressing
Specific        The relaxation of stipulated
                                                                   measure 3.
Policy          design standards will
objective:      incrementally reduce per-unit
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                       35
3.0 Housing Element
                                                  Responsible:    Commission and City Council.
Agency          Planning Commission, City
Responsible:    Council.                          Financial       Minor administrative cost to
                                                  Impact on       City.
Financial       Some administrative time.         the City:
Impact on
the City:                                         G. Promote equal housing opportunity for all
                                                      Orinda residents and others seeking
F. Develop an ordinance granting up to a 25           housing in Orinda.
    percent density bonus for provision of 25
    percent or more affordable units in a project Federal and state programs guarantee equal
    as provided by State law. This ordinance      housing opportunity.        The Rumford Fair
    should identify the minimum length of         Housing Act prohibits arbitrary discrimination
    time units are to remain affordable. The      on any basis, including race, color, religion, sex,
    allowable density shall not exceed the        marital status, national origin or ancestry in
    larger of that obtained by applying           the rental, lease, sale or financing of any
    policies B and F separately.                  residential dwelling other than an individual
                                                  room in an owner's house.
The State's first density bonus law was enacted
in 1979 and clarified in 1982. Together, the two  The Unruh Civil Rights Act prohibits
laws (Gov. Code Sec. 65915) require that          discrimination on the basis of a person's race,
housing developers who agree to construct 25      color, sex, national origin or ancestry in the
percent of the total units in a development       provision of goods and services by all business
project for low- or moderate-income households,   entities. A business entity includes landlords,
or 10 percent for lowincome households, must be   real estate brokers acting as agents in the sale
granted a density bonus of at least 25 percent or of real property and financial institutions.
other incentives of equivalent financial value.
                                                  The California Fair Employment and Housing
The law contains additional clarifying
                                                  Commission receives complaints of housing
language regarding the procedures and
                                                  discrimination and takes necessary actions to
definitions relevant to granting density bonuses.
                                                  relieve discrimination. In the central Contra
Little use of the required density bonus          Costa County area, the Housing Alliance in
provision is anticipated. However, it may be      Walnut Creek provides services to victims of
possible for developers to take advantage of      housing discrimination.
some or all of the other incentive programs as
outlined in Section 3.3.6.E which, together       Program         Support services and programs
                                                  objective:      which fight housing
with the density bonus, would make affordable
units feasible.                                                   discrimination; direct persons
                                                                  toward agencies that provide
Program         Provision of incentives for                       assistance to victims of
Objective:      affordable housing units;                         discrimination as needed.
                compliance with state law.
                                                  Action          Policy in General Plan;
Action          Policy in General Plan.           Taken:          collection of information on
Taken:                                                            housing discrimination for
                                                                  public distribution.
Actions         Granting of density bonuses as
Needed:         mandated in Government Code       Actions         Continue to implement and
                65915; integration of a density   Needed:         monitor effectiveness of policy.
                bonus provision in the Updated
                                                  Agency          City Staff.
                Zoning Ordinance.
                                                  Responsible:
Agency          Planning staff, Planning
                                                  Financial       Minor administrative cost.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      36
3.0 Housing Element
Impact on                                                    and park fees for affordable housing in
the City:                                                    multi-family project proposals.
                                                         •   An information library on affordable
3 . 3 . 7 Review of Effectiveness of Housing
Policies and Progress in Implementation                      housing programs for developers has
                                                             been established.
Since the first Orinda General Plan Housing
                                                         •   The City is collecting information
Element was adopted in 1987, a number of
                                                             toward      establishing   a    working
actions have been taken by the City to
                                                             relationship with a local non-profit
implement the housing policies for the
                                                             organization which develops and/or
encouragement of housing development targeted
                                                             maintains affordable housing.
for very-low, low- and moderate-income
households. These have been discussed in the             •   A policy of reducing design standards
previous section, but are also summarized as                 for affordable housing proposals, such
follows:                                                     as parking requirements for elderly
                                                             housing, is being Implemented .
•      The City has taken steps to ensure and
       encourage the development of affordable           The potential results of these programs in
       multiple family dwelling units on the             terms of new affordable housing cannot be
       Santa Maria Church surplus land site by           quantified, but they can be expected to
       establishing     a    policy    to    permit      greatly ease the way for the development
       substantially higher density for affordable       of affordable housing (Policy E).
       housing at this location. This policy would  •    A comprehensive revision of the City
       permit the construction of up to 96               Zoning Ordinance has been initiated,
       affordable units (Policies A and B).              which will incorporate the density bonus
•      Provisions for multiple family and senior         provisions for affordable and elderly
       housing have been incorporated into the           housing as required by state law, and
       ongoing planning process for Gateway              which will set the minimum period of time
       Valley (Policy A).                                that units are to remain affordable at
                                                         thirty years. These new provisions will
•      A Floor Area Ratio Ordinance has been
                                                         apply to the sites discussed under Policies
       adopted and amended once, to ensure that
                                                         A and B. and would result in additional
       homes built on smaller lots are limited in
                                                         affordable dwelling units (Policy F).
       size, so as to respond to the demand for
       housing variety and lower-priced homes,      •    The City has continued to disseminate
       potentially yielding 25 to 40 low- or             information on housing discrimination to
       moderate priced homes by 1995 (Policy C).         the public and to developers (Policy G).
•      The City has adopted the Second Unit         In summary, the above policies enable the
       Ordinance       and    approved      several development of new residential units for very-
       additional units beyond the nine units       low, low and moderate income individuals and
       which were completed in 1990.          It is families. These policies and programs were
       estimated that up to 36 additional second    initiated approximately 3 years ago, and have
       units, utilized by persons with very-low or  had partial success. The original Housing
       low incomes will be built by 1995 (Policy    Element adopted in 1987 proposed numerous
       D).                                          ordinances, policies and programs, the majority
                                                    of which have been realized. Further review,
       •   A policy of fast-tracking development
                                                    evaluation or consideration of major revisions to
           applications has been implemented;
                                                    the Housing Element at the present time is
           the city staff is preparing a draft
                                                    premature. The established goals, objectives
           ordinance for consideration which will
                                                    and policies of the original Housing Element
           waive or reduce traffic, storm drainage
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                       37
3.0 Housing Element

have been retained in their original form with    above, review, evaluation or consideration of
minor revision, and their appropriateness for     major revisions to the Housing Element at the
the current planning period is not in question in present time is premature, and their
this Updated Housing Element. It is important     appropriateness for the current planning period
to note that as a newly incorporated City,        is not in question in this Updated Housing
Orinda's first Housing Element was prepared       Element.
and adopted only three years ago. The short
amount of time that has elapsed since adoption
                                                  3.4     LAND INVENTORY
makes it difficult to point to major quantitative
achievements. However, the policies and           Table 3.13 and Figure 4 identify sites available
programs contained in the first Housing           for residential development. Most of these
Element       are    reaffirmed     and     their sites, except those in upper El Toyonal and the
implementation programs given continued           Gateway Valley, are considered infill sites. A
support.                                          total 672 units could be built on these identified
                                                  sites.
3 . 3 . 8 Status of Existing Assisted Housing
State housing statutes adopted in 1989
(Chapter 1451) requires all housing elements to
address by January 1, 1991 the potential
conversion      of   existing   assisted-housing
development to non-low-income housing use. As
discussed in Section 3.2.4 of the Updated
Housing Element, Orinda has one assisted-
housing development, known as Senior Village,
which currently has a 20-year fixed subsidy, as
well as fixed bylaws requiring that it continue
to provide low and very-low income housing for
seniors and disabled persons. These conditions
are sufficient safeguards that these existing
assisted-housing units will not be converted to
market-rate dwellings within the time period
defined by the General Plan.
3 . 3 . 9 Consistency with General Plan and
Appropriateness of the Goals, Objectives
and Policies
The 1990 Updated Housing Element does not
represent a change from the goals of the
General Plan, nor a change from goals defined
in the 1987 Housing Element. Changes to
housing policies and objectives contained in this
document are considered to be minor relative to
the 1987 Housing Element. Such changes are
furthermore considered to be consistent with
the provisions of all other elements of the
current Orinda General Plan, and plans for
congestion management, the Zoning Ordinance,
and capital improvement programs. As stated
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                     38
3.0 Housing Element
TABLE 3.13
SITES AVAILABLE FOR DEVELOPMENT OF HOUSING
(Includes development of subdividable parcels; excludes approvals)
Site Number/Location                     Units Assumeda     Approximate        Current Zoning
                                                              Acreage
North Orinda
    Small Subdividable Parcels                  8 SF DU
Manzanita/St. Stephens
    Small Subdividable Parcels                  4 SF DU
El Toyonal
6. Johnson Ranchb                              22 SF DU           110       A-4
5. Seaborg Ranchb                              10 SF DU             51      A-2/SD-1
Downtownc
4. Santa Maria Churchd                        96 MF DU             3.2      R-20/SD-1
Bates/Glorietta
7. Southwood Estates                           16 SF DU             43      R-20/SD-1
8. Knickerbocker Lane                          16 SF DU             33      R-20/SD-1
    Small Subdividable Parcels                  8 SF DU
Gateway
9. Near Gateway Blvd b                      400 MF DU               40      A-2
Valley View/Hall Drive
10. Crestview                                   6 SF DU              6      R-65 +R-20/SD-1
11. Lost Valley                                 3 SF DU              3      R-20/SD-1
12. Hall Drive                                 10 SF DU              8      R-20/SD-1
13. Orinda Oaks                                27 SF DU           111       R-20/SD-1
    Small Subdividable Parcels                  5 SF DU
South Orinda
14. Lavenida                                   13 SF DU             10      R-12/SD-1
    Small Subdividable Parcels                 22 SF DU
Total                                           672 units        418e
Note: SF DU = single-family dwelling units; MF DU = multi-family dwelling units
Since originally mapped, site numbers 1 and 2 have been approved for development, and site 3 has
been acquired by the East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) as a watershed protection area.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      39
3.0 Housing Element
(Table 3.13)                                                  assumed that an average of three acres per
a Assumptions are preliminary estimates                       parcel would need to be under 25 percent to
    prepared to allow a projection of the                     allow access and to provide a building site.
    number of housing units likely to be added                Plan does not propose number of units in
    in orinda. The number of units listed for a               Gateway valley. Number is assumed for
    given site should not be interpreted as a                 EIR analysis and could be multi-family or
    determination of appropriate density; the                 single-family units.
    planning and approval process may result              b   These parcels are not currently served by
    in higher or lower numbers :                              utilities.
                                                          c   The Downtown Pine Grove School site is a
    Slope-density ordinance standards were
                                                              potential multifamily site, but would first
    applied using approximate determinations
                                                              have to be declared surplus, so is not
    of slope. On sites designated by the Plan
                                                              included in this table.
    for Very Low-Density development, the
                                                          d   The Santa Maria Church surplus land
    number of sites was based on the acreage
                                                              would yield up to 96 units if developed as
    under 25 percent slope, divided by three.
    Because the Very Low-Density areas are                    affordable housing under Section 3.3.6.s.
    predominantly over 25 percent slope, it is
Zoning Category Descriptions:
    R-12   -  Single-family residential on 12,000 square foot minimum size lots.
    R-20   -  Single-family residential on 20,000 square foot minimum size lots.
    R-65   -  Single-family residential on 65,000 square foot minimum size lots.
    A-2    -  General agricultural on 5 acre minimum size lots.
    A-4    -  Agricultural preserves on 20 acre minimum size lots.
    P-1    -  Planned unit district.
    SD-1   -  Slope density combining district (lot area limitations based upon the
              severity of average site slope).
                                                          Existing and projected market constraints to the
[Figure 4 Sites for Housing Development (Map)]
                                                          production of affordable housing can, in part, be
                                                          mitigated through implementation of the four
3.5     CONSTRAINTS TO THE                                programs listed under Policy 3.3.6.E. These
PRODUCTION OF HOUSING                                     programs provide incentives and opportunities
This section describes factors that act to either         for affordable units by: (1) reducing processing
constrain the production of housing generally,            costs through permit fast-tracking and waiver
or to increase the difficulty of making housing           or reduction of certain development fees; (2)
in Orinda available to moderate- and low-                 dissemination of Federal, State and County
income households.         Overall, the major             housing assistance program information; (3)
limiting factor in Orinda is the fact that it is          coordinating the efforts of a nonprofit housing
an almost built-out community, with remaining             agency; and (4) reducing production costs by
sites generally among those most expensive to             relaxing certain design standards. Further,
develop. The General Plan Housing Element                 since current market constraints are largely
would permit an increase in the number of                 economic in nature, the foregoing programs can
housing units in the city (above those existing,          be combined with others designed to allow a
approved and under construction) by 10 percent.           reduction in unit size, thereby bringing such
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                             40
3.0 Housing Element
units within the reach of low- and moderate-        unit. Considerable further costs may be incurred
income households.                                  if preparation of an Environmental Impact
                                                    Report is necessary, which is considered to be
3.5.1.Governmental Constraints                      likely for multifamily development and major
                                                    subdivisions in Orinda.
General Plan and Zoning Regulations. Orinda's
land-use regulations designate remaining sites      Payment for connections to sewer and water
in a manner that will result in developing a        systems are the responsibility of the developer.
character similar to that of the existing city.     Additionally, developers must aid in providing
The Plan designates one site for multifamily        public amenities for residents of their projects
housing at a density of up to 30 units per net acre by contributing either land or in lieu , fees.
for affordable senior housing. Two additional       The City currently levies an in lieu park-
sites are identified as locations where             dedication fee of $3,186 per detached single-
multifamily housing might be added by a             family unit for acquisition and improvement of
General Plan amendment.                             new park facilities. In addition, the City
The low-density development required by the         collects traffic fees of $2,800 for each single-
City limits the number of units to be constructed   family unit, or $2,100 for second or multiple-
in the city and increases housing cost. It must be  family units. Drainage fees of $.56 per square
recognized, however, that higher density is not     foot of impervious surface are also collected,
necessarily equated with more affordable units,     which can typically amount to about $2,500.
and that unregulated, the market is likely to       Collectively, these fees would represent a
produce units for households like those now         significant disincentive to the production of
living in the city rather than expanding            affordable housing; however, Program 3.3.6.E.1
housing opportunities for other income groups.      would waive or reduce these fees for affordable
                                                    units in multi-family projects, thus removing
In order to significantly encourage affordable      this constraint. In addition, this same program
housing to be developed within multifamily          provides for an accelerated processing of
land-use districts, the City is offering major      projects containing affordable units, thereby
incentives for the production of such housing.      increasing the relative attractiveness of such
Section 3.3.6.E provides such incentives in the     projects to prospective developers.
form of fast-tracking application processing,
waiver or reduction of impact fees, and reducing    Project     Processing      and      Improvement
design standards. These programs are intended       Requirements.        Residential     development
to compensate for the market demand to              application review by the City of Orinda is
develop only higher cost units.                     typical of most Bay Area cities and presents no
                                                    additional constraints to affordable housing.
Building Codes. The City requires construction      With the exception of rezonings (which require
to the standards of the Uniform Building Code.      City    Council approval)        all      tentative
Fees and Exactions.             Applicants for      subdivision maps and development plans are
development approvals and building permits          subject to approval          by the        Planning
now bear the costs of processing their              Commission. The City Design Review Board
applications. These costs are passed on to the      reviews many residential projects.
home buyers through increased home prices.          On and off-site improvements required for
This practice is common throughout California.      residential projects in Orinda are also typical
Total development fees (including utility           of most other Bay Area cities and present no
connections) for a single-family residence are      additional constraints to affordable housing. In
approximately $18,000. For a multifamily            addition, reductions to normal on- and off-site
building with seven units, fees would total         improvement standards may be permitted by
approximately $100,000 or just over $14,500 per
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                         41
3.0 Housing Element
the City through        the   implementation of
                                                   Potential multifamily sites would have
Section 3.3.6.E.4.
                                                   considerably lower land costs per unit. The per-
Federal Programs. Historically,           federal  unit cost of purchasing the surplus Santa Maria
programs have been instrumental in financing       Church for development of multifamily units at
subsidized housing. Since 1981, however, there     a density of 10 units per acre. However, the
have been drastic reductions in the federal        perunit cost at the higher density allowed for
government's involvement in assisting in           affordable senior housing on this site (30 units
housing production. Annual appropriations for      per acre) could be as low as $3,000.
federal housing assistance programs fell from
                                                   Cost of Construction. As reported by the
$27 billion to $9.9 billion between 1981 and
                                                   Construction     Industry     Research    Board,
1984. Currently, there are no federal programs
                                                   construction costs in the Bay Area rose by
providing funds for the construction of housing
                                                   approximately 43 percent from 1985 to 1989.
for families.
                                                   Cost for a standard-quality single-family
While Orinda would be an unlikely location for     residence in the Bay Area as of September 1990
subsidized housing whatever the federal            was estimated at $150,000. A developer active
funding policies, it is important to recognize     in Orinda reports construction costs of $75 per
that the federal withdrawal from involvement       square foot for a one-story, 2,200-square-foot
in housing places a greater emphasis on the role   home. Constructing units of the size, quality
that all jurisdictions must play in providing      and amenities common in Orinda adds
affordable housing.                                considerably to construction costs. A developer
                                                   of patio homes in the area reports costs of about
3 . 5 . 2 Nongovernmental Constraint               $75 per square foot for construction, and total
                                                   contract construction costs (excluding design,
Availability of Financing/Interest Rates.          approval, financing, sales costs and fees) of
Prevailing interest rates affect the rate of       about $100 per square foot. There is a strong
construction and cost of new units as well as the  correlation between increases in land costs and
ability of households to purchase homes.           rising construction costs in that builders
Falling interest rates in 1986 have reduced costs  generally do not locate inexpensive homes on
for home-buyers and increased the number of        expensive lots.
households able to qualify for home loans.
Table 3-10 identifies the variation in             Geologic Constraints. Unstable soils, steep
affordable prices for different income groups,     slopes, landslide susceptibility and other
based on two different assumed interest rates.     hazardous conditions limit the potential
                                                   intensity of residential land use in many areas.
Land Costs.       High land costs in Orinda        These conditions also limit the number of
contribute to the price of housing. Existing half- dwellings that can safely be accommodated on
acre lots are generally priced above $150,000,     a given parcel. These conditions create the need
with many lots priced in excess of $300,000.       for expensive soils analysis, grading and
Table 3.10 indicates the highest unit price        construction techniques, and geologic hazards
affordable to moderate-income households is        have an inflationary impact on housing prices.
$188,200, assuming an interest rate of 10
percent. Substandard lots, many of which are       Community Concerns. The Housing Element and
less than one-third the size of the standard       other elements of the Plan have been
lots, with limitations on allowable house size,    developed in large part through the efforts of a
would be expected to be available for much         volunteer committee of Orinda residents.
lower prices. These substandard lots often have    Noncommittee members have participated
topographical and soils problems which make        through a series of public meetings. Throughout
building costs expensive.                          the process, there has been a clear community
                                                   preference for adding diversity to the housing
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      42
3.0 Housing Element
market while maintaining single-family           Section 3 Footnotes:
character to the greatest extent possible. These
                                                 1. (from page 18J Different figures for persons
preferences are expressed in the Plan.
                                                 per household or persons per unit for different
                                                 time periods appear in this Updated Housing
3.6.    OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY                 Element. The 1980 U.S. Census figure is 2.87
        CONSERVATION                             persons per occupied housing unit. A 2 percent
The State        of California     sets energy   vacancy rate existed in 1980, so the household
conservation standards for new residential       population divided by the total number of
construction. The City can promote energy        housing units was 2.80. The state Department of
conservation in project design through a variety Finance has reported that there were 2.757
of measures.                                     persons per unit in Orinda in 1990. The ratio
                                                 used to calculate population at buildout is 2.44
It is in approving site plans that the City can  persons per household cited by ABAG for
assure new developments will have energy         Orinda in 2005 (Protections '90). Vacancy
efficient design. Prior to project approval, the assumptions are built into the 1995 and 2005
City can require developers (or their designers) figures, but not specifically stated.
to demonstrate that energy conservation and
solar orientation have been a consideration in   2. (from page 18) The nine-county Bay Region
site and landscape design.                       consists of: San Francisco, Marin, Sonoma,
                                                 Solano, Contra Costa, Alameda, Santa Clara,
Many state and federal programs for energy       San Mateo, and Napa counties.
conservation (including tax credits and zero-
interest-rate loans) were terminated at the end  3. (from page 21) Projection based on
of 1986. PG&E offers residential customers free  "Regional      Economicdemographic     System"
energy audits and other energy-conservation      (REDS) utilized by ABAG since 1986, an
incentives. Orinda residents may also take       analytical and econometric model which
advantage of a cheaper off-peak rate (peak       considers behavior for industry sectors,
hours being from 2 PM to 6 PM) if they pay for   available data and projections from historical
installation of a special meter.                 data.
The City should work with local utilities and    4. (from page 31) This figure is from the 1980
public energy agencies to identify key energy    Census. Since that time, 150 one-bedroom units
conservation measures relevant to the city.      have been built in the Senior Village.
Appropriate ordinances and information           5. (from page 31) Open-occupancy units are
dissemination to assure an energy conserving     defined as those units available to a l l
building stock should be developed from such     applicants and not only to certain groups, such
investigations.                                  as seniors or low-income families.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                  43
3.0 Housing Element
                                                    Historic and archaeological resources accepted
4.0 ENVIRONMENTAL                                   for the National Register of Historic Places
       RESOURCES MANAGEMENT                         include the Orinda Theatre, American Trust
       SECTION                                      Bank, and the Joaquin Moraga Adobe. Other
                                                    historic sites are to be considered by the City
                                                    for formal designation. Although unique
OVERVIEW
                                                    historical and archaeological resources are
This section includes three state-mandated          offered some protection under State law, the
elements: the Conservation Element, the Safety      Orinda General Plan provides additional
Element, and the Noise Element. Material in         protection for sites and structures of historic
these sections presents the environmental           interest. Only a very small part of the
setting in Orinda and discusses several factors     Planning      Area      has    been     surveyed
that directly affect the location of new            archaeologically          and         additional
development in Orinda. These include: location      archaeological/ historical sites may exist.
of wildlife habitats, creeks, landslides, and       Accordingly, the Plan provides a mechanism
earthquake faults.                                  for      further       archaeological/historical
                                                    discovery, for maintaining a data base for this
The description of Orinda in this section
                                                    resource, and for protection of known historical
reveals some of the components of the semi-
                                                    resources.
rural character of the City: undeveloped
ridgelines and hillsides, heavy tree cover and      Wildlife and Wildlife Habitats. The wide
other natural vegetation, limited grading and       range of habitats found in regional park and
disturbance      of     existing       topography,  watershed land surrounding the City and the
unchanneled creeks and their associated plant       proximity of EBMUD's wildlife refuge at the
and animal environments, and visible vacant         San Pablo Reservoir contribute to the abundance
land within and surrounding residential areas.      and variety of wildlife in Orinda. Information
Each of the following elements contains setting     from the Natural Diversity Data Base of the
information for individual topics, a brief          California Department of Fish and Game
discussion of issues, and guiding and               shows that several rare or endangered species
implementing policies. Not all background           have been located in or near the Orinda
information is included in the General Plan         Planning Area. State and federal law protects
document. Additional information for many of        rare, threatened and endangered animal
these topics is included in the Environmental       species by preserving habitats. Plants with
Impact Report on the General Plan.                  these same designations are less protected, and
                                                    State and Federal law requires only prior
                                                    notification of any disturbance so that the
4.1     CONSERVATION ELEMENT                        plants can be removed.
According to state law, topics to be considered
in the Conservation Element which are               General Plan policies seek to maintain the
pertinent to Orinda include: water and its          wide variety of wildlife in the Planning Area
hydraulic force; wildlife; prevention and           by preserving habitats. This will be achieved
control of the pollution of streams and other       through the City's environmental review
waterways; regulation of the use of land in         process, and by General Plan designation of
stream channels; prevention, control and            open space and parks.
correction of the erosion of soils; protection of   Creeks and Drainage.          Orinda's creeks
watersheds; the location, quantity and quality      contribute to the semi-rural character of the
of the rock, sand and gravel resources; and flood   City and provide valuable riparian habitat.
control.                                            San Pablo Creek is channelized in the
Historic     and Archaeological          Resources. downtown area, and Lauterwasser Creek is
Resources include both structures and sites.        underground at Dalewood Drive, but creeks in
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      44
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
other locations are in a natural state. The       would land immediately to the east of San
Contra Costa County Flood Control District is     Pablo Dam Road and Camino Pablo. If Lake
responsible for maintenance of the improved       Cascade Dam were also to fail, flooding would
sections of San Pablo Creek, but maintenance of   affect additional land, extending almost to
creeks elsewhere is the responsibility of         downtown Orinda. Failure of the San Pablo
landowners.                                       Dam would not cause flooding Orinda. Flood
                                                  waters would flow toward the Bay.
New development can cause increased runoff,
erosion of slopes, accumulation of debris         No dam in Contra Costa County has failed as a
resulting in localized flooding and bank erosion, result of earthquake shaking. No dams in the
and pollution and sedimentation in creeks and     Orinda area straddle known active fault traces,
downstream reservoirs. General Plan policies      and the dams are designed to withstand strong
minimize these negative impacts by restricting    ground shaking.       However, plans should
residential development near creeks, and by       recognize there is always a small possibility of
requiring drainage studies as part of project     dam failure under the stresses generated by a
approval.                                         severe earthquake.       In addition, Federal
                                                  Insurance Administration flood hazard maps
Water Quality. The San Pablo and Briones
                                                  from the U.S. Department of Housing and
EBMUD reservoirs are just north of the
                                                  Urban Development show a small area of Zone
Planning Area. In order to minimize the risk of
                                                  A land (100-year flood potential) immediately
reservoir pollution from urban development,
                                                  adjacent to San Pablo Creek, Lauterwasser
EBMUD has acquired much of the surrounding
                                                  Creek, and Lake Cascade.
watershed. General Plan policies support the
concept of keeping much of the land on the        Mineral Resources. The Orinda Planning Area
north and west of the City which drains into      contains two areas that may be designated by
these reservoirs designated as parks, very low-   the State Mining and Geology Board as resource
density residential, and watershed land. This     sectors for construction aggregate. These areas
is for both water quality value and aesthetic     are mapped on Figure 5.
value.
                                                  According to state law, following formal
Flood Hazard and Control.           Three dams    designation by the State Mining and Geology
regulated by the State of California are          Board of an area as a resource sector, the
located in the Orinda area: San Pablo Dam, a      affected city is required to prepare policies
hydraulic fill dam, owned by EBMUD; Briones       allowing a recovery of such resources.
Reservoir, an earthen dam, owned by EBMUD;        However, the City of Orinda has officially
and Lake Cascade Dam, an earthen dam, owned       protested the possible designation of these sites
by the Orinda Country Club. The Division of       as significant regional mineral resources, and
Safety of Dams within the California              the General Plan policies prohibit mineral
Department of Water Resources has broad           resource extraction.
responsibilities over these dams to ensure that
                                                  Air Quality. The closest air quality monitoring
they meet adequate standards of public safety
                                                  stations operated by the Bay Area Air Quality
consistent with earthquake motions to which
                                                  Management District in surrounding areas are in
they may be subject to. Periodic inspection of-
                                                  Richmond, Oakland and Concord.
existing dams is carried out, and the owner is
required to make any improvements found to be
necessary.
                                                  [Figure 5: Mineral Resources (Map)]
Inundation maps reproduced by Contra Costa
                                                  These locations have experienced relatively
County show that in the event of a dam failure
                                                  few air quality problems, although Concord
at the Briones Reservoir, land south of Briones
                                                  has recorded ozone levels exceeding federal
Dam to San Pablo Reservoir would flood, as
                                                  standards.     Additionally,    as    congestion
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                    45
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
increases on Highway 24, Orinda may
                                                     J.     Open space to the north and west of t h e
experience locally high levels of carbon
                                                            Planning Area adjacent to watershed areas
monoxide near the freeway when certain
                                                            and parks shall be preserved.
climatic conditions are present. Growth
anticipated under the General Plan is likely to      K. Limit septic tanks to very low-density
contribute only a very small proportion of the              areas.
additional trips on Highway 24 between now
                                                     L. Promote energy conservation programs and
and 2005. Therefore, General Plan policies can
                                                            practices.
do little to influence air quality in the area.
                                                     M. Encourage preservation of EBMUD land for
4 . 1 . 1 Conservation Element: Guiding                     watershed and recreation use.
Policies
                                                     N. Encourage undergrounding of power lines
A. Preserve Orinda's historic structures and                and replacement of utility towers w i t h
       sites, unique trees and landforms.                   single poles.
B. Preserve rare and endangered species.
                                                     4 . 1 . 2 Conservation Element: Implementing
C. Preserve valuable wildlife              habitats, Policies
       particularly riparian habitats.
                                                     A. Conduct an archival study of resources, map
D. Preserve oak woodlands and other native                  the general locations of resources, and
       trees,   and     encourage    planting   and         review development proposals to determine
       reforestation of oaks and other natives in           the potential impacts on archaeological
       hillside areas.                                      and historic resources and the need for more
                                                            detailed study. Require additional study of
E. Protect creeks from siltation, pollution, and
                                                            development proposals on sites w i t h
       debris buildup to minimize the danger of
                                                            moderate probability that such resources
       flooding in storms, to retain the aesthetic
                                                            exist.
       and habitat values of the creeks in t h e i r
       natural state, and enhance and restore them   B. Adopt          a    Landmarks       Preservation
       where      possible.       Prohibit    major         Ordinance to protect structures, sites and
       channelization.                                      areas having a special            historical,
                                                            architectural, natural, or aesthetic interest
F. Achieve aesthetically sensitive grading
                                                            or value.
       that conforms to the natural contours,
       ensures safety and preserves trees and other  C. Require environmental habitat assessment
       vegetation to the greatest practical extent.         for any major development determined to be
                                                            in an environmentally sensitive area.
G. Protect visually prominent ridgelines and
       hillsides from development.                          This assessment will include an on-site
                                                            inspection, and a written description of any
H. Protect San Pablo Reservoir and Briones
                                                            habitats, plant and animal species
       Reservoir from pollution and siltation
                                                            observed, species likely to be present,
       resulting from development within t h e
                                                            likely impacts of the proposed project, and
       Planning Area.
                                                            mitigation measures which will preserve
I.     Prohibit mineral resource extraction except          the habitats.
       as it is incidental to grading for
                                                     D. Where possible, maintain connecting open-
       development, safety, or recontouring of
                                                            space areas so that wildlife can have free
       previously quarried areas. Quarrying and
                                                            movement through the area, bypass urban
       mining would be destructive to t h e
                                                            areas, and have access to adjacent regional
       environment of Orinda.
                                                            parks and open space.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                          46
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
                                                       preservation ordinance. The ordinance
E. Preserve drainage easements along creeks in
                                                       would     include    permit    and    worker
    order to protect adjacent buildings from
                                                       certification requirements.
    flooding, and to preserve valuable riparian
    vegetation. Where riparian vegetation          N. Develop        a    comprehensive      energy
    has to be disturbed for construction, re-          conservation plan. The plan should be
    vegetation with local riparian species is          coordinated with those of adjoining
    required. The City shall develop design            communities and utility companies and
    policies for development near creeks.              with experts in the field. It should include
                                                       policies, ordinances and informational
F. Develop a creek maintenance ordinance.
                                                       elements.
G. Develop an erosion control ordinance.
H. Review development proposals to ensure          4.2     SAFETY ELEMENT
    site design and construction methods t h a t
                                                   The Safety Element of the General Plan
    minimize soil erosion and volume and
                                                   provides information for the protection of the
    velocity of surface runoff, and mitigate
                                                   community from unreasonable risks associated
    impacts on properties below.
                                                   with the effects of seismically induced surface
    Soil erosion can result in siltation of creeks rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, and
    and eventual siltation in San Pablo            dam failure; slope instability leading to
    Reservoir. Erosion can be controlled by        landslides, subsidence and other geologic
    limiting     surface   runoff,    minimizing   hazards;     flooding;    hazardous    material
    exposure of raw soil during storm season,      accidents; and wildland and urban fires (Gov.
    early mulching and seeding of slopes, and      Code, Sec. 65302[g]).
    temporary or permanent siltation ponds.
                                                   Seismicity. Like most cities in California and
    Stream bank erosion can be prevented using
                                                   particularly the Bay Area, Orinda is located
    upstream detention basins and siltation
                                                   near several active earthquake faults within
    basins.
                                                   the San Andreas system. The closest active
I.  Limit development in the proximity of          fault is the Hayward fault which passes
    reservoirs to prevent siltation and water      through Berkeley and Kensington, and is
    contamination.                                 located approximately four miles to the west.
J.  Encourage the conservation of energy           The Wildcat fault is located approximately
    through the promotion of solar design, and     two miles west of downtown Orinda. Based on
    recycling of newspaper, aluminum and           its position and orientation it is reasonably
    bottles. Provisions should be made to allow    considered to be a branch of the Hayward fault.
    for a conveniently located and screened        Other faults in the area include the Pinole
    recycling area in the downtown.                fault and the Moraga fault. Figure 6 shows
                                                   named and unnamed faults in the Orinda area.
K. Control noticeable accessory items such as
    windmills, solar panels, satellite dishes,     Landslide.      Landsliding is a significant
    antennas and domed inflated swimming           constraint on urban development in the Orinda
    pool covers by ordinance.                      area. Figure 7 shows landslide deposits as
                                                   interpreted from aerial photography. Many of
L. Control septic tank use by ordinance. Septic    the intensively developed hillsides are
    tanks will be permitted only where t h e y     relatively landslide-free, while the slopes of
    conform to City and County standards.          the Gateway Valley consist mainly of
M. Develop an ordinance pertaining to t h e        landslide deposits. Although geologic studies
    planting, maintenance and removal of           are relatively abundant, it is unrealistic to
    heritage trees and all trees on City           expect existing data for so large an area to be
    property, and in addition, consider a view     specific enough to validate or invalidate
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                     47
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
individual land-use proposals on marginal          hazardous        materials     in quantity,      the
lands.    Detailed, independent geotechnical       possibility of a toxic materials accident exists.
studies are necessary for virtually all proposed   The EBMUD filter plant on Camino Pablo uses
subdivisions.                                      some toxic chemicals. The main risk relates to
                                                   the transportation of hazardous materials on
                                                   Highway 24, and on Camino Pablo and Moraga
[Figure 6: Earthquake Faults (11x17 map)]          Way. Transportation of some hazardous
                                                   materials       (flammable       materials,   liquid
[Figure 7: Landslide and Other           Surficial petroleum gas, or poisonous gas in tank trucks)
Deposits (11x17 map)]                              through the Caldecott Tunnel is limited to
                                                   between 3 a.m. and 5 a.m. by the California
                                                   Vehicle Code (Section 31301). There are no
Flood hazard. Flood hazard and the potential       restrictions on transportation on the remainder
for dam failure is discussed in the Conservation   of Highway 24. Drivers may use any route
Element. Flooding does not present a significant   through Orinda unless a local ordinance
risk to Orinda, although the potential for local   designates truck routes. Highway 24 is not
flood damage caused by overtopping creeks          designated by the California Highway Patrol
during storms does exist.                          as an approved route for explosives, and
Fire protection. The Orinda Fire Protection        therefore none should be carried on this
District is the primary fire protection agency in  highway.
Orinda, although portions of the City are          A general policy on hazardous materials is
within the Contra Costa County Consolidated        included in the Plan.             Further policies
Fire Protection District or the Moraga Fire        concerning truck routes and response to toxic
Protection District. The Orinda Fire Protection    material accidents will be developed for the
District operates three stations in Orinda:        Emergency Preparedness Plan.
Downtown on Orinda Way; Orchard Road and
Moraga Way, and Honey Hill Road and Via            Evacuation Routes. In the event that Highway
Las Cruces. In addition to fire fighting and fire  24 is closed, there are few routes out of Orinda,
inspection, the District also operates a weed      particularly routes leading to the west. The
abatement program in the residential area, and     Emergency Preparedness Plan will designate
makes recommendations concerning fire-             evacuation routes for use in the event of a City
resistant planting for new developments.           wide emergency.
Fire hazards in Orinda are increased by the        4 . 2 . 1 Safety Element: Guiding Policies
potential for wildfires on open-space lands,
dense tree cover, and fire fighting on slopes.     A. Geologic and seismic hazards shall be
Orinda is within the area of Critical Fire                mitigated or development shall be located
Weather Class II, with 1 to 9.5 days a year of            away from geologic and seismic hazards in
critical fire weather. Critical fire weather              order to preserve life and protect property.
days are based on atmospheric humidity. Also
                                                   B. Encourage a high level of fire protection
contributing to the wildfire hazard are steep
                                                          and fireprevention education.
slopes and combustible vegetation. Most of the
undeveloped slopes in Orinda are "High             C. Development shall be located away from
Hazard" as defined by the Fire Hazard                     floodprone areas unless flood risks can be
Severity Scale; fire fighters have to deal with           mitigated.
slopes of up to 60 percent, chaparral cover, and   D. Provide public protection from hazards
several days a year of critical fire weather.             associated with the use, storage and
Hazardous Materials. Although Orinda has no               transportation of hazardous materials.
heavy industry and few firms likely to store
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                         48
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
                                                         Firebreaks and fire-access easements
4 . 2 . 2 Safety Element: Implementing
Policies                                                 should be made a condition of project
                                                         approval.
A. A geotechnical investigation and report,
                                                     I.  Reduce the level of risk from toxic and
       including assessments of seismic and
                                                         hazardous materials in Orinda               by
       landslide risks shall be required for new
                                                         regulating the transportation and storage of
       development in Orinda, including single-
                                                         these materials into, through, and out of
       family residences unless exempted by t h e
                                                         Orinda, and through an educational
       City of Orinda. Any other facility t h a t
                                                         program on the proper disposal methods for
       could create a geologic hazard, such as a
                                                         hazardous, toxic and polluting materials.
       road on hillside terrain, must also h a v e
       such an investigation.                        J.  Prepare       and     adopt     fire-resistant
                                                         landscaping       requirements     for    new
B. Evidence of probable geologic hazard will
                                                         subdivisions. The Orinda Fire Protection
       require a geotechnical study by a registered
                                                         District currently uses guidelines developed
       soil engineer or registered geologist to be
                                                         by the State Department of Forestry. A
       reviewed by geotechnical consultants
                                                         committee will be appointed to review
       selected by the City.
                                                         these guidelines and develop an ordinance
C. Study alternative mechanisms to include in            for Orinda.
       an ordinance which ensures that necessary
                                                     K. Establish standards for public and private
       geotechnical     improvements      in    new
                                                         roads that ensure adequate access for fire-
       subdivisions are permanently maintained
                                                         protection equipment.
       to provide protection to on-site and off-site
       homeowners to the greatest feasible extent.   L. Develop and implement           an Emergency
                                                         Preparedness Plan.
D. Develop grading and drainage regulations
       to ensure long-term stability of the finished M. Develop          appropriate        floodplain
       site and individual lots           to   meet      management        ordinances   and     related
       Conservation Element policies and to              measures consistent with official HUD
       protect Orinda streets from construction          flood-hazard boundary maps.
       damage.
                                                     N. Cooperate with other agencies to assure
E. Land development shall be consistent with             adequate medical and other emergency
       the natural carrying capacity of nearby           services.
       creeks, streams and other waterways.
                                                     O. Develop an ordinance requiring posting of
F. Encourage a high level of fire protection to          the use of toxic materials.
       residential and commercial development.
       G. Ordinances      shall    be    developed   4.3     NOISE ELEMENT
       requiring fire protection features, such as:
                                                     Traffic is the primary source of continuous noise
       fire-retardant roof material for new and
                                                     in Orinda. Noise contour maps (Figures 8 and 9)
       replacement roofs, sprinklers for new
                                                     have been prepared for 1985 noise conditions
       construction, adequate      provisions    for
                                                     and for projected 2005 noise levels. The 1985
       emergency access, and other fire protection
                                                     contours were developed using a combination of
       features.
                                                     noise modeling and measurement techniques.
H. Minimize damage from grass fires through          Three types of measurements were made: a
       the development of firebreaks in dedicated    continuous 24-hour measurement along Moraga
       open space and fire-access easements.         Way to determine the typical daily variation
                                                     in noise levels in Orinda; 15-minute
                                                     measurements with traffic counts along Camino
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                         49
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
Pablo and Moraga Way; and a series of five-               are penalized 10 decibels (dB). The dB scale is
minute spot measurements throughout the                   logarithmic; a 3 dB difference is normally
Highway 24 corridor to evaluate the influence             discernible and a 10 dB increase is subjectively
of terrain on the location of the noise contours in       heard as a doubling in loudness.
this area.       The location of the noise
                                                          Improvement of the noise environment for
measurements are shown on Figure 8, and the
                                                          homes adjoining Camino Pablo and Moraga
noise measurements are described in Table 4.1.
                                                          Way will be difficult because opening for access
The day/night average noise level (Ldn)                   would make a sound wall ineffective. Along
describes 24-hour average noise levels                    Highway 24 the line between the sound source
measured in decibels (dBA) taking account of              and most homes above could not be blocked out
increased sensitivity to noise during nighttime           by a sound wall.
hours. Sound levels between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.
TABLE 4.1: SUMMARY OF NOISE MEASUREMENTS
Location                         Length of                          Leq2        Calculated
Numberl         Day              Measurement        Start Time      (dBa)       Ldn3 (dBA)
         1       12-19-85           5 min.           10:00 a.m.         52           55
         2       12-19-85           5 min.           10:06 a.m.         55           58
         3       12-19-85           5 min.           10:15 a.m.         72           75
         4       12-19-85           5 min.           10:25 a.m.         55           58
         5       12-19-85           5 min.           10:35 a.m.         51           54
         6       12-19-85           5 min.           10:42 a.m.         53           56
         7       12-19-85           5 min.           11:00 a.m.         66           69
         8       12-19-85           5 min.           11:08 a.m.         48           51
         9       12-19-85           5 min.           11:20 a.m.         52           55
        10       12-19-85           5 min.           11:23 a.m.         63           66
        11       12-19-85           5 min.           11:33 a.m.         70           73
        12       12-19-85           5 min.           11:45 a.m.         52           55
        13       12-19-85           5 min.           11:52 a.m.         63           66
                 12-18-85
        14       12-19-85           5 min.           Noon               70           73
        15       12-19-85           5 min.           3:00 p.m.                       66
                                                                                 (measured)
        16       12-19-85           5 min.           3:30 p.m.          66           68
        17       12-19-85           5 min.           4:23 p.m.          69           71
Notes:
1.     See Figure 7.
2.     Leq - Sound level for monitoring period.
3.     Ldn - Day/night noise equivalent.
       dBA - A-weighted decibels. (a-weighting is a method of weighting frequencies to
       correspond to the way sound is perceived by the human ear.)
Source: Charles M. Salter Associates, Inc.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                           50
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
4 . 3 . 1 Noise Element: Guiding Policies
A. Where practical, mitigate traffic noise to
       acceptable levels.
B. Prevent unnecessary noise from all sources.
4 . 3 . 2 Noise Element: Implementing
Policies
A. Require an acoustical study and any
       necessary noise level mitigation where new
       residential or commercial development is
       proposed along Highway 24 corridor and
       adjacent tomajor arterials where projected
       noise contours are 60 Ldn or more.
B. Review all multi-family development
       proposals within the projected 60 Ldn
       contour for compliance with noise standards
       (45 Ldn in any habitable room) as required
       by State law.
C. Develop ordinance to limit noise created by
       temporary activities such as building
       construction to the shortest duration
       possible, and to daytime hours wherever
       possible. All reasonable noise mitigation
       measures would be used.
D. Incorporate appropriate noise mitigation in
       Gateway Valley road designs w h e r e
       exisiting     or     planned       residential
       development would be affected.
E. Encourage owners of homes subject to traffic
       noise nuisance to install noise installation
       and to make design modifications t h a t
       would improve the noise environment.
       Consider providing technical advice.
F. Adopt a comprehensive noise ordinance.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                           51
4.0 Environmental Resources Management Section
5.0 GROWTH MANAGEMENT
ELEMENT                                           The Growth Management Element is also
                                                  consistent with the requirements of the Contra
                                                  Costa Transportation Improvement and Growth
5.1        PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY                  Management Program (Measure C), approved
                                                  by Contra Costa voters in 1988.
5 . 1 . 1 Purpose
The purpose of the Growth Management              5.2       PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Element of the Orinda General Plan is to          Public participation in the development of the
establish policies and standards for traffic      Growth Management Element occurred through
Levels of Service, and performance standards      an introductory Planning Commission study
for parks, fire, police, sanitary facilities,     session held on February 5, 1991. Hearings were
water and flood control in order to ensure        subsequently conducted by the Planning
generally that public facilities are provided     Commission and City Council which were open
consistent with the standards adopted in this     to the general public. A 45 day public review
element. The Growth Management Element            period for the draft Growth Management
also contains a discussion of housing options and Element        and   supporting   environmental
job opportunities on a city, subregional and      documents was provided prior to adoption.
countywide        basis.     By  adopting     and Also, copies of the draft Element documents
implementing this Element, the City of Orinda     were forwarded to neighboring jurisdictions,
intends to comply with the requirements of the    the Southwest Area Transportation Planning
Contra Costa Transportation Improvement and       Committee, Contra Costa Transportation
Growth Management Program (Measure C) and         Authority, and other interested organizations
to establish a comprehensive, longrange           and individuals.
program that will match the demands for
public facilities generated by new development
with plans, capital improvement programs and      5.3       TRAFFIC SERVICE STANDARDS
                                                  AND PROGRAMS
development mitigation programs.             This
Growth Management Element is a framework
                                                  5 . 3 . 1 Introduction
for the City to use and, as with other General
Plan elements, it can be amended over time as     Traffic service standards and programs in the
needed.                                           Growth Management Element are intended to
                                                  complement policies in the Land Use and
5 . 1 . 2 Authority                               Circulation Elements of the Orinda General
                                                  Plan. These traffic standards and programs
The Growth Management Element is adopted          must be implemented in order to adequately
pursuant to the authority granted to local        resolve regional traffic issues faced by Orinda
jurisdictions by Section 65303 of the Government  residents. Cooperation from special districts
Code of the State of California which states:     and nearby jurisdictions in the planning of
       "The general plan may include any other    growth and management of traffic congestion
       elements or address any other subjects     will be required to accomplish policies
       which, in the judgement of the legislative contained within this Element. Background
       body, relate to the physical development   traffic information is contained within the
       of the county or city."                    Technical Supplement of the General Plan.
The Growth Management Element is consistent
with the other elements of the Orinda General
Plan.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                   52
5.0 Growth and Management Element
                                                    (ii.)    Orinda's      Five-Year        Capital
5 . 3 . 2 Standards and Related Policies
                                                    Improvement program includes projects which,
A. Routes of Reqional Significance. The City        when constructed, are projected to result in
       of Orinda, in cooperation with the           operations better than or equivalent to those
       Southwest Area Transportation Planning       specified in the standard.
       Committee ("SWAT") and the Contra
                                                    D. Findinqs of Special Circumstances. For any
       Costa Transportation Authority ("CCTA"),
                                                         Basic Route signalized intersection that
       has designated State Highway 24 as the
                                                         will not meet Level of Service standards as
       City's     single  Route      of    Regional
                                                         described in Policy 5.3.2.C, the City may
       Significance. Additional routes may be
                                                         request and the CCTA may make Findings
       proposed by the City, approved by SWAT
                                                         of Special Circumstances, as described in
       and adopted by the CCTA. Orinda has and
                                                         Policy 5.3.3.D.
       will continue to participate with other
       agencies in developing Action Plans for
       Routes of Regional Significance in Contra
       Costa County.
B. Standards for Basic Routes. All signalized
       intersections not designated as Routes of
       Regional Significance are classified as
       Basic Routes. The following standards
       apply to signalized intersections on Basic
       Routes as described in Policy 5.3.3.C.
       Rural: LOS low-C (70 to 74) v\c
       Semi-Rural: LOS high-C (75 to 79) v\c
       Suburban: LOS low-D (80 to 84) v\c
       Urban: LOS high-D (85 to 89) v\c
       Central Business District: LOS low-E (90 to
       94) v\c
As indicated in Table 5.1, all signalized Orinda
intersections are designated either "Suburban"
or "Central Business District".
C. Application of Standards.              Standards
       apply to signalized intersections on a l l
       Basic Routes unless the City of Orinda and
       the CCTA make Findings of Special
       Circumstances in accordance with Policy
       5.3.2.D.
The City of Orinda and the CCTA find that
Level of Service standards are considered to be
met if:
(i.) Measurement of actual conditions at the
intersections indicates that operations are
equivalent to or better than those specified in
the standard; or
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                     53
5.0 Growth and Management Element
TABLE 5.1        MINIMUM TRAFFIC LEVEL OF SERVICE FOR BASIC ROUTE SIGNALIZED
                 INTERSECTIONS
              BASIC ROUTE                    LAND USE            MINIMUM
              SIGNALIZED                     CATEGORY            LEVEL OF
              INTERSECTION                                       SERVICE
     1.       Manzanita Drive/               Suburban            Low-D (80 to 84)
              Camino Pablo                                              (V/C)
    2.        Miner Road/                    Suburban            Low-D (80 to 84)
              Camino Pablo                                              (V/C)
    3.        Orinda Way/                    Central             Low-E (90 to 94)
              El Toyonal/                    Business                   (V/C)
              Camino Pablo                   District
    4.        Camino Sobrante/               Central             Low-E (90 to 94)
              Camino Pablo                   Business                   (V/C)
                                             District
    5.        Santa Maria Way/               Central             Low-E (90 to 94)
              Orinda Way                     Business                   (V/C)
                                             District
    6.        Santa Maria Way /              Central             Low-E (90 to 94)
              Camino Pablo/                  Business                   (V/C)
              Hwy 24 westbound on ramp       District
    7.        Moraga Way/                    Central             Low-E (90 to 94)
              Camino Encinas/                Business                   (V/C)
              Camino Pablo                   District
    8.        Glorietta Blvd/                Suburban            Low-D (80 to 84)
              Moraga Way                                                (V/C)
    9.        El Camino Moraga/              Suburban            Low-D (80 to 84)
              Moraga Way                                                (V/C)
    10.       Ivy Drive/                     Suburban            Low-D (80 to 84)
              Moraga Way                                                (V/C)
              (Joint with Moraga)
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                       54
5.0 Growth and Management Element
                                                         CCTA, consistent with the procedure
5 . 3 . 3 Implementing Policies and Programs:            prescribed by the CCTA. The request shall
General (Required)                                       include identification of alternative
A. Local Development Mitigation Proqram.                 standards      and    proposed     mitigation
       The City has adopted and will continue to         measures and programs.(1)
       implement          the        Transportation E. Capital Improvement Programs. Capital
       Improvement Program Fee Ordinance                 projects sponsored by the City and necessary
       requiring developers to mitigate impacts of       to maintain and improve traffic operations
       their development projects on the local and       will be included in the Five-Year Capital
       regional transportation system. Impacts           Improvement Program. Funding sources for
       may be mitigated on Regional Routes, Basic        such projects as well as intended project
       Routes or transit systems.                        phasing will be generally identified in the
B. Local Street Maintenance and Improvement              Capital Improvement Program.
       Funds. Transportation projects intended to   F. Multi-jurisdictional             Transportation
       meet or maintain Level of Service                 Planninq. The City will participate in
       standards, to implement Action Plans for          multijurisdictional transportation planning
       Regional Routes, and to provide mitigation        by sharing in the activities of the
       for intersections subject to Findings of          Southwest Area Transportation Planning
       Special Circumstances, may be funded              Committee           (SWAT),         including
       through use of Local Street Improvement           development of Regional Route Action
       and Maintenance Funds allocated by the            Plans; and cooperating in planning for
       CCTA. In no case will revenue from that           intersections subject to Findings of Special
       source replace private developer funding          Circumstances located in other jurisdictions
       for transportation projects determined to be      when it is believed by the City of Orinda
       required for new growth to meet or maintain       that local actions contribute to conditions at
       standards. Measure C funding may also be          such intersections.
       used      for   other      CCTA-authorized
                                                    G. Conflict Resolution. The City will
       transportation       benefits    such     as
                                                         participate in the CCTA's conflict
       transportation planning studies or for
                                                         resolution process, as needed.
       maintenance and rehabilitation projects not
       directly related to attainment of standards.
C. Achieving Level of Service Standards. In
       the event that any Basic Route signalized
       intersection does not meet adopted
       standards, the City will, in order to attain
                                                    (1)
       the standards specified in Policy 5.3.2.B,       1The CCTA can accept Findings of special
       consider amendments to the General Plan,          Circumstances based on one or more of these
       Zoning Ordinance, Capital Improvement             four criteria: 1) a high proportion of
       Program or other relevant plans and               through traffic; 2) an inability to fund
       policies.                                         improvements required to           bring   an
                                                         intersection into compliance; 3) impacts to
D. Findinqs of Special Circumstances. If such
                                                         the    environment      and     neighborhood
       amendments as are described in Policy             character that are in conflict with General
       5.3.3.C are not possible or feasible for          Plan policies and objectives; and, 4) a
       reasons discussed as "Criteria for Findings       conflict with economic development or
       of Special Circumstances" in materials            other local objectives included in t h e
       published by the CCTA, the City may               General Plan.
       prepare a request for Findings of Special
       Circumstances. It will be submitted to the
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                        55
5.0 Growth and Management Element
                                                            of   Special      Circumstances    including
H. Implementation of Action Plans. Following
                                                            imposition of appropriate mitigation
       adoption of Regional Route Action Plans by
                                                            measures have been adopted by the City
       the SWAT and the CCTA, the City will
                                                            and the CCTA.
       implement specified local actions in a
       manner consistent with adopted Actions
       Plans.
                                                     5.4       OTHER PERFORMANCE
I.     Transportation Demand Manaqement. As          STANDARDS
       part of the program to attain traffic service
       standards, the City has adopted and is        5 . 4 . 1 Introduction
       implementing a Transportation Demand
       Management (TDM) ordinance.                   Performance standards for six urban services are
                                                     established in this section. Each represents a
J.     Compliance Reporting. For the purposes of
                                                     commitment by the City to either provide for or
       reporting to the CCTA on compliance with
                                                     cooperate with the responsible agencies to
       the Growth Management Program, the City
                                                     provide for adequate capital facilities relating
       will    complete and submit required
                                                     to parks, fire, police, sanitary facilities, water
       checklists. For monitoring of compliance
                                                     and flood control to serve future development.
       with adopted standards, a list of Reporting
       Intersections on Basic Routes will be         Agencies currently providing these services are
       prepared and maintained by the Orinda         as follows:
       Public Works Department.
                                                     Parks -          City of Orinda
5 . 3 . 4 Implementing Policies and Programs:        Fire -           Orinda Fire Protection District,
           Review of Development Applications
                                                                      Moraga Fire Protection District,
A. Traffic Impact Study Requirements. As part                         and     Contra    Costa    County
       of the application review process for                          Consolidated     Fire   Protection
       development projects estimated to generate                     District
       over 50 peak-hour vehicle trips, the City     Police -         City of Orinda (through a contract
       will conduct a traffic impact study                            with the Contra Costa County
       consistent with the Technical Guidelines                       Sheriff's Department
       published by the CCTA.
                                                     Sanitary-        Central Contra Costa Sanitary
B. Findinqs of Consistency with Standards. No        Facilities       District
       development project expected to generate
       over 100 peakhour vehicle trips in the peak   Water -          East Bay Municipal         Utility
       direction at signalized intersections will be                  District (EBMUD)
       approved unless the City has made             Flood
       Findings of Consistency with the Level of
                                                     Control -       City of Orinda
       Service Standards adopted in Section 5.3.2.
                                                     The City specifies that these performance
       Findings of Consistency may be made only if
                                                     standards pertain to the development review
       a traffic impact analysis shows that project
                                                     process and should not be construed as applying
       approval is consistent with adopted Action
                                                     to        existing      development.      Proposed
       Plans with respect to Routes of Regional
                                                     developments must include mitigation measures
       Significance and will not result in violation
                                                     to ensure that new development is paying its
       of adopted standards at any Basic Route
                                                     fair share towards the maintenance of the
       signalized intersections unless (1) projects
                                                     intended levels of service. Modifications to
       included in the Five-Year Capital
                                                     these standards may be accomplished by City
       Improvement Program will result in
                                                     Council resolution.
       attainment of the standards, or (2) Findings
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                         56
5.0 Growth and Management Element
                                                       that new growth is paying its share of the
5 . 4 . 2 Performance Standards                        costs associated with the provision of
                                                       facilities for services provided by the City
A. Parks - Dedication of parkland or payment
                                                       including parks, police and flood control.
       of an inlieu parkland dedication fee
                                                       Working with other agencies, the City will
       equivalent to five acres of parkland per
                                                       assist and facilitate in the adoption and
       1,000 residents for new residential
                                                       implementation         of   a    development
       development. This standard is referenced in
                                                       mitigation program to ensure that new
       Orinda' 8 Park Dedication & In Lieu Fee
                                                       growth is paying its share of the costs
       Ordinance and General Plan Policy 2.2.1.E.
                                                       associated with the provision of facilities
B. Fire - Respond to all structural fires with         for services not provided by the City
       three engine companies.                         including fire, sanitary facilities and
                                                       water.
C. Police - Provide capital facilities sufficient
       to maintain an average two-beat minimum      B. Findinqs on Performance Standards. The
       patrol configuration.                           City will approve development projects
                                                       only after making findings that one or more
D. Sanitary Sewer - Capacity to carry and
                                                       of the following conditions are met:
       treat 100 gallons per capita per day for
       residential uses and 1,500 gallons per acre     (1) Assuming participation in adopted
       per day for commercial uses. Sewer mains             mitigation programs, an approved
       should be designed to be 2/3 full and trunk          project will be required to contribute its
       lines should be designed to be 100% full.            share      toward      maintenance      of
                                                            performance standards identified in
The liquid capacity of a septic tank serving any
                                                            Section 5.4.3; or
residential use shall be based on the total
number of bedrooms in the dwelling. The                (2) Because of the characteristics of the
minimum capacity for two bedrooms or less is                development project, project-specific
1,000 gallons. For each additional bedroom add              mitigation measures are needed in order
250 gallons. This standard is taken from the                to contribute toward maintenance of
Environmental Health Division's regulations                 standards, and such measures will be
for installation of individual sewage disposal              required of the project sponsor; or
systems (Chapter 420-6 of the Ordinance Code           (3) Capital projects planned by the City or
of Contra Costa County).                                    special district(s) will contribute
E. Water - Provide a secure, reliable, high                 toward maintenance of standards.
       quality water supply to customers.           C. Capital Improvement Proqram. Capital
F. Flood Control - Enforce provisions of               projects sponsored by the City and necessary
       existing Ordinance regulating development       to contribute toward levels of performance
       in areas of Special Flood Hazards               shall be identified in the Five-Year
       (Ordinance 87-13) and provisions of existing    Capital Improvement Program. Funding
       Flood Control Ordinance and Subdivision         sources of the projects as well as intended
       Ordinance for new development (Title 9 and      phasing shall be generally identified in
       10 of the Ordinance Code of Contra Costa        the Capital Improvement Program.
       County).                                     D. Contributions to Improvements. All new
                                                       development projects shall contribute to or
5 . 4 . 3 Implementation Policies and Program
                                                       participate in the improvement of the
          for Capital Projects
                                                       parks, fire, police, sanitary, water and
A. Development Mitigation Proqram. The                 flood control systems in proportion to the
       City will adopt and implement a                 demand generated by project occupants and
       development mitigation program to ensure        users as determined by the City.
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                      57
5.0 Growth and Management Element
GLOSSARY OF TERMS                                      development of land zoned with a slope
                                                       density combining district. Key provisions
1) Arterial Street - A major street with               of the ordinance require design review of
    controlled intersections carrying the traffic      new development and a minimum parcel
    of local and collector streets to and from the     size requirement which increases the
    freeway and other major streets, with              minimum lot area correspondingly with the
    controlled intersections.                          severity of the site slope.
2) Collector Street - A street for traffic moving  11) Sphere of Influence - A plan for the
    between arterial and local streets.                probable ultimate physical boundaries and
3) Density Transfer - The conveyance of                service area of Orinda as determined by the
    density credit of designated by the General        Local Agency Formation Commission.
    Plan from one parcel to another, within the    12) Village Character - A commercial area of
    same project.                                      relatively     low      density  with      a
4) General Plan Land Use Map Designation -             predominance of small-scale, low-lying
    The General Plan Land Use Map designates           buildings with varying architectural styles
    general categories of permitted uses and           (generally not exceeding two stories)
    ranges of acceptable           developmental       fronting on streets or landscaped plaza-like
    densities desired within the General Plan          spaces.
    planning period (1987 - 2007).                 13) Zoning Map Land Use Designation - The
5) Local Street - A street providing direct            Zoning Map designates specific categories
    access to properties and designed to               of permitted uses such as agricultural,
    discourage through traffic.                        single-family residential, commercial, etc.,
                                                       and minimum parcel sizes currently desired.
6) Local Use - A commercial retail and/or
                                                       State law requires that zoning map
    office use serving a market in which the
                                                       designations be consistent with the General
    majority of business trade is derived from
                                                       Plan.
    the Lamorinda area.
7) Planning Area - Land located within the
    Orinda      City     limits      and     minor
    unincorporated portions of land enclosed
    with the "Planning Area boundary" lines
    shown on the General Plan map (Figure 1).
8) Regional Use- A commercial retail and/or
    office use serving a market in which the
    majority of business trade is derived from
    outside the Lamorinda market.
9) Semi-Rural Character - The Orinda living
    environment characterized by heavy
    mature tree growth and open meadows on a
    hilly topographical setting, relatively
    undisturbed ridgelines and creeks, major
    open space areas and large lot homes served
    by a rural street system, and as further
    defined in Section 2.1.
10) Slope Density Ordinance - County Code,
    Chapter 814-2 adopted by Orinda in 1985
    places restrictions on the subdivision and
ORINDA GENERAL PLAN 5/20/87                                                                    58
5.0 Growth and Management Element
            Recreation Element
            INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE ELEMENT
            The recreational amenities of Ojai Valley have been long valued by local residents and
            visitors alike. The natural composition of the Ojai Valley facilitates a wide variety of
            outdoor recreational activities and contributes to the overall beauty of the City and its
            quality of life. Numerous recreational facilities are available. They range from hiking
            and horseback riding to tennis and golf.
            The amount, distribution, and accessibility ofrecreational land within a community are
            important in the development of an adequate park and recreation system. An overall
            recreation system must be developed with facilities that will meet the diverse needs of
            all residents. By providing regional and community parks, trails, and other recreational
            amenities, open recreational spaces contribute to the health and well being of local
            residents.
            The Recreation Element of the Ojai General Plan is a planning tool prepared to meet
            the recreational needs of the community. These needs have been identified by City
            staff, the Ojai Parks and Recreation Commission and active community leaders and
            citizens. The Ojai Parks and Recreation Commission serves the community by voicing
            the recreational needs of the community and formulating plans, programs and other
            methods by which to improve the recreational opportunities available to residents.
            The commission's participation in formulation of this Element reflects future
            recreational needs and plans of Ojai. The Element is composed of the following
            planning components:
            o    Definitions and categories of recreational requirements and opportunities;
            o     Inventory of existing facilities (included in the Ojai MEA);
            o    Identification of recreational issues and needs;
            o    Goals and Policies to guide recreational activities and development;
            o    Implementing Programs to attain defined Goals and Policies;
ASSUMPTIONS/DEFINITIONS
            Base data for the Recreation Element was derived from the Master Environmental
            Assessment (MEA) Recreation Section. The MEA section provides a complete
            recreation facilities inventory based on research of existing and proposed recreation
            OJM GENERAL PLAN                                   1                   MA.Y~1987
Recreation Element
facilities in the Ojai Sphere of Influence (see MEA "Recreational Facilities Matrix',).
The MEA Recreation section was utilized to identify recreational issues and needs of
the Ojai community. The Goals, Policies, and Programs of this Element were then
created in response to the identified issues.
Definitions and examples are provided below as a reference to categorization 6f, and
standards, for recreational facilities in this General Plan Element.
Recreation
Recreation may be defined as the refreshment of one's mind or body through activity
that amuses or stimulates.
An area of land set aside for public recreational use is the common understanding of
"Park". Two categories of parks discussed in this General Plan include:
Regional/County Parks
These parks include regional facilities operated by the County ofVentura. They attract
people from a wide range of age and interest. Examples ,of County parks in Ojai's
Planning Area include Soule Park and Camp Comfort. These widely utilized facilities
provide recreational opportunities to Ojai Valley and Ventura County residents.
Local/Community Parks
Local/community parks generally provide facilities to serve the daily needs ofa defined
neighborhood or community. Facilities may include: open areas for passive
recreation; active sport areas, e.g., baseball and court games; and neighborhood activity
centers. A local park may be a small neighborhood park Qess than 5 acres) such as
Daly Park or a larger city park such as Sarzotti Park or Libbey Park and it may have
specialized facilities used for community recreation needs.
Trails are defined in this Element as paths designed to accommodate hiking, horseback
riding and bicycling through an area and they mayor may not be removed from
vehicular traffic.
Trails are categorized in this Element according to function. Types of trails discussed
in this General Plan include:
DJM GENERAL PLAN                                   2                    MAY13,1987
Recreation Element
     o  Hiking
     o  Equestrian
     o  Bicycling
In some cases one trail will serve two functions as in the case of a hiking/equestrian
traiL These trails may also be used by off-road (mountain) bicycles. Bicycle routes and
some equestrian trails may exist on or adjacent to streets; hiking trails occur primarily
in the nearby hills of Ojai or the back country of Los Padres National Forest to the
north.
Existing and proposed trails, as identified on the Master Plan of Trails of the
Recreation Element, are also classified according to purpose. "Primary Trails" are
those routes that area portion of a regional system. They are used mostly for
recreation but may be used for commuting purposes to locations outside the city.
"Secondary Trails" are those located within the city that primarily serve local needs.
Specialized Facilities
These facilities provide specific recreational opportunities for local or regional use.
They usually have an individual element of attraction. The facility may exist alone or
be within a park, school, or other larger facility, and may be privately or publicly
owned and operated. Examples include:
     o  Arts, Museums, and Cultural Centers
     o  Auditoriums/Amphitheaters
     o  Botanical Gardens/Nature Center
     o  Campgrounds
     o  Equestrian Centers
     o  Festival Grounds
     o  Golf Courses
     o  School Playing Fields
     o  Vista Points/Scenic Areas
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                               3                      MAY13,1987
            Recreation Element
                o     Water Activity Areas (e.g. fishing, swimming, boating)
            Preserves
            An area ofland that is highly valued for its natural condition, unique scenic/aesthetic
            resources, biological resources, geologic phenomena or cultural significance may be
            classified or considered for designation as a Preserve. It is generally protected in its
            natural state from extensive urban development in order to maintain or enhance the
            aesthetic, natural quality of an area. An example of an existing Preserve is the Los
            Padres National Forest located to the north of Ojai.
LEGAL AUTHORITY
            This Element of the General Plan is not mandated by State planning legislation.
            Instead, the subject of parks and recreation is included as an integral component of
            two other Elements, namely, Land Use and Open Space. Section 65302(a) of the
            Government Code of the State of California stipulates that the General Plan shall
            include:
                  "A land use element which designates the proposed general distribution and
                   general location and extent of the land for housing, business, industry, open
                   space, including agriculture, natural resources recreation, and enjoyment ofscenic
                                   ·
                   beauty, educanon,...  "
            and Section 65560 states that all cities and counties in California must adopt...
                   "A local open space plan for the comprehensive and long range presentation and
                   conservation of open space land within its jurisdiction...including, but to, areas
                   of outstanding, scenic, historical and cultural value, areas particularly suited for
                   park and recreation pw;poses, including access to lakeshores, beaches, and rivers
                   and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors."
            Recognizing the important functions served by parks and recreation facilities in the
            Ojai community, the City of Ojai has chosen to expand this subject into a separate
            General Plan Element. This approach is permitted by Section 65303 of the California
            Government Code which states the following:
                  "...general plans may include the following element or any part or phase thereof:
                   (a)  A recreation element showing a comprehensive system of areas and public
                        sites for recreation, including the following, and, when practicable, their
                        location and proposed development
            OJAI GENERAL PLAN                                 4                      MAYl1,1987

Recreation Element
            (1) natural reservations
             (2) parks
             (3) parkways
             (4) beaches
             (5) playgrounds
            (6) other recreation areas."
Although this Element of the General Plan is not mandated, community certification
for all federal and most State open space and conservation funding programs requires
the preparation of a Parks and Recreation Element.
The Index Matrix within the Introduction Section of this General Plan provides an
index/reference of State General Plan requirements and under which sections of the
Ojai General Plan the State requirement is fulfilled.
OJAf GENERAL PLAN                              5                    MAY 13, 1987
         Recreation Element
         ISSUES AND NEEDS
OVERVIEW
         Recreational opportunities in Ojai are numerous. The area is known for its scenic
         beauty, natura1 resources and recreational amenities. Types of facilities and activities
         are defined and categorized in the above paragraphs for reference. An inventory of
         existing recreational facilities is provided on Exhibit REC-t of the City of Ojai MEA.
         The Recreation Element Map further illustrates types and locations of existing and
         proposed facilities; the Master Plan of Trails depicts existing and proposed bicycle,
         equestrian and hiking trails.
         The General Plan inventory, analysis, and Goals, Policies, and Programs of recreation
         facilities is divided into four issue areas. General recreation issues and the four areas
         are discussed in following pages.
GENERAL
         Issues regarding the overall recreation services and facilities in Ojai were raised based
         upon research and analysis of existing conditions. The primary recreation issues in the
         community are briefly listed below:
                 o     Continuation and enhancement of coordination between the City, County
                       and other involved recreational agencies and organizations and their
                       facilities
                 o     Recreation's role related to tourism in Ojai
                 o    Optimum utilization by the City of the proceeds of the Parkland Recreation
                      Tax in improving Ojai's recreation system
                 o    Funding of the maintenance of all existing and future recreational facilities
PARKS
         Numerous parks exist in the Ojai area. These parks consist of public and private
         facilities that serve local residents and visitors. The parks are generally sufficient to
         serve existing demands in the Valley.
         Park land in the City of Ojai is considered sufficient by standard per capita
         requirements. However, parks in Ojai are utilized by many non-city residents and by
         visitors, thus the parks serve more than local residents.
         OJAf GENERAL PLAN                                  6                    MAY13,1987
       Recreation Element
       City parks facilities in Ojai are generally considered less than adequate in size and scope
       to serve near future demands due to their wide usage by local and non-local people.
       A need has been identified by the community to expand the City's local/community
       park system. There have been no scheduled major additions to existing city parks
       facilities in the recent past.
       Major issues related to parks in Ojai include:
               o    Optimum utilization and park development of existing park areas
               o    Funding the maintenance, enhancement, and expansion of existing and
                    future city park areas
               o    Identification ofpotential new park sites and the retainment of that land for
                    future potential park and recreational uses
TRAILS
       The three types of trails in Ojai (bicycle, equestrian, hiking) are separate in purpose but
       often overlap in use (i.e., a hiking/equestrian trail in Los Padres National Forest). As
       such many interrelated issues have been raised. Trails issues identified below pertain
       generally to all trails in the Ojai Planning Area. Issues relating to specific bicycle,
       equestrian, or hiking trails are indicated by that specific trail in parenthesis.
               o    Formal General Plan designations of all trail systems
               o    Proper directional signing and marking of established trails
               o    Connection of all "Primary" Trails to regional trail systems
               o    Safety in design and use of trails
               o    Establishment of trail heads and/or staging areas and parking areas (hiking
                    and equestrian)
               o    Education program to inform the public of opportunities, existence and
                    location of trails
               o    Establishment of a cross-town connector (equestrian)
       DJAI GENERAL PLAN                                  7                     MAY13,1987
               Recreation Element
SPECIAl TZRD FACILl77ES
               Numerous recreational and cultural opportunities exist in Ojai. Specific programs
               within the City Recreation Department are based in a variety of facilities. Activities are
               provided from various locations in parks and facilities. The MEA Recreation Facilities
               Matrix provides an index of all recreation activities in Ojai and lists the activity facilities
               available in each park or recreation area (see MEA Recreation section).
               Many participants in City recreation programs are non-City residents (25% of
               participants are Ojai City residents). The City Recreation Department programs are
               popular and are often full or over capacity. Cultural programs are also popular and in
               need of additional facilities in which to be conducted. The Recreation Department
               uses schools and other facilities to conduct programs when parkland is not available
               or appropriate. The City has identified a need to expand the variety of recreational
               and cultural facilities and programs to satisfy these demands.
               County parks are appropriate for use in City programs but often are underutilized.
              Joint use of facilities could be coordinated with City recreation systems to enable
               optimum use of facilities. For example a reservation system could be established for
               use of county parks or schools by City recreation programs. In this way, an equitable
               system could be established, balancing the provision and use of the area's recreation
               facilities between the County, City, and other involved parties as appropriate.
               The major issues and needs relating to specialized facilities include:
                       o    Additional lighted ball fields
                       o    More efficient/extensive use ofschool facilities for recreational and cultural
                            arts programs
                       o    Additional recreation classes and organized programs
                       o    Additional fine arts and other cultural programs and activities
                       o    Utilization of all existing facilities within the community to the optimum
                           extent feasible and desirable
                       o   Vista Points and designation of Scenic Areas
                       o    Child-care integration with Recreation Department Program (i.e.,
                            babysitting service for children whose parents participate in recreation
                            programs)
               OJAI GENERAL PLAN                                    8                    MAYn,1987
          Recreation Element
                o   Additional water sports facility Qong-term, e.g., pooD
                o   A new equestrian center Qong-term)
                o   Performing Arts Center with Civic Auditorium, Gallery Qong-term)
PRESERVES
          Los Padres National Forest provides protected, recreational open space for the area.
          Recreation issues ofconcern to the Forest Service and other needs regardingpreserves
          include:
                o   Coordination between City and Forest Service personnel in planning and
                    operation efforts
                o   Access from urban areas (northern city boundary) to National Forest land
                    and facilities (including acquisition of rights-of-way through private
                    property to National Forest land)
                o   Directional and informational signing, parking, and formal establishment of
                    "trail heads" at National Forest trails entrances
                o   Establishment of new trails in National Forest
                o   Establishment of new preserves and related facilities in other areas (such as
                    to the south of the City) where potential biological, aesthetic or other
                    recreational or open space values have been identified
                o   Acquisition of land for new preserves outside established parkland or
                    preserve area
                o   Public education and awareness ofthe long-term importance of"Preserves"
          OJAI GENERAL PLAN                               9                    MAY11,1987
             Recreation Element
             GOALS, POUCIES AND IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS
INTRODUC170N
             This section of the Recreation Element sets forth Goals, Policies, and Programs.
             These were formulated from analysis of the Element's Issues and Needs section.
             Policies and Programs were created to implement each Goal. The goals, Policies, and
             Programs are presented in a format to enable the reader to clearly understand how
             each Goal is to be realized. Overall Recreation Goals are stated first, followed by
             Goals for each recreation category.
GENERAL
           . IT SHALL BE THE OVERALL GOAL OF THE CITY OF OJAI TO
             ADEQUATELY PROVIDE FOR THE RECREATIONAL NEEDS OF OJAI
             VALLEY RESIDENTS AND VISITORS.
                 Policy: The City shall facilitate cOIDInunication and coordination between
                 recreation agencies and organizations to optimize the area's recreational
                 opportunities.
                   Program: The City shall establish a staff level recreation committee.
                   Representatives of Federal, State and County agencies will be invited to attend.
                   Program: The City shall require non-City residents to pay a proportional share
                   of administrative and park maintenance costs. This will allow them the use of
                   City facilities and programs until a Special District is created.
                 Policy: The City shall support and accoIDInodate, where appropriate, the
                 recreation related tourist industry in Ojai as consistent with environmental
                 and quality of life standards in Ojai to the extent that tourism does not
                 compromise other General Plan goals.
                   Program: A comprehensive signage program to orient the visitor to all
                   recreational areas and facilities shall be implemented. These signs will be an
                   extension of existing directional signs.
                   Program: The Ojai visitors information centerwhich is located at the Chamber
                   of Commerce Office shall continue to be used to assist visitor's use in
                   discovering recreation opportunities in the area by providing literature and
                   direction/information assistance.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                                10                     MAY~1987
      Recreation Element
         Policy. The City shall actively pursue methods to improve and expand
         existing recreational facilities in Ojai and the Ojai Valley.
           Program: Park and Recreation Tax proceeds shall be utilized to the maximum
           extent feasible to improve and expand upon parks and recreational facilities.
           Program: The City shall encourage Ventura County, school districts and other
           public agencies and private interests to combine efforts for recreation facilities'
           improvements to adequately serve the recreational needs of all residents of the
           Ojai Valley.
           Program: The City shall request that the County improve and maintain regional
           park facilities in the Ojai Valley. Further, the City shall request that the County
           recognize that regional recreational facilities in the Ojai Valley contribute to the
           overall economic vitality for the community. In making this contribution they
           need not be fiscally self-sufficient.
PARKS
      THE CITY OF OJAI SHALL SUPPORT METHODS TO OBTAIN AN
      EXCEPTIONAL PARKS SYSTEM IN OJAI TO SERVE RESIDENTS AND
      VISITORS OF THE OJAI VALLEY.
         Policy. The City shall work in coordination with the County of Ventura and
         other agencies and interests to optimize the use of all County parks and to
         balance the use of County and City parks.
           Program: The City shall encourage the County and other public agencies to
           formulate a Park-Sharing Agreement regarding the proportionate provision and
           use of parks and their services. The Agreement will address park maintenance
           responsibilities in Ojai and its vicinity.
         Policy. The City shall maximize uses within all existing parks in the area
         to their fullest, and then improve and expand upon existing City parkland
         to meet the growing recreational demands of the City.
           Program: The City shall explore and pursue the utilization of park in-lieu-fees
           to enhance and expand upon existing City park facilities.
           Program: Park Master Plans for Libbey Park and Sarzotti Park shall be prepared
           and/or updated to reflect ultimate development.
      DJM GENERAL PLAN                                11                      MAYll,1987
       Recreation Element
            Program: An overall Parks Maintenance Plan shall be formulated to provide
            funding for the maintenance of all existing and future City parks areas.
            Program: The following improvements to Libbey Park shall be pursued,
            incorporated into the Master Plan, and implemented when appropriate and
            feasible:
            o    Pro-shop at lower courts (to sell sporting goods and schedule court use and
                 supervision)
               o Stairs from upper parking lot to lower courts (currently a  ~
                 potential danger area)
                                                                                     I
                                                                                       I
                                                                                          f
            o    Additional tennis courts next to lower courts                    ,M
            Program: The following improvements to Sarzotti Park shall be incorporated
            into the Master Plan, pursued and implemented when appropriate and feasible:
            o    Sidewalk lighting
            o    Combination maintenance/store/restroom building
             o   Redevelopment of ballfield #3 into multi-use social area with small stage,
                 additional trees, benches, etc.
          Policy; In the long-term planning of City parkland, the City shall identify
         and retain open space for potential future parkland.
            Program: In future General Plan Amendments the City shall identifY and
            procure land for park use.
            Program: The City shall encourage donations and dedications to the City of
            suitable park land within, and adjacent to, the community. Such dedication shall
            include maintenance responsibility agreements.
TRAILS
       THE CIlY OF OJAI SHALL SUPPORT THE ESTABUSHMENT OF
       COMPREHENSIVE,SAFEAND ACCESSIBLE TRAILSYSTEMS FOR USE
       BY LOCAL RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO THE OJAI VALLEY.
          Policy: The City shall formally identify trails systems and bike routes in the
       OJAf GENERAL PLAN                              12                    AMY13,1987
Recreation Element
   City's Sphere of Influence.
     Program: The General Plan shall officially designate on the Master Plan of
     Trails all Primary and Secondary trails and Bicycle Routes within the City Sphere
     ofInfluence.
     Program: All established trails shall be identified via directional signage and/or
     bike lanes and trails signs. Upon implementation of future proposed trails, each
     trail/route shall be given appropriate signage for identification and access.
   Policy: The City shall continually work towards connecting all Primary
  Trails within the City Sphere oflnfluence to County Regional and National
   Forest trail systems.
     Program: Regarding implementation of the Master Plan ofTrails, priority shall
     be given to Primary Trails and Bicycle Route that connect to Regional Trails.
     Program: Trail heads and/or equestrian staging areas shall be established as
     depicted on the Master Plan of Trails. Priority shall be given to significant
     regional trail connections. Adequate parking should exist at all established trail
     heads and staging areas.
   Policy: Safety shall be a major consideration in location, access, design and
   use of trail systems throughout the community.
     Program: Safety standards shall be incorporated into all ultimate trail and
     bicycle route design.
     Program: Safe street crossing provisions shall be incorporated into any
     trails/ routes crossing Ojai Avenue and Highways 33 and 150. Forma1 n crossings n
     shall be established as depicted on the Master Plan of trails.
     Program: The City shall explore alternate east-west routes for bicycle and
     equestrian trails in the downtown area of Ojai (i.e. alternate route from Ojai
     Avenue near the Arbolada).
     Program: Trails/routes adjacent to or leading to schools and recreational
     facilities shall be located on streets considered the safest for children and shall
     be marked for safety.
     Program: Proposed trails, espeeially bicycle routes, located adjacent to or
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                               13                     MAY13,1987
              Recreation Element
                    leading to schools and recreation facilities shall be given high priority in
                    implementation.
                  Policy: The City shall strive to inform the public of recreational trail systems
                  in the Ojai Valley.
                    Program: Maps of existing trail systems and bicycle routes shall be printed,
                    published and made available to the public.
                    Program: Information pertaining to the location, access, use and safety of trails
                    shall be made available through the public school system, Recreation
                    Department, Chamber of Commerce and regional agencies such as Ventura
                    County General Services Agency/Parks Department and the National Forest
                    Service.
                  Policy: Trail systems for cross-town connections shall be given priority in
                  implementation.
                    Program: In establishing new trails and improving existing
                    routes, priority shall be given to the funding and
                    construction of a safe north-south route through the Ojai
                    community.
SPECIALIZED FACILITIES
              IT IS THE GOAL OF THE CITY OF OJAI TO PROVIDE
              AN ARRAY OF RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY
              OPPORTUNITIES IN THE OJAI COMMUNITY.
                  Policy: The City shall work with the County ofVentura and other involved
                  agencies and interested parties to provide a balance ofrecreational services
                  programs and facilities in the community.
                    Program: The Ojai Parks and Recreation Commission shall review and update
                    its long range plan of recreation services and facilities. This effort should be
                    conducted in cooperation with Ventura County and other interests.
                    Program: The City shall develop an equitable Recreation Fee System for
                    non-City residents participating in City Recreation programs. Funds shall be
                    utilized by the City Recreation department for the provision and improvement
                    of recreation services.
              OJAf GENERAL PLAN                              14                     MAY 11, 1987
Recreation Element
    Program: Staff levels for the Recreation Department shall be periodically
    reviewed by the City Staffand City Council in order to facilitate the organization,
    conduct, and supervision ofRecreation Programs. Funding shall be encouraged
    to be included in the Ojai Recreation long-range plan and the City should pursue
    support of other involved agencies.
  Policy: The City shall attempt to utilize all existing facilities within the
  community to the maximum extent feasible and desirable.
    Program: The City shall propose a coordinated work effort with the County to
    formulate an agreement pertaining to shared use ofall facilities, incorporating an
    equitable fee system to allocate financial obligations for maintenance of facilities,
    and supervision of programs.
  Policy: The City shall attempt to supplement existing recreation and
  cultural facilities by developing new facilities at the time they are considered
  needed and desired by the community.
    Program: Pursuant to the Policy above, the following are identified as future
    short-term needs for additional recreational facilities:
    o    Additional lighted ballfields
    o    Additional recreation classes and organized programs
    o    Child-care (or babysitting) facility/services integrated with recreational
         servtces
    o    Vista Points and designation of scenic areas
    o    New restrooms/storage building in Sarzotti Park
    o    Improve lighting in Sarzotti Park
    Program: Pursuant to the Policy above, the following are identified as future
    long-term needs for additional facilities:
    o    A new multi-purpose youth facility center
    o    New perfonning arts center/civic auditorium/public art gallety
DJM GENERAL PLAN                                15                     MAYlJ,1987
          Recreation Element
               o    Additional water sports activities (i.e., swimming, classes)
               o    A new equestrian center
PRESERVES
          THE CITY SHALL STRIVE TO ENHANCE AND PROVIDE ACCESS TO
          EXISTING PRESERVE LAND AND ESTABUSH NEW PRESERVES
          WHERE APPROPRIATE AND FEASIBLE.
             Policy: The City shall coordinate with the National Forest Service in
             planning access to and operation of the Los Padres National Forest
             (LPNF).
               Program: The City shall provide support to the County and Forest Service to
               establish formal access from urban areas to LPNF. Access shall include
               directional signing, parking, trail heads and mechanisms to inform the public of
               recreational opportunities in the LPNF.
               Program: The City shall encourage the Forest Service and Ventura County to
               combine efforts in the establishment of new trails and related facilities in the
               LPNF.
             Policy: The City shall, on a long-term basis, strive to establish new preserves in
             areas with biological, aesthetic, recreation or other open space values.
               Program: The General Plan Conservation and Open Space Elements shall be
               the basis for the identification of potential future preserves. Identified valuable
               areas shall be retained as open space for potential future preserve designation.
               Program: Upon identification and conservation of preserve areas, the City shall
               work towards acquisition of the land by appropriate agencies and other entities.
               Program: The City shall incorporate public awareness education into school and
               recreational programs in order to inform the public of the long-term importance
               and value of preserve lands and open space.
          OJAI GENERAL PLAN                               16                     MAY1J,1987
             Safety Element
             INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE ELEMENT
             In 1971, the California Legislature passed legislation requiring two new elements to
             be added to the general plans of all cities and counties in the State. These were the
             Safety Element and the Seismic Safety Element.
             The impetus for this legislation was a series of natural disasters which had occurred
             in Southern Califomia in the preceding two years. The winter of 1969 saw
             particularly heavy rains, especially during January and February. Serious flooding
             occurred in many areas of Southern California but especially in Ventura County.
             These heavy rains caused substantially increased growth in the chaparral vegetation
             belts of the Southern California hills and mountains. Then during thirteen days of
             September and October, 1970, a series of disastrous fires broke out, fanned by dry
             desert Santa Ana Winds. The Ere burned over half a million acres of brush and
             timber land, destroyed 722 homes, killed 16 people and cost $233 million to
             control. The following winter landslides and mudslides occurred in the hills and
             damaged many of the structures that had escaped the fall flres.
             In response to these disastrous floods, flres and landslides, the 1971 Legislature
             enacted Government Code Section 65302.1, which requires ofeach city and county
             general plan:
                     A safety ekmentfor the protection of the community from fires andgeologic
                     hazards includingfiatures necessaryfor such protection as evacuation routes,
                     peak load watersupplY rtquirtments, minimum road widths, ckarances around
                      strnaUrtS, andgeologic hazards mapping in artas of known geologic hazard.
             The impetus for the Seismic Safety Element was the February 9, 1971, San
             Fernando Valley earthquake. This earthquake of 6.6 magnitude took 65 lives and
             caused almost $1 billion of damage to freeway interchanges, hospitals (accounting
             for the greatest loss of life), utilities, dams, and public, private, commercial and
             industrial buildings. The earthquake also revealed major discrepancies in building
             design and a laxness in land use planning.
             This disaster prompted the Legislature to require another element to the general
             plan, a Seismic Safety Element. Government Code Section 65302 (F) requires:
                     A seismic saftty ekment consisting of an identification and appmisal ofseismic
                     hazards such as susceptibility to surfOce npturesfrom faultin~ to ground shakin~ to
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                           1                      SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
        groundfailure or to the effects ofseismicaf!y induced waves such as tsunamis Q1/d seiches.
         The seismic safety element shaD also inelude an appraisal of mudslides, andslides, and
         slope stability as necessarygeologic hazards that must be considered simultaneouslY with
         other hazards such as possible surface rupturesfrom faulting, ground shaking, ground
        failure and seismicaf!y induced waves.
Most recently, the Legislature adopted AB 2038 in 1984 which expanded the list of
mandatory safety issues to be addressed within the Element. The additional
concerns focused on seismic safety. Essentially, the Legislature took the issues
previously considered in the seismic safety element and made them safety element
requirements. At the same time, the Legislature deleted the seismic safety element
from the list of mandatory general plan elements.
In order to meet the state requirements discussed above, the City of Ojai adopted
the County of Ventura's e.'<isting Seismic Safety and Safety Element in 1974. This
adoption of a County element is provided for in Government Code Section 65302
(g).
In 1988, the City prepared a Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) as part of
a comprehensive update of its General Plan which included the Circulation, Open
Space, Conservation, Recreation, and Housing Elements. The MEA includes
several maps which delineate areas of flooding, fire, and seismic hazards within the
City. In 1989, the County updated and completely reformatted its General Plan,
doing away with the typical seven element format. In response to this reformatting
ofthe County General Plan, the City initiated a program for updating the remaining
City elements which have incorporated by reference adopted County elements.
These include the Noise and Safety Elements. The City is currently in the process
of updating its Noise Element.
The City of Ojai has created its own Safety Element with the text and exhibits
which follow. This element is more tailored to the specific safety issues which
concern the City of Ojai. One of the shortcomings in utilizing the County's Safety
Element has been that it discusses certain hazards which are not a concern within
the City of Ojai. The City's Safety Element therefore does not contain detailed
discussions of tsunami and seiche hazards, hazards which do not occur within the
City of Ojai. Tsunami and seiche hazards will only be referred to in the
assumptions I definitions portion ofthis element. Another shortcoming ofutilizing
the County Element for the City is that it does not provide detailed discussions on
certain conditions and policies which are unique to the City of Ojai. The City's
Safety Element identifies existing conditions which are unique to the City. These
include the ongoing effort to upgrade the remaining unreinforced masonry bearing
0IAI GENERAL PLAN                             2                      SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
wall buildings within the City, and a detailed discussion of the level of fire service
currently being provided to the City by the County.
The City's Safety Element also includes references to maps delineating existing
hazards contained within the City's MEA.. The maps relevant to the issues
identified in this Safety Element have been updated and included as part of the
creation of this element to reflect most current 1991 environmental conditions.
The Safety Element contained within the following text and exhibits combines the
State of California requirements for safety elements and seismic safety elements
into one coherent document. The purpose of this Safety Element is to provide for
the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks associated with the
effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, and
dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence and
other geologic hazards known to the City; flooding; and wildland and urban fires.
The Safety Element includes mapping of known seismic and other geologic
hazards. It also addresses evacuation routes, peakload water supply requirements,
and minimum road widths and clearances around structures, as those items relate
to identified fire and geologic hazards.
The City of Ojai Safety Element achieves the following purposes:
         1.      To meet the requirements of State law for preparation of a Safety
                 Element.
        2.       To investigate the various hazards from a regional as well as a local
                 perspective so as to provide a more integrated picture of the
                 hazardous conditions within the City of Ojai and Ventura County.
         3.      To develop a framework which will permit the investigation of all
                 types of hazards and the resources they impact.
        4.       To present the information collected in a form which will allow
                 decision makers and the public to quickly evaluate the pertinent
                 aspects of a given hazard.
         5.      To offer a range ofresponse measures from which decision makers
                 may choose as they attempt to alleviate a given hazard.
         6.      To provide a framework in which future inventory and analysis can
                 be performed.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                       3                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
              Safety Element
ASSUMPTIONS/DEF1N1770NS
             This Safety Element has been prepared pursuant to State General Plan Guidelines
             for preparation of Safety Elements. It is in conformance with the overall General
             Plan Goals of the City of Ojai. The Element strives to provide decision makers
             with the information necessary to evaluate the nature ofa given hazard and possible
             courses of action.
             Base data for the Safety Element was derived from the City of Ojai Master
             Environmental Assessment (MEA) 1988, the Seismic Safety and Safety Element of
             the Ventura County Environmental Resources Agency 1974, the Updated County
             of Ventura General Plan (Hazards Chapter) 1989, the Ventura County Multi-
             Hazard Functional Plan, and applicable current Environmental Impact Reports
             (EIRs).
             Definitions and categories of risks and hazards that are referenced throughout this
             Safety Element are listed below.
             These are taken from the State of California's 1990 Guidelines for the Required
             Elements of the General Plan and from the Ventura County General PIan, Hazards
             Chapter.
             Active Fault
             A fault that has moved recently and which is likely to move again. For planning
             purposes, "active fault" is usually defined as one that shows movement within the
             last 11,000 years and can be expected to move within the next 100 years.
             Area of Special Flood Hazard
             The land in a flood plain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in
             any given year; is sometimes referred to as the "base flood" or "100-year" flood
             area.
             Critical FaciIity
             Includes facilities housing or serving many people which may pose unusual hazards
             in case of damage from or malfunction during an earthquake, such as hospitals, fire,
             police, and emergency service facilities, utility "lifeline" facilities, such as water,
             electricity and gas supply, sewage disposal, and communications and transportation
             facilities.
             OJM GENERAL PLAN                        4                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Dam Failure
Structural failure may be caused by seismic activity, or by landslides flowing into a
reservoir. Flooding may oCOlC as the result of structural failure of a dam.
Debris Flow/AvaIanche
Landslides involving mixture of rock fragments, gravel, sand, soil, mud, water, and
minor organic debris in which flow is the dominant transport mechanism. An
extremely high-velocity debris flow landslide is known as a debris avalanche.
Epicenter
A point at the earth's surface that is closest to the subterranean origin of an
earthquake.
Ewansive Soils
Soils which tend to expand when wet and shrink when dry due to mineralogical
composition.
A fracture in the earth's crust forming a boundary between rock masses that have
shifted.
Flooding:
A "flood" is an overflow of water onto land that is normally dry. The most
common type of flood, and the major subject of this section, is the "rainstorm-
river" flood. A second major type is a "coastal" flood, resulting from a relative
increase in sea level that may be caused by a storm, by a tsunami, or by subsidence.
Other potential causes of floods include dam or levee failure, landslides and seiches.
Floodway
The channel of a watercourse plus any adjacent flood plain area that must be kept
free of encroachment in order that the 1DO-year flood may be carried without
substantial increases in flood heights.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                       5                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Ground Failure
A general tenn for occurrences when seismic activity causes the ground to lose its
cohesiveness, as in liquefaction, subsidence, and earthquake-related landslides.
Ground Shakine-
"Ground shaking" is the physical movement of the land surface due to earthquakes.
When a fault breaks, the accumulated strain energy is released as seismic waves that
travel outward in all directions from the earthquake focus (the point of first release
of tectonic stress located below the earth's surface on the fault plane, causing
ground shaking). Seismograms (records ofearthquake motion) indicate that several
kinds of motions, or waves, are created by earthquakes. These waves exhibit
different types and directions of movement. Each type ofwave can affect buildings
slightly differently depending on many diverse variables. The combined effect of
these waves makes up the ground shaking component of an earthquake.
Hazardous Buildine-
A building that may be hazardous to life in the event of an earthquake because it:
         1.      Was constructed prior to the adoption and enforcement of local
                 codes requiring earthquake resistant design of buildings;
         2.      Is constructed of unreinforced masonry; or,
         3.      Exhibits anyone of the following characteristics:
                    o    Exterior parapets and ornamentation that may fall on
                         passers-by;
                     o   Exterior walls that are not anchored to the floors, roof, or
                          foundation;
                     o    Sheeting on roofs or floors incapable of withstanding
                           lateral loads;
                     o   Large openings in walls that may cause damage from
                          torsional forces; or,
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                         6                SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
                      o    Lack of an effective system to resist lateral forces.
Hazardous Material
An injurious substance, including pesticides, herbicides, toxic metals and chemicals,
liquefied natural gas, explosives, volatile chemicals, and nuclear fuels.
Inactive Fault
A fault which shows no evidence of movement in recent geologic time and no
potential for movement in the relatively near future.
Landslide
A general term denoting downslope movement of slope materials composed of
rock, soil, fill or combinations thereof.
Liquefaction
The transportation of a saturated granular layer into a fluid state due to intense
ground shaking and/or increased pore water pressure.
Lurching
A sudden roll, pitch or sway of the ground resulting directly from the release of
selsrruc energy.
Non-Seismic Geotechnical Hazards
Geotechnical hazards not triggered by or related to seismic activity, including, but
not limited to, landslides, subsidence, expansive soils and coastal stability problems.
Potentially Active Fault
(1)      A fault that last moved within the Quaternary Period before the Holocene
         Epoch (the last 2,000,000 to 11,000 years);
(2)      A fault which, because it is judged to be capable of ground rupture or
         shaking, poses an unacceptable risk for a proposed structure.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                        7                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Seiche
A seiche is a long wave which oscillates in an enclosed or partially enclosed body
ofwater as a result of seismic or atmospheric disturbances. Seiches typically occur
in lakes and bays, and are normally caused by unusual tides, winds or currents, but
can also be produced by earthquake ground motion. The shaking rocks the water
back and forth, setting up seiche waves.
The City of Ojai does not contain any substantial body ofwater within or adjacent
to the City limits which would create a primary seiche hazard. No goals, policies,
or implementation programs related to seiches need to be addressed within this
element.
Subsidence
Subsidence is any settling or sinking of the ground surface arising from surface or
subsurface causes. Its usual form is a dish-shaped or bowl-shaped region of
downward surface displacements. Some types of subsidence can be the result of
natural processes, including natural compaction of loosely consolidated alluvium
C'consolidation refers to the gradual compression of a soil under applied load), as
well as tectonics and earthquakes. Other types of subsidence are caused by human
activities. In California, four types of the latter have been identified; they are
named according to the action that causes the subsidence: groundwater withdrawal
subsidence, oil or gas withdrawal subsidence, hydro-compaction subsidence and
peat oxidation subsidence.
Surface Rupture
A surface rupture is a break in the ground's surface and associated deformation
resulting from the movement of a fault.
Tsunami
A tsunami is a traveling ocean wave generated by disturbances associated with
earthquakes, volcanoes or major submarine landslides. Commonly called a tidal
wave in the past, it is referred to now as a series of sea waves. These waves have
a long wavelength (distance from the crest of one wave to the crest of the
succeeding wave) normally over 100 miles, and a very low amplitude (height from
crest to trough). As these waves approach shallow water, the speed decreases from
a deep water speed of over 600 m.p.h. to less than 30 m.p.h., and their energy is
transferred from wave speed (velocity) to wave height (amplitude); waves as high
DJM GENERAL PLAN                       8                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
             Safety Element
             as 80 feet can be fonned. Although the arrival time ofwaves can be predicted, the
             intensity of the wave when it reaches shore cannot be predicted.
             The City of Ojai is located several miles inland from the County of Ventura's
             tsunami hazard zone, which extends two miles upstream from the mouth of the
             Ventura and Santa Clara Rivers and Calleguas Creek. No goals, policies, or
             implementation programs related to tsunamis need to be addressed within this
             element.
             Wildland Fires
             Fires occurring in a non-urban, natural area which contains uncultivated lands,
             timber, watershed, brush, or grasslands.
LEGAL AUTHORITY
             Under State Law (Section 65302.1) a City is required to adopt a Safety Element" for
             the protection of the community from fires and geologic hazards including features
             necessaty for such protection as evacuation routes, peak load water supply
             requirements, minimum road widths, clearances around structures, and geologic
             hazards mapping in areas of known geologic hazard."
             A City is also required to adopt a Seismic Safety Element. Government Code
             Section 65302 (F) requires that a seismic safety element consist of:
                     An identification and appraisal of seismic hazards such as susceptibili!) to
                     surface mptumsfrom faulting, to ground shaking, to groundfailum or to the
                     iffects ofseismicaf!y induced waves such as tsunamis and seiches. This seismic
                     safe!) element shaUalso includes an appraisal ofmudslides, landslide, and slope
                     slabili!) as necessary geologic hazards that must be considemd simultaneouslY
                     with other hazards such as possible surface ruptum from fizulting, ground
                     shaking, groundfailum, and seismicaf!y indtlced waves.
             The City of Ojai has combined the requirements for both the Safety and Seismic
             Elements into a Safety Element in accordance with the California State code in
             order to sufficiently detail the appropriate polices and programs for the City's
             planning area. This element has been submitted in accordance with State Code to
             the California Division of Mines and Geology of the Department of Conservation.
             OJAf GENERAL PLAN                           9                      SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
               Safety Element
               ISSUES AND NEEDS
OVERVIEW
               Public safety issues in Ojai are numerous. The area is surrounded by topographical
               features which create geologic, seismic, flood, and fire hazards. Types of hazards
               are defmed and categorized in the previous section for reference. Historically, Ojai
               and the surrounding area has experienced damaging earthquakes, landslides, floods,
               dam failures and disastrous brush fires. In addition, the area is isolated from other
               regions of the County due to limited vehicular access created by topographical
               barriers. If roads and bridges leading to the City are cut off by an earthquake,
               flood, or mud slides, then medical, fire, and other emergency response would be
               severely restricted.
               The constant threat to life and property from these hazards creates a need to
               protect the community through sound planning, development, and maintenance
               practices, as well as through disaster education and preparedness programs.
               The General Plan inventory and analysis of public safety hazards is divided into five
               issue areas. The five areas include seismic and geologic hazards (below), flood
               hazards (page 27), fire hazards (page 29), hazardous materials and waste (page 32),
               and disasters (page 33). These issue areas are discussed below and in the following
               pages. Goals, Policies and Implementing Programs for the City of Ojai related to
               safety issues are listed beginning on page 37.
SEISMIC AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
               The City of Ojai is exposed to various geologic and seismic hazards as a result of
               the general topography of the area. Ojai is situated in a relatively narrow valley
               surrounded by dramatic mountains with numerous faults traversing the region.
               The following seismic and geologic hazards are known to exist in the Ojai area:
               Seismic Hazards                                 Other Geoloeic Hazards
               Surface Rupture                                 Landslides
               Ground Shaking                                  Expansive Soils
               Subsidence                                      Erosion
               Ground Failure
               Liquefuction
               Dam Failure
              OJM GENERAL PLAN                        10                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Seismic Hazards
The City of Ojai has not directly experienced a devastating earthquake. Although
the historic record shows little evidence for strong earthquakes or surface
displacement along faults in the southern area of Ventura County, the likelihood
of the occurrence of one or more such events within 50 to 100 years is not remote.
Only two historic earthquakes might have been devastating to present day
populated areas of the County, but they occurred in December 1812 and January
1857, before there was any semblance of population in the region. The earthquake
of 1812 severely damaged missions from present-day Santa Maria on the west, to
San Fernando on the east, for a total of116 miles. The 1857 earthquake is the first
historical earthquake of California to be described as a "great" earthquake. It is
estimated at 8.25 on the Richter Scale because it apparently ruptured ground from
Fort Tejon to at least 100 miles in each direction along the San Andreas Fault from
Fort Tejon.
The relatively recent 1971 San Fernando earthquake occurred along a fault having
little historic record of activity. Several of the faults within the southern half of
Ventura County are similar in structure. They are subject to
comparable tectonic forces as those associated with the San
Fernando earthquake. A map showing the County's major
earthquake locations and intensities between 1928 and 1971 is
illustrated in Exhibit GEO-2 of the MEA.
Most of the land in Ventura County is encompassed by the
Transverse Range geographic province of California. The
province is distinct from other provinces in that the nature of
its prevailing linear trend is west to east instead of northwest
to southeast (which is the case from most geologic trends in the state). The
province is bounded by three major faults, including the northwest trending San
Andreas Fault zone, which cuts the northeast comer of the County; the west
trending Big Pine Fault, which joins the San Andreas and forms the northern
boundary of the province; and the Malibu Coast Fault, which forms the southern
boundary of the province where the fault extends offshore to the west of the
County boundary. Each of these faults constitute a potential major earthquake
hazard. The following paragraphs outline each known hazard.
Surface Rupture
The major direct effect of earthquake faulting is surface rupture. This is when
faulting causes actual rupturing of the earth's surface.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                       11                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Nearly all man-made structures are susceptible to damage ranging from severe to
total when affected by displacement along faults passing beneath their foundations.
The San Fernando Earthquake of 1971 has shown that no structures designed
under present standards are safe from severe damage or destruction as a result of
surface fault displacement of foundations. It is widely acknowledged that design
of most structures, such as single-family homes or larger structures, roads, bridges,
pipelines, or other conduits, to resist fault displacement is generally not feasible.
Only massive earth structures such as earthfill dams can be designed to remain
functional after several feet of displacement along an underlying fault.
Permanent effects of surface displacement along faults also can include:
         1.      Abrupt elevation or depression of ground surfaces of several feet
                 for distances of many hundreds of feet along the fault;
         2.      Disruption of surface drainage;
         3.      Changes in groundwater levels in wells;
         4.      Blockage and surface seepage of groundwater flow;
         5.      Changes in survey benchmark elevations;
         6.      Dislocations of street alignments and property lines of many feet
                 if lateral (horizontal) displacement also occurs along a fault;
         7.      Displacement of drainage channel and drains.
Secondary effects of surface displacements along faults within an urban area could
include:
         1.      Disruption ofmovement along roadways due to abrupt depressions
                 or elevation of pavement surfaces;
         2.      Possible flooding due to disruption of drainage channel and storm
                 drain flow;
         3.      Disruption of utility services such as water, gas, fuel, telephone and
                 electric power lines;
         4.      Temporary impact on industry and commerce similar to that
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                        12                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
                  resulting from the occurrence of most kinds of regional natural
                  catastrophic events such as hurricanes or floods.
The State Division of Mines and Geology (Urban Geology Master Plan for
California. 1973, Bulletin 198) indicates that on a statewide basis the potential
hazard to structures from the surface displacement of faults is low compared to
such geologic phenomena as earthquake shaking and landsliding. Historically,
major losses due to fault displacement have been limited to the San Fernando
Earthquake of 1971. Structural losses due to fault displacement in the 26 other
major earthquakes in California are unknown but were probably small. Most of the
losses incurred during the 1906 San Francisco Earthquake and 1952 Tehachapi
Earthquake were caused by ground shaking and ensuing fires.
The greatest potential for fault activity is along any of the faults which lie within the
several major fault systems which transect the County from east to west. The 1971
San Fernando Earthquake which occurred along one of these major fault systems
illustrates the high level of activity that some faults within these systems may have,
and foretells the occurrence ofother such earthquakes in the Los Angeles, Ventura-
Santa Barbara regions.
The San Fernando earthquake of 1971 may be an example of the typical type which
could occur along some of the east-west trending faults which transect the County.
Based upon that earthquake, it is most likely that a surface fault displacement within
the County will be sudden, occurring over a period of less than one minute. The
displacement would be accompanied by sharp ground shaking lasting perhaps
several tens of seconds.
Many of the faults in the County are associated with major fault systems extending
beyond County boundaries. Several ofthese faults and fault systems are considered
to be active, but a great deal of additional information must be assembled to
determine the potential for, as well as the nature of, activity of most of the faults
including those presently considered to be active.
The present level of knowledge of the recency ofsurface or near surface movement
along the faults within Ventura County is not sufficient on which to base a firm
determination of the "degree" of activity of most of these features. There is some
evidence that some of the known faults have displaced at least late Quaternary
terrace sediments, indicating possible movement as recent as 11,000 years ago. This
is the primary basis for designating the most recently active faults, as these could
have the higher potential of future movement.
There are many places other than the San Andreas fault where faulting occurs. A
OJM GENERAL PLAN                         13                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
series of related faults is called a fault zone or a fault system. There are several faults
and fault zones located near the City of Ojai. In the event of surface displacement
along these fault zones, loss oftife and property damage in the unincorporated and
incorporated areas of Ojai could be significant. These zones are described below
and illustrated in Exhibits GEO-l and GEO-3 of the City of Ojai MEA.
SANTA ANAlARROYO PARIDA FAULT ZONE
This filUlt extends from Montecito to the Vent:w:a River and along the south side
of the Ojai Valley. This fault system is an eastward extension of the Mission
Ridge Fault in the Santa Barbara area and extends to the southeast end of the
Ojai Valley where San Cayetano zone apparently begins. The fault roughly
parallels the southern boundary of the City of Ojai. The Santa Ana Fault has
raised the Upper Ojai Valley relative to the Ojai Valley. The fault forms a
groundwater barrier in the alluvium beneath the Vent:w:a River. One school lies
in the fault zone and sewer mains and water transmission lines from Lake
Casitas and Vent:w:a to the Vent:w:a area cross this fault zone. This system is
considered potentially active.
UON MOUNTAIN FAULT
This fault is encompassed by the Lion Canyon Fault Zone which extends from
Santa Paula Creek along the south edge of Upper Ojai Valley through the Lion
Canyon area and possibly to Oak View and beyond to Lake Casitas. The fault
itself does not enter the City of Ojai. The actual Lion Mountain fault is located
between Lake Casitas and the San Cayetano fault zone, east of Ojai. The Lion
Mountain Fault Zone contains a major portion ofthe Oak View co=unity and
the southern section of the Ojai community. Major electrical transmission lines,
gas mains, water transmission lines and sewer mains between Oak View and Ojai
transverse this zone. Local geologic formations show relatively recent activity.
This fault is considered potentiaIly active.
POssmLE FAULTS
In addition to the above mentioned vicinity faults there is evidence that faults,
to date unmapped, may extend across the north part of the Ojai Valley area and
link the San Cayetano Fault zone to the east with faults and possible faults to the
west ofVent:w:a River.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                          14                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
SPECIAL STUDIES ZONES
In t 972 the California State Legislature enacted the Alquist-Priolo Geologic Hazard
Zones Act. Pursuant to this act the "State geologist shall delineate ... special
studies zones to encompass all potentially and recently active traces of the San
Andreas, Calaveras, Hayward, and San Jacinto Faults, and such other faults ... as
to constitute a potential hazard to structures from surface faulting or fault creep."
(Alquist-Priolo Act).
Two special studies zones briefly enter the City of Ojai's western boundary near the
Villanova school. Please refer to Exhibit GEO-3 in the City of Ojai MEA.
The intent of the zone is to provide for public safety from the hazard of fault
rupture by avoiding, to the extent possible, the construction of structures for
human occupancy astride hazardous faults. However, the precise location and
identification of hazardous faults within or near a zone of potentially active faults
can be determined only through detailed geologic investigations. Therefore the
State Mining and Geology Board has adopted policies and criteria for the
implementation of these zones.
The most significant criteria within the act is that no structure may be built across
the trace of an active fault. Furthermore, the area within fifty feet of an active fault
shall be assumed to be underlain by active branches and therefore, before any
structure can be built within the zone, a geologic investigation and submission of
a report by a geologist registered by the State of California are required. In
addition, any city or county may require more restrictive policies.
Ground Shaking
The physical movement of the land surface due to earthquakes is known as ground
shaking. When a fault breaks, the accumulated strain energy is released as seismic
waves that travel outward in all directions from the epicenter. Unlike a surface
rupture, ground shaking can occur great distances from an actual known fault. The
intensity of ground shaking/seismicity during an earthquake depends largely on
geologic foundation conditions of the materials comprising the upper several
hundred feet of the earth's surface. The greatest amplitudes and longest durations
of ground shaking occur on thick, water-saturated, unconsolidated alluvial
sediments. Ground shaking can also cause ground failure or surface rupturing due
to lurching and liquefaction.
Ground shaking can cause disruption of surface drainage, blockage of surface
seepage and groundwater flow, changes in groundwater flow, dislocation of street
DJM GENERAL PLAN                        15                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
alignments, displacement of drninage channels and drnins, destruction or damage
to buildings and property and possibly loss of life. Seismic shaking can renew
movement of old landslides as well as result in the formation of new slides. The
intensity of shaking within 10 miles of the epicenter focus point of the earthquake,
in areas underlain by deep alluvium, would likely be in the range of VII to VIII
Modified Mercalli intensity, and VI to VII in areas underlain by finn ground
bedrock (please refer to Table A). Higher intensities would be experienced
immediately adjacent to the epicentral area.
The State Division of Mines and Geology in their publication entitled, "Urban
Geology" 1973, Bulletin 149, indicates that on a state-wide basis, the potential
hazard to structures from ground shaking is higher than any other hazard.
Approximately one dozen unreinforced masonry buildings are located within the
City of Ojai. In order to reduce the risk of structural damage to these buildings in
the event of an earthquake, the City has recently adopted an ordinance to provide
seismic strengthening provisions for unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings.
The ordinance identifies 12 unreinforced masonry buildings, sets time limits for
these structures to meet current seismic code, and specifies the allowable design
criteria which is required.
The State Division of Mines and Geology has also indicated that the Ventura
County area could experience relatively high earthquake activity. It has been
estimated that within the ne..n year there is a 3% to 4% chance of occurrence for
a major earthquake measuring at least 7.0 on the Richter Scale; within the next fifty
years, it is estimated that there is a 50% to 90% chance of an earthquake of this
magnitude. The source of this anticipated earthquake is the 650-mile long San
Andreas fault.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                       16                 SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
               Safety Element
                                      TABLE A
                        RELATIONSHIP OF RICHTER MAGNITIJDE
                     AND MODIFIED MERCALLI INTENSfIY SCALES
                         TO EXPECTED EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE
              MODIFIED MERCALLI
  RICHTER     MAXIMUM INTENSITY                            EXPECTED
MAGNITIJDE        (AT EPICENTER)                        EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE
       2            I-II                   Usually detected only by instruments.
       3             III                  Felt indoors. May not be recognized as earthquake.
       4           IV - v                 Felt by most people; structure shake; windows and
                                          dishes rattle; wooden walls and frame creak; slight
                                          damage to unsecured objects.
       5       VI - VII                   Felt by all; many frightened and run outdoors; glassware
                                          breaks; items fall offshelves; furniture moves; cracks in
                                          unreinforced masonry; fall of chimneys, cornices and
                                          other unreinforced architectural ornament; some small
                                          slides can occur.
       6        VII -VIII                 Difficult to stand; steering of autos is affected;
                                          potentially moderate to major structures; frame houses
                                         move off foundations if not bolted; branches broken
                                         off trees; collapse of elevated structure such as
                                         chimneys, water towers.
       7           IX-X                   General panic; Major total damage to masonry
                                         structures; underground pipes broken; frame structures
                                         seriously damaged; cracks in ground; large landslides
                                         likely; serious damage to dams, dikes, embankments.
      8+         X-XII                   Major and total damages to buildings and infrastructure.
Source:    California Division of Mines and Geology, "CDMG Notes," after Charles F. Richter,
           1958, Elementary Seismology.
              DJM GENERAL PLAN                       17                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Subsidence
Subsidence and differential settlement (the uneven lowering of the ground surface)
constitute minor natural hazards in the City of Ojai. Local subsidence may be
caused by extracting more groundwater than is replaced by the natural hydrologic
cycle. The results from this drawdown are empty pore spaces in the soil, wruch are
compacted from the weight of overlying material.
Subsidence, defined as the sinking or lowering of a part of the earth's surface, can
occur as a result of or independent of earthquakes. Seismically-induced subsidence
can be either a direct or an indirect result of an earthquake. Direct tectonic
displacement of bedrock can result from strong earthquakes causing either
subsidence or uplift of up to several feet over relatively large areas of ground
surface. Indirect subsidence resulting from compaction ofgradual soil layers caused
by ground shaking is more common. Such shaking causes subsidence by
compressing the soil deposit so that pore space formerly filled by groundwater or
air is eliminated. There must be an outlet for evacuation of these pore spaces in
order for subsidence to occur.
Differential settlement is a more common hazard often occurring when buildings
and bridges are built on poor foundation materials. Pilings are often used to
anchor structures to fIrmer deposits below the surface in these situations. Surface
footings tend to be used to support less important structures. If surface footings
are used to support one part of a structure and pilings for another, differential
settlementwill occur, with the area supported by surface footings setting faster than
the pilingsupported section. Differential settlement generally occurs slowly enough
that its effects are not serious.
Ground Failure
Earth materials in a natural condition tend to reach equilibrium over a long period
of time. In geologically active areas such as California and Alaska there are many
regions where earth materials have not yet reached a natural state of stability. For
example, most of the valleys and bay margins are underlain by recent loose
materials that have not been compacted and hardened by long-term natural
processes. Landslides are common on most of the hills and mountains as loose
material moves downslope. In addition, many activities of man tend to make the
earth materials less stable and hence to increase the chance ofground failure. Some
of the natural causes of instability are earthquakes, weak materials, stream and
coastal erosion, and heavy rainfall. Human activities that contribute to instability
include oversteepening of slopes by undercutting them or overloading them with
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      18                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
artificial fill, extensive irrigation, poor drainage or even groundwater withdrawal,
and removal of stabilizing vegetation. These causes of failure, which normally
produce landslides and differential settlement, are augmented during earthquakes
by strong ground motions that result in rapid changes in the state of earth
materials. It is these changes, by means of liquefaction and loss of strength in fine-
grained materials, that result in so many landslides during earthquakes as well as
differential settlement, subsidence, ground cracking, ground lurching, and a variety
of transient and permanent changes in the ground surface.
Although the basic causes of ground instability are simple in concept, the
consequences are often complex and highly variable. They include numerous
varieties of landslides, ground cracking, lurching, subsidence, and differential
settlement. Moreover, these types of ground failure occur on a wide variety of
ground conditions. Landslides, for example, do not require a steep slope on which
to form, particularly during earthquakes. Many occur on slopes that are virtually
flat, and the surface on which they fail may be very shallow (1 to 2 feet deep) or as
much as hundreds of feet below the ground surface. The type of ground failure
that develops in a given area is determined by the nature of the natural man-made
disturbance that occurs and partly by the topographic, geologic, hydrologic, and
geotechnical characteristics of the ground.
Liquefaction
Liquefaction is a type of ground failure that can occur during an earthquake.
Liquefaction can occur on relatively level ground and have catastrophic effects on
structures. Liquefaction can cause buildings to collapse or sink, pipeline and storage
tanks to float or break, disruption or destruction of gas lines, sewer lines, roads, etc.
Liquefaction can also be the cause of landslides on slopes as small as 2.5%.
Liquefaction occurs when loose soils that are water-saturated are subjected to
ground shaking of high intensity and long duration. Liquefaction is manifested by
sand boils and mudspouts at the ground surface and water seepage through ground
cracks or by the development of quicksand-like conditions or landslides. When
quicksand-like conditions occur, buildings may sink or tilt into the ground and
underground facilities may float to the surface.
Several conditions are necessary to produce liquefaction includingwater saturation,
low density soil, uniform grain size, lack of confining pressure, high intensity and
high duration ground shaking. Ground shaking intensity depends on the magnitude
of an earthquake and the amplification of the ground shaking. In terms of soil
density, loose unconsolidated soil materials are the most subject to liquefaction.
DJM GENERAL PLAN                          19                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Uniform grain size, such as a deposit of only sand, causes materials to be more
susceptible to liquefaction than mixed materials. The deeper in the soil zone the
higher the confining pressure and consequently, the lower the potential for
liquefaction.
Liquefaction can occur at any level of a soil deposit but
usually occurs within the upper 40 to 50 feet. The
potential for liquefaction exists wherever there are
saturated, loose sand deposits, especially if they are near
the surface. This includes most of the river valleys and the
low lying plains that have poor drainage. Since subsurface
soil properties are not precisely known, it is necessary to
assume that all alluvial areas having high groundwater may
be subject to liquefaction during strong earthquake
shaking.
Areas with alluvial soils are subject to liquefaction hazard.
In the Ojai vicinity, these areas are the Santa Ana Valley
north of Casitas Lake, the Ojai Valley, and the UpperOjai
Valley.
Referring to Exhibit GEO-4 of the City of Ojai MEA, areas designated high hazard
zones for liquefaction are alluvial areas which have had water table levels within 15
feet of the ground surface at some time in the last 50 years or since water well
records have been kept. Moderate hazard zones include alluvial areas which have
had water between 15 and 40 feet below ground level.
There are a few areas within the Sphere of Influence but outside the City
boundaries which are subject to liquefaction hazard. These areas are located along
or adjacent to San Antonio Creek and in the eastern portion of the Sphere of
Influence.
The majority of the City of Ojai is subject to liquefaction hazard. Those portions
of the City located far north along the City boundary or to the west of the Ojai
Country Club are free from significant liquefaction potential.
Inundation From Dam Failure
Dam failures can result from a number of natural or manmade causes such as
earthquakes (ground rupture or severe groundshaking), erosion of the face of
foundation, landslidingwhich displaces a large volume ofwater, rapidly rising flood
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      20                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
waters, and struetural/design flaws.
There are currently no dams within, adjacent to, or upstream from the City of Ojai
which are large enough to endanger lives and property in the event of a failure.
The Stewart Debris Basis, northerly of Canada Street, is not technically adam (refer
to Exhibit GEO-3 of the City of Ojai MEA). The facility was designed by the
Corps of Engineers to accommodate a 500 year flood and is considered safe.
However, in the event of its failure, lives and property could be at risk. In adclition,
the threat of inundation from dam failure could oc= with the construction of a
dam upstream of the major drainage courses such as San Antonio Creek which
traverse or follow close to the City's borders. Because of these threats, this topic
is included in the safety element for present and future reference.
There are three general types of dams: earth and rockfill, concrete arch or
hydraulic fill, and concrete gravity. Each of these types of dams has clifferent
failure characteristics. The earth-rockfill dam will fail gradually due to erosion of
the breach; a flood wave will build gradually to a peak and then decline until the
reservoir is empty. A concrete arch or hydraulic fill dam will fail almost
instantaneously; thus a very rapid build-up to a peak wave and then a gradual
decline. A concrete gravity dam will fail somewhere in between instantaneous and
gradual, with corresponcling build-up of flood wave.
In adclition to the above mentioned characteristics, warning ability is generally
determined by the frequency of inspections for structural integrity, the flood wave
arrival time (the time it takes for the flood wave to reach its maximum clistance of
inundation), or the ability to notify persons downstream and their ability to
evacuate. The existence and frequency of updating and exercising an evacuation
plan that is site-specific assists in warning and evacuation functions.
A dam failure will cause loss of life, damage to property, and other ensuing hazards,
as well as the clisplacement of persons resicling in the inundation path. Damage to
electric generating facilities and transmission lines could also impact life support
systems in communities outside the irnmecliate hazard areas. A catastrophic dam
failure, depencling on size of dam and population downstream, could exceed the
response capability of local communities. Damage control and disaster relief
supportwould be required from other local governmental and private organizations
and from the state and federal governments.
Mass evacuation of the inundation areas would be essential to save lives, ifwarning
time should permit. Extensive search and rescue operations may be required to
assist trapped or injured persons. Emergency meclical care, food, and temporary
OJM GENERAL PLAN                         21                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
shelter would be required for injured or displaced persons. Identification and burial
of many dead persons would pose difficult problems; public health would be a
major concern. Many families would be separated, particularly if the failure should
occur during working hours, and a person inquiry or locator system would be
essential. These and other emergency operations could be seriously hampered by
the loss of communications, damage to transportation routes, and the disruption
of public utilities and other essential services.
Governmental assistance could be required and may continue for an extended
period. These efforts would be required to remove debris and clear roadways,
demolish unsafe structures, assist in reestablishing public services and utilities, and
provide continuing care and welfare for the affected population including, as
required, temporary housing for displaced persons.
Other Geololric Hazards
In addition to seismic hazards, the geology of the Ojai area has created geologic
hazards which may cause loss of life and property due to earth movement not
associated with a seismic event. The following geologic hazards are found
throughout the Ojai area.
Landslides
The widespread landsliding and slope instability throughout much of southern
Ventura County can be related to the intensity of past faulting and folding of
geologic strata, to the clay content of certain sedimentary formations and the
subsurface moisture content. The County of Ventura has not identified any areas
of past landslide activity within the City of Ojai, although the potential does exist.
Land development in hillside areas can result in the formation of new landslides if
grading or development design does not take into account potentially adverse
landslide conditions. Many of the area's natural slopes are underlain by bedded
sedimentary rocks that are inclined downhill. The slopes in these cases are
marginally stable and prone to failure along the bedding planes.
Generally in Ventura County, landsliding is most commonly found along
prominent fault zones (refer to Exhibit GEO-3 ofthe City ofOjai MEA), anticlinal
folds (upside down "U"-shaped folds in rock strata), areas of younger geologic
formations and areas of weak or clayey bedrock. Landslides and potentially
unstable slopes are especially common in hillside areas underlain by sedimentary
bedrock. Many landslides are also associated with steep slopes which have been
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      22                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
undercut by erosion. Subsurface water is also a contributing factor to slope
instability in the great majority oflandslide occurrences. In general, most existing
landslides in southern Ventura County are not of recent origins, over 100 years old
and most are not actively moving. They are subject to movement if triggered by
earthquakes, poorly planned grading or ifground moisture is substantially increased.
Several areas in the Ojai vicinity are subject to landsliding hazard. Most of these
large areas are in the hillsides to the north and south of the City of Ojai. The
Sulphur Mountain hills to the east of San Antonio Creek and south of the Upper
Ojai Valley have large areas susceptible to landsliding. In the National Forest,
northeast of the Ojai Valley, there is a large area of landsliding.
There are no significantly large areas oflandslidingin the City's Sphere of Influence
or in the City of Ojai.
Expansive Soils
Expansive soils are those which are generally clayey, expand or swell when wetted,
and contract or shrink when dried. These soils are typically located in areas of
moderate slope. Expansive soils are referred to as soils having high shrink-swell
potential. Downslope soil creep in hillside areas is a concern with regard to
expansive soils. As an expansive soil shrinks and swells it tends to move downslope
due to gravity.
Expansive soils tend to be very localized and site specific and a soils test is usually
necessary to determine a particular site's susceptibility to expansive soils.
Engineeringpractices can sometimes be applied to alleviate the problems associated
with building on expansive soils. Examples of these practices are appropriate
foundation design, less steep slopes, removal and replacement of expansive soils,
special landscaping, and irrigation techniques to bind and avoid wetting the soil.
Moderately expansive soils are prevalent throughout south Ventura County. Areas
of low potential for expansive soils are common along rivers and some canyons.
Small areas of highly expansive soils are scattered throughout the western portion
of the south County. Larger areas are common in the southeastern portion of
south County.
The great majority of the land within the City of Ojai is covered with moderately
expansive soils with the exception of the central portion of the City which has low
expansive potential. These soils can be built upon easily with conservative
DJM GENERAL PLAN                       23                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
               Safety Element
              engineering practices. The northeastern corne~ of the City is covered with highly
              expansive soils which must be taken into consideration prior to land development.
              Please refer to Exhibit GEO-9 of the City of Ojai MEA.
              The majority of the City of Ojai's adopted Sphere of Influence is underlain by
              moderately expansive soils. The southeastern portion of the Sphere has highly
              expansive soils near Highway 150. Highly expansive soils are also prevalent in the
              portion of McDonald Canyon and the area east ofMeiners Oaks located within the
              Sphere ofInfluence boundaries.
              Erosion
              The majority of soils in the Ojai area have potential for very severe water erosion
              if the soils are cultivated or heavily grazed. The exceptions to this are areas along
              riverbeds. These areas experience no potential to moderate potential
              for erosion hazard.
              Outside the City limits, the trend of severe erosion hazard near the City increasing
              to very severe hazard to the northwest and reducing to moderate hazard to the
              southeast continues in the City vicinity. A small area east of Meiners Oaks,
              however, has potential for moderate erosion hazard.
              Potential for severe erosion hazard characterizes the majority of the soils within the
              City limits. To the northwest, the potential increases to very severe. To the
              southwest, the potential for erosion hazard is reduced to moderate. Please refer to
              Exhibit GEO-I0 ofthe City of Ojai MEA for an illustration of the erosion hazards
              which exist within the City and its sphere of influence.
FLOOD HAZARDS
              The potential of flooding is a major safety concern in Ojai. Parts of the City and
              surrounding areas are subject to flood hazards. Structures in the Ojai area are
              highly susceptible to damage from water runoff. Controlling and directing the flow
              of water will need to be addressed. This will be accomplished by specifically
              identifying areas susceptible to flooding and making appropriate plans of action.
              Climate
              The climate of the Ojai area directly affects the duration and intensity of rainfall.
              It is characterized by hot summers and mild winters. The mean annual precipitation
              for the area ranges from 19 inches near the confluence of San Antonio Creek and
              the Ventura River, to 30 inches in the mountains.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                        24                 SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Major floods in the area are produced by unstable frontal storms that form in the
Pacific Ocean and approach the coast from the west. These frontal systems form
by cold air masses from the polar regions mixingwith very moist warm air from the
tropics. They have a potential for producing heavy and prolonged rainfall. The
rain generally occurs during the winter months from November to April. Storms
last from three to four days. Local storms can cause high intensity precipitation for
a duration of about six hours or less. General summer storms can also occur in
southern California during the later summer or early fall months. These summer
storms have not resulted in any major floods in the San Antonio Creek Basin
during the periods for which discharge records are
available.
Drainage
Drainage for the City of Ojai and Sphere of Influence is south and southwest. The
streams and drains are typical of the majority of streams in southern California;
streamflow is negligible except during and immediately after rains. Climatic and
basin characteristics are not conducive to continuous runoff. Runoff increases
rapidly in response to high-intensity precipitation and is magnified to some degree
by the impermeable surfaces created by urbanization. Streamflow is seasonal and
diminishes rapidly at the end of the winter precipitation season. Based on records
on the last 100-year period of flood history, some flood damage will occur in the
vicinity of Ojai on an average of once in every four years. The Ojai area historically
has been subjected to major storms on an average of once every 11 years.
Channel Analysis
There are many creeks and drains in the Ojai area which could have an effect on
the City when floods occur. The following tables and descriptions briefly detail
those watercourses which pose possible flood hazards for the City of Ojai.
    o   San Antonio Creek
        This a major tributary to the Ventura River. It originates in Senior Canyon
        north of the Ojai Valley southwestward to its confluence with the Ventura
        River north of Casitas Springs.
    o   Thacher Creek
        This creek originates northeast of Ojai and flows in a southwesterly
        direction to its confluence with San Antonio Creek in the City of Ojai.
0JM GENERAL PLAN                      25                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
  o   Stewart Canyon Channel
      Stewart Canyon traverses the City ofOjai and its Sphere of Influence from
      north to south. It goes through the center of the City. Along Stewart
      Canyon Channel urban development has occurred. This drain runs from
      the mountains north of the City south to its confluence with San Antonio
      Creek along the southern corporate boundary. A debris basin was built by
      the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the mouth of Stewart Canyon Storm
      Channel. It contains and regulates the outflow for both the Intermediate
      Regional (100-year) and Standard Project F100ds (SOO-year). Below the
      basin a concrete channel and covered box conduit has been constructed to
      accommodate the Intermediate and Standard Project F1ood. This
      improvement extends from the spillway of the debris basin to
      approximately 200 feet downstream of the Southern Pacific Railroad
      crossing. In this manner all flood hazards along Stewart Canyon Channel
      have been minimized above the downstream end of the channel
      improvement.
  o    Fox Canyon Barranca
     This traverses the City and Sphere from north to south in the eastern third
      of the City. Along Fox Canyon Barranca urban development has occurred.
      This drain runs from the mountains north the City to its confluence with
      Stewart Canyon Drain and then into San Antonio Creek, along the
      southerly corporate boundary.
     The principal danger of flooding along the Fox Canyon Barranca is the
      inadequate inlet under Daly Road. Following the 1985 Wheeler Fire, a
      debris barrier was constructed on Fox Canyon upstream of Daly Road.
      However, this inlet could still become clogged from debris generated
      upstream ofDaly Road. An upstream extension to the conduit under Daly
     Road is proposed which would eliminate the inadequate inlet at Daly Road
     and place Fox Canyon underground to the mouth of the canyon some 800
      feet upstream.
     The area tributary to Fox Canyon includes a large area east of the channel
      that is not collected due to a lack of lateral drainage facilities. The City
      Master Plan of Drainage (dated June 1979) proposes a storm drain parallel
      to Fox Canyon Channel. This drain would intercept much of the tributary
     east of Fox Canyon. It is designated as Drain 26 and is considered to be
     a Ventura County Flood Control "Redline" or jurisdictional channel.
DJM GENERAL PLAN                    26                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
    o   McNeil Creek
        McNeil Creek is an unimproved channel throughout its length and runs
        mostly through agricultural land. The channel is inadequate to contain an
         Intermediate Regional (100-year) Flood throughout its length.
    o   Happy VaIley Drain
         This drain travels northeast to southwest and is situated just outside the
         western boundary of the City limits. The flood plain for Happy Valley
         Drain south of El Roblar is partially developed.
    o   DronCreek
        This creek travels north to south, originating from the mountains and
        emptying into San Antonio Creek. Dron Creek has the potential to
        overflow its banks before it reaches San Antonio Creek.
Floodin~    Hazards
Almost all of the above described waterways pose a flooding threat to the City of
Ojai. Flooding can be aggravated by several factors such as inadequate channel
cross-sections, culverts at roadways, poor flow line alignment, and excessive debris.
The major watercourse influencing the City is San Antonio Creek. Damaging
floods along this creek and its tributaries in the vicinity of Ojai are reported to have
occurred in 1862, 1867, 1884, 1911, 1914, 1938, and 1943. Major floods along the
creek are described as having a peak discharge greater than 3500 cubic feet per
second. Major floods have been recorded along San Antonio Creek occurred in
1952, 1958, 1965, 1966 1969, and 1978. The flood of January 25, 1969 had the
largest recorded peak discharge at 16,200 cf./sec. The largest peak discharge for
San Antonio Creek during the 1978 winter storms was 14,000 cf./sec. which was
recorded on February 10th. This was facilitated by the 16.23 inches of rainfall
during the months of December and January in the City ofOjai. The January 16th
storm produced a 6,900 cf./sec. peak discharge on San Antonio Creek with the
March 4th storm producing a 10,100 cf./sec. discharge.
Most flooding problems along the San Antonio Creek are associated with excessive
debris accumulation and in some instances, alignment of the natural stream; losses
of recreational facilities such as picnic tables are common on an annual basis
(Flood Insurance Study, HOD, 1978). The Ojai Valley is periodically threatened by
flows containing large quantities of debris from steep canyons of the upper
OJM GENERAL PLAN                        27                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
watershed. The existing channels can become clogged with debris and no longer
carry the volume of flood flows. These flows then spread over the valley causing
loss in property and posing potential hazard to life.
Traditional improvement plans to alleviate debris flows are debris darns and basins
at canyon mouths and the lining of channels. These improvements would then
carry the cleared water from the basin outlets past points which are susceptible to
flood damages. Systematic and periodic flood channel preventive maintenance
including removing debris accumulating in flood channels and contributory streams
would lessen or remove flood threats from debris clogged channels.
The floods during the January 1969 storms resulted in excessive channel
sedimentation and production oflarge quantities of floating debris. In many areas,
severe sedimentation resulted in the blockage of road crossings. This occurred
along Grand Avenue and Ojai Avenue in the Ojai Valley and Highway 33 north of
Ojai.
Debris basins are invaluable during storm periods because they provide an area to
capture and accumulate debris before it can enter the downstream channels and
cause damage. The Stewart Canyon Debris Basin is credited with saving the City
of Ojai from major property damages and loss of lives. It is estimated that over
200,000 cubic yards of material were deposited in the basin by the January and
February 1969 storms.
The floods during the January/February/March 1978 storm season produced
minor flooding problems in numerous storm drains throughout the City of Ojai.
Most of these facilities are designed for a to-year storm and overflow during greater
storms. However, the result is primarily nuisance flooding since the design flows
are relatively minor. This type of flooding does not pose a serious threat to life and
property.
A burned watershed, results of the July 1985 Wheeler fire, posed a serious potential
threat of flooding to the Ojai Valley in the 1985-1986 flood season. Fortunately
emergency measures including debris darns, temporary channels, watershed
reseeding and extensive sand-bagging combined with a wet, but well distributed,
rainfall resulted in little serious flooding to the valley.
Flood Plain Manarement
In October 1978 the City of Ojai adopted a Flood Protection Ordinance
incorporating flood plain management programs recommended by a Flood
Insurance Study. The intent of the ordinance is to regulate development in flood
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                        28                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
             Safety Element
             plains and flood prone areas, the stream channels, canyon channels, and barranca
             channels identified in the Flood Insurance Study and in this document. Specific
             areas depicted on a parcel by parcel basis within the City limits and its Sphere of
             Influence subject to 100-year and SOO-year flood plains are illustrated in the Safety
             Element's Flood Hazard Map (Exhibit S-l), and Exhibit GEO-3 in the City shows
             general areas within the City limits and Sphere of Influence subject to 1OO-year and
             SOO-year flood plains of the City ofOjai MEA. It is important to note that the SOO-
             year flood plain includes areas subject to toO-year flooding with average depths of
             less than one foot.
             The Master Plan of Drainage Study,
             prepared for the City of Ojai in June
             1979, identifies sources of funding
             which may be used by a development
             applicant in completing a specific
             project.
             Drainage areas in the Ojai Valley located
             outside of the City limits are subject to
             the Ventura County Flood Control
             District regulations and policies guiding
             flood control activities. Please refer to
             Table HYD-C of the City of Ojai
             MEA for a description of these areas.
FIRE HAZARDS
             Because of the mix of urban and wildland areas in the Ojai area, fire protection is
             a difficult problem and fire protection systems are complex. Much of the area
             surrounding the City of Ojai is covered with woodland, brush, or grassland. Large
             tracts of sparsely populated land must be protected from wildland fires in hot, dry
             summers at the same time that adequate protection must be provided to population
             centers. Fire protection in urban areas must also be designed and equipped to cope
             with industrial fires with their associated hazardous materials concerns, multi-level
             structures of varying occupancies, densely built and highly populated residential
             apartments and similarstructures, and transportation accidents involving hazardous
             materials.
             0IAI GENERAL PLAN                       29                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
 Safety Element
Fire Hazard Severity
In recent years, extensive study has been
undertaken at the State level to classify the
fire hazard severity of different regions of
the State. One of the key components in
measuring severity is the type and quantity
of flammable vegetation within a given unit
of land area. This factor, also known as
"fuel loading characteristics," can then be
combined with weather and slope to obtain
a measure of relative hazard. Please refer to
Exhibit GEO-3 of the City ofOjai MEA for
an illustration of designated fire hazard
areas. This exhibit is also included m
Appendix B of this document.
Fuel Loading
Three basic fuel loading characteristics have been identified by the State. "Heavy"
fuel loading vegetation is assigned to woodland and brushwood areas. This
characteristic is generally assigned to vegetation that is six feet or more in height
and which has a crown density of 20 percent or more of the ground area. The
heavy fuel loading vegetation types include oak woodlands and chaparral which are
found in abundance in the rural areas surrounding the City.
"Medium" fuel loading vegetation generally includes scrub vegetation that is less
than six feet in height but with similar crown density characteristics. This category
includes California sagebrush, coyote brush, manzanita, and other chaparral species
common to the area.
"Light" fuel loading vegetative types are various types of grasslands, herbaceous
rangelands and irrigated pasture lands. These areas are almost completely treeless
and highly flammable during dry seasons. The significance of this fuel is that it
carries the fire into the medium and heavy fuel beds.
Weather Conditions
The second major natural characteristics to consider in fire hazard measurement are
local weather conditions. In Southern California, very little rain normally fulls
between mid-April and the beginning ofNovember. By September, many portions
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      3D                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
of the State are tinder dry from months of aridity. It is not unusual for strong,
drying winds to blow in from the north and east.
The State has established three"critical fire weather frequency" classes to measure
the weather-related fire hazard severity. These classes basically measure the annual
number of days in which a critical "fire load index" is exceeded over a 10-year
period, with Class I the lowest and Class III the highest level of danger.
Slope
The third major characteristic of fire hazard measurement is the degree of slope
present in a localized area. The rugged terrain and steep slopes that characterize
much of the area surrounding the City can create extreme access problems for
fighting fires once they have started. Generally, vegetation is more abundant in
steep canyon areas due to less severe sun and wind exposure and greater capture
of rain runoff. Fires that start in the bottom of canyons will burn 16 times faster
upslope than if they begin at the top of ridges and burn downslope.
The State has divided slope categories into three different classes of fire severity.
Class I includes slopes from 0 to 40 percent. This category assumes that direct
attack on the fire is possible with all-wheel drive fire trucks, bulldozers, and crews
and aircraft. Class II includes slopes between 41 and 60 percent. This class
assumes direct attack is not possible with fire trucks, but still possible in most cases
with bulldozers, hand crews, and aircraft. Class III includes slopes greater than 61
percent. This class includes areas mostly beyond the capability of bulldozers which
can only be directly attacked by hand crews and aircraft.
Level of Service
The Ventura County Fire Protection District provides the City of Ojai with
structural fire protection and general rescue services.
The City is mainly served by District Fire Station #21. The station is located in the
southeastern section of Ojai and has an estimated average response time of 4.9
minutes to calls in the City. Additional support can be provided by three District
stations outside of the City limits. These include the Meiner Oaks, Oak View, and
Upper Ojai stations.
Station 21 is manned by 3 firefighters, which is the standard engine company
staffing throughout the District. The station currently is equipped with a 50 foot
telesquirt, water tender, reserve engine, and brush engine.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                       31                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
            Safety Element
            The Fire District currently requires sprinklers in all buildings 5,000 square feet or
            greater. Any residential development outside of areas served by the water service
            district is required to maintain a minimum water supply to be used for fire
            suppression. All new development is required to provide steamer hydrants every
            500 feet in residential and 300 feet in commercial or industrial districts.
            The Fire Prevention Division is responsible for the review of all proposed
            development, street names, and inspection oflicensed care facilities, fire protection
            systems and businesses handling hazardous materials.
            Weed Abatement
            The Fire District's weed abatement program currently requires all flammable
            material, including weeds and trash, to be cleared from all lots.
            It is general policy of the District to clean the entire lot, but if in the opinion of the
            Fire Chief or his agent this needs to be modified, then in no case would the District
            clean less than 100 feet from all structures.
HAZARDOUSMATERlALS.AND WASTE
            Hazardous Material means a substance or combination of substances which,
            because of quantity of concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
            characteristics, may either a) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
            mortality or an increase in serious illness; or b) pose a substantial present or
            potential hazard to human beings or the environment. Hazardous materials include
            substances that people rely on continuously, such as petroleum projects, oil-based
            paints, pesticides and the like.
            Hazardous Waste means any waste substance that may cause or significantly
            contribute to serious illness or death, or may pose a substantial threat to human
            health or the environment when improperly managed; these substances are
            generally toxic, corrosive, flammable or reactive.
            The basic difference between wastes and materials is the intended use. "Hazardous
            Wastes" are materials that are no longer useful and must be properly and safely
            disposed of, treated or recycled. In some cases, waste at one facility can be used
            as a raw material at another facility. In those cases, the material would be regulated
            under the hazardous material regulations, and not the hazardous waste regulations.
            Several catastrophic incidents over the past 20 years involving human illnesses, loss
            OJAI GENERAL PLAN                        32                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
          Safety Element
          of life and environmental destruction caused by hazardous materials and wastes, as
          well as gradual long term groundwater pollution from leaking dumps and tanks,
          have led to the enactment of hundreds of Federal and State laws which place limits
          and prohibitions on the way hazardous wastes are managed from the point of
          generation to the point of disposal. Increased regulatory requirements and the
          increased costs associated with the proper disposal ofall classifications ofwaste has
          led to illegal disposal operations countywide. The Ventura County Planning
          Division has inventoried all past and current waste disposal sites which may pose
          health or land use problems by adversely affecting land, water or air resources.
          The County's Hazardous Waste/Materials Management Plan has been adopted by
          the City of Ojai and is incorporated by reference into this Safety Element. The
          plan includes a coherent set of goals and strategies for the management of
          hazardous materials and wastes within the County.
DISASTERS
          In the event of a major seismic or wildfire event, the City of Ojai will require a
          disaster plan which outlines the various operations and procedures to be taken by
          local agencies. This plan shall discuss, at a minimum, evacuation routes, peakload
          water supply requirements, minimum road widths, and clearance around structures,
          in order to reduce casualties and damages during and following the disaster. Title
          3, Chapter 1, "Emergency Organization" of the Ojai Municipal Code currently
          establishes an administrative plan for disaster directives. This ordinance establishes
          a Disaster Council chaired by the Mayor and designates the City Manager as the
          Director of Emergency Services. In addition to the City's disaster plan, the
          County's Multi-Hazard Emergency Response Plan outlines the various operations
          and procedures to be taken by agencies throughout the County of Ventura.
          The City is currently in the process of updating the City's existing Disaster Plan.
          The revisions to the Plan include: a re-evaluation of the City's disaster
          preparedness, special first aid and CPR training for City employees, and
          development of a data base listing persons within the City who have special talent
          which may be useful in the event of an emergency. The City has recently
          completed a mailing to inform residents about earthquake hazards and how to
          prepare for them. Also, an unreinforced masonry ordinance has been adopted by
          the Citywhich will provide seismic strengthening for unreinforced masonry bearing
          wall buildings. This ordinance will assist in reducing the risk of structural damage
          to these buildings in the event of an earthquake.
          0IAI GENERAL PLAN                                            SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
 Safety Element
Seismic Events
The City of Ojai lies approximately 35 miles southwest of the San Andreas fault.
A catastrophic earthquake having a magnitude of 8.3 on this portion of the San
Andreas fault is likely before the end of the twentieth century and is estimated to
have a current annual probability of occurrence between two and five per cent. It
is based on a repeat occurrence of the great Ft. Tejon earthquake of January 9,
1857, and other geophysical observations. As geologists know, at least eight major
earthquakes have occurred in this area, with an average spacing in time of 140 years,
plus or minus 30 years.
First instance property losses for the magnitude 8.3 event on the south-central San
Andreas fault are estimated to be close to $20 billion.
Dependingupon the time ofday or night, this magnitude 8.3 eventwill kill between
3,000 and 14,000 people and cause between 12,000 and 55,000 people to require
hospitalization.
The City must anticipate the occurrence ofgreat earthquakes which will overwhelm
present capabilities to respond adequately and in an organized manner.
Evacuation Routes
A major seismic event could conceivably cut off evacuation routes into and out of
the City of Ojai. Highway 33 north ofthe City could be temporarily closed through
portions of the Los Padres National Forest due to landslides. The section of
highway through the Forest includes six (6) wooden bridges and three (3) tunnels
which could sustain damage during a seismic event. Caltrans currently has plans to
replace all six (6) of the wooden bridges with concrete structures by early 1994, at
the earliest date. These bridges, located between Matilija and Bear Creeks, will cost
approximately $2.4 million to replace, with construction estimated to begin in early
1993.
Highway 150 east and west of the City could also experience closures due to
landslides. Highway 33 south ofthe City could experience disrupted pavement and
damage to bridges. In addition to the major highways, surface streets could
experience delays and detours due to disrupted pavement, downed power lines, and
structural debris. These disruptions could last up to 72 hours in some cases. It is
also possible that a major seismic event or other emergency in the Ventura area
could disrupt traffic along the Pacific Coast Highway (FCH) /Highway 101 north
of the City of Ventura. In the event of the closure of PCR/Highway 101,
Highways 33 and 150 may be designated as an alternative route between Ventura
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      34                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
 Safety Element
and Santa Barbara via the City of Ojai.
The disaster map of the City's General Plan (Exhibit S-2located in the City ofOjai
MEA) identifies the major routes leading out of town and the distances to the
nearest hospitals outside of the City limits. The map also identifies locations of
nuclear fallout shelters designated by the State Office of Emergency Services. In
the event ofa non-nuclear emergency, emergency shelters will be set up by the Red
Cross at schools, parks, and other public facilities. These sites will be determined
by the Red Cross at the time of the emergency based upon the type and location
of the emergency.
Water Supply
The City of Ojai obtains 83% of its water from ground water supplies. The
remaining 17% is obtained from Lake Casitas via the lake's main conveyance
system. In the event of a major seismic disaster, both of these sources of water
may be limited.
Groundwater wells througbout the City may be damaged by faulting and earth
movements which could displace sources ofgroundwater. Wells with water sources
which remain intact may be rendered inoperable if water pumps are damaged or
power supplies are cut off. In addition, wells which remain operable may
experience damage to their distribution systems, severely limiting water availability.
Water supplied by Lake Casitas may be limited in the event of a dam failure or
damage to the lake's main conveyance system.
The City's disaster plan should include policies to deal with water distribution needs
immediately following a seismic event.
Minimum Road Widths
In the event of a major seismic disaster, emergency response vehicles will require
access to various structures throughout the City. The City's disaster plan should
include minimum street widths to accommodate emergency response vehicles.
Wildland Fires
The area surrounding the City of Ojai is particularly vulnerable to wildland fire
hazards which could pose a community-wide threat during a major conflagration.
The City's low-density residential areas closest to areas ofhigb fire danger pose the
greatest threat.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                     35                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Evacuation Routes
A major wildland fire has the ability to shut down anyone of the major highways
leading out of the City. It is not likely, however, that all major routes out of the
City would be shut down simultaneously. Formal fire evacuation routes have not
been predetermined, due to the unpredictability of a fire. Law enforcement
agencies will therefore need to react according to the needs of each situation.
Water Supply
A major wildland fire may result in decreased water pressure throughout the City
as a result of increased water use by firefighters and residents alike. This could
result in disastrous situations ifwater pressure drops below effective levels in crucial
areas. The City's disaster plan should outline backup water supplies and ways to
reduce pressure decreases before they drop below crucial levels.
Minimum Road Widths
In the event of a major wildfire disaster, emergency response vehicles will require
access to various structures throughout the City. The City's Disaster Plan should
include minimum street widths to accommodate emergency response vehicles, as
recommended by the Fire Prevention Division of the Fire District.
Clearances Around Structures
The City of Ojai currently follows the Fire District's brush clearance requirement
of 100 feet minimum around structures in high-bush areas. This has been proven
to significantly reduce hazards to life and property during wildfires by providing an
effective fire break.
OJM GENERAL PLAN                        36                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
              Safety Element
             GOALS, POUCIES AND IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS
INTRODUCTION
             This section of the Safety Element sets forth Goals, Policies, and Implementing
             Programs. These were formulated from analysis ofthe Element's Issues and Needs
             section. Policies and Implementing Programs were created to implement each
             Goal. The Goals, Policies, and Programs are presented in a format to enable the
             reader to clearly understand how each Goal is to be realized.
             Where necessary and appropriate, all or a portion ofa category's Goals, Policies and
             Programs are cross referenced to another City or County document. In such cases
             the referenced document's Goals, Policies, and Programs are incorporated in the
             Safety Element by reference.
             The first category ("GENERAL") provides overall Goals, City Policies and
             Implementing Programs. The GENERAL section is then followed by specific
             safety and seismic safety issue sections. The general goals detailed below apply to
             all issue sections.
GENERAL
             1)     A City that is prepared for hazards and disasters so as to protect the public
                    health, safety, and welfare, and to minimi2e damage to property.
             2)     A City whose development is planned in consideration of major hazards and
                    other physical constrains so as to minimi2e loss of life, injury, and damage to
                    property resulting from hazards and disasters.
             3)     A City whose citizens are informed as to the appropriate actions to take in
                    the event of hazards and disasters.
             4)     A City that continues to improve upon inter-agency communication and
                    cooperation regarding safety issues and emergency response preparedness.
             Policies
             1)     Applicants for land use and development permits shall provide all necessary
             OJAI GENERAL-PLAN                      .17                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
      information relative to hazardous conditions which may affect their
      proposals. Applicants shall also specify how they intend to alleviate identified
      hazards.
2)    All geologic and soil reports submitted with development permit applications,
      includingrecomrnendations for measures to eliminate or mitigate any possible
      hazard, shall be reviewed by qualified personnel registered and certified by the
      State, such as engineers or engineering geologists.
3)    Essential facilities shall be designed and constructed to resist, insofar as is
      practical, the forces generated by earthquakes, gravity, fire and winds.
4)    The City Department of Planning and Building shall continue to enforce
      requirements of the Uniform Building Code pertaining to earthquake-
      resistant design and construction.
Implementing Programs
1)    The City Department of Planning and Building, with the technical support
      of the Public Works Department and other applicable agencies, shall review
      the Safety Element periodically to identify what information needs to be
      updated, and where appropriate, shall submit a budget request as part of the
      next year's City budget.
2)    The City Department of Planning and Building shall prepare a program for
      Council consideration to reduce structural deficiencies through the removal,
      reinforcement, or modification of the structures whose failure could cause
      significant numbers of injuries, substantial loss of life, or unacceptable level
      of economic loss.
3)   The City Planning Department shall maintain the latest copy of the Ventura
      County Office of Emergency Services update of the Ventura County Multi-
      Hazard Functional Emergency Response Plan including mitigation measures
      and preparedness, response, and recovery strategies for the following nine
      contingency plans:
      o Floods
      o    Earthquakes
      o    Landslides
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      38                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
              Safety Element
                    o    Hazardous Materials
                    o    Dam Failure
                    o    Nuclear Defense/Radiological Emergency
                    o    Wildland Fire
                    o    Transportation Accidents (involving airplanes, boats, major highway
                          accidents, and railroads)
                    o     Off-shore Oil SpiUs
              4)    The City Planning Department shall explore the feasibility of requiring the
                    recordation of a Notice ofHazards and Hold Harmless Agreements with the
                    County Recorder for all subdivisions of land and discretionary permits in
                    areas of known potential hazards.
              5)    The Department of Planning and Building shall comply with applicable
                    provisions of Chapter 12.2 (comrnencingwith Section 8875), Division 1, of
                    Title 2 of the Government Code, pertaining to identification of potentially
                    hazardous buildings in the City of Ojai, and establishment of a mitigation
                    program for such potentially hazardous buildings.
SURFACE RUPTURE
              Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 of
              the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan.
              General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
              document
              Policies
              1)    No development shall be located within a fault hazard area unless detailed
                    seismic-geologic investigation confirms that such development on the
                    proposed specific site would not be hazardous. Such investigations shall
                    include a site-specific characterization of anticipated ground motion, which
                    would include estimates of peak: horizontal ground acceleration and duration
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                       39                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
             Safety Element
                   of shaking.
             2)    No habitable buildings or other structures shall be located over, or within 50
                   feet of, any active or potentially active fault (as depicted on Exhibit GEO-3
                   of the City of Ojai MEA).
             3)    Land in fault hazard areas should, where feasible, be designated Open Space
                   or Agriculture on the General Land Use Maps.
             4)    Roads, streets, highways and utility conduits shall be planned to avoid
                   crossing active or potentially active faults where feasible. When such location
                   is unavoidable, the design shall include measures to reduce the effects of any
                   fault movement as much as possible.
             5)    No new essential facilities including hospitals, fire and sheriff's stations and
                   communication centers, and no new uses which have a high occupancy
                   potential such as schools, theaters, churches and shopping centers, shall be
                   located within fault hazard areas.
             Implemen tin 2' Pr°lrolIll s
             1)    All development projects involving construction within an Alquist-Priolo
                   Special Studies Zone (as depicted on Exhibit GEO-3 of the City of Ojai
                   MEA) shall be reviewed by the City Public Works Department in accordance
                   with the requirements ofthe Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act and the
                   policies and criteria established by the State Mining and Geology Board
                   pursuant to said Act.
             2)    The City Planning Department shall maintain the latest version of the
                   Ventura County Sheriff's Office of Emergency Services Multi-Hazard
                   Emergency Response Plan, Earthquake Contingency section.
             3)    The Department of Planning and Building shall be responsible for
                   implementing the requirements of the Essential Services Buildings Seismic
                   Safety Act of 1986.
GROUND SHAKING
             Related goals, policies and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 of
             the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan.
             OJM GENERAL PLAN                       40                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991

           Safety Element
           General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 40 of this
           document.
           Policy
           1)    All structures designed for human occupancy shall incorporate engineering
                 measures to mitigate against risk of injury in areas identified by the Public
                 Works Department as subject to ground shaking.
           Implementing Programs
           1)    The City Public Works Department shall have a study prepared examining
                 existing City-owned public utility systems for susceptibility to damage from
                 ground shaking, and shall analyze the extent of acceptable risk of the effects
                 of such ground shaking.
           2)    The City Department ofPlanning and Building and the City Manager's Office
                 shall continue enforcement of the City of Ojai Unreinforced Masonry
                 Ordinance. An unreinforced masonry mitigation program is currently
                 underway.
           3)    The City should conduct a public education program to inform Ojai citizens
                 of earthquake hazards and encourage them to prepare for them.
SUBSIDENCE
           Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 of
           the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan
           General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
           document.
           Policies
           1)    Potential subsidence effects shall be evaluated prior to approval of new oil or
                 gas well drilling permits.
           OJAI GENERAL PLAN                     41                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
             Safety Element
             2)    Structural design of buildings and other structures shall recogruze the
                   potential for differential settlement and subsidence.
             3)    No structure which is needed for public safety or emergency services shall be
                   located where an interruption in service could result from structural failure
                   due to subsidence. If such location in an area subject to potential subsidence
                   is unavoidable, the structure shall be designed to mitigate the hazard.
             Imp1ementine: Proer;uns
             1)    The City Public Works Department shall maintain current versions of the
                   County Surveyor's periodic examinations of monument elevations
                   throughout the County. The Department shall coordinate with the Surveyor
                   to modifY the subsidence portion of the Safety Element as necessary.
             2)    The City should conduct a public education program to inform the public of
                   subsidence hazards and educate them to identify areas ofpossible subsidence.
GROUND FAILURE
             Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 and
             of the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan
             General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
             document.
             Policies
             1)    Continue to require that adequate soils, geologic, and structural evaluation
                   reports are prepared when deemed appropriate by the Building Official. All
                   reports submitted to the City for review shall be prepared by registered soils
                   engineers, engineering geologists, and/or structural engineers.
             2)    Geologic reports, building plans, and environmental impact reports prepared
                   for major construction projects (i.e., all critical facilities or uses with large
                   human occupancies in recognized or suspected hazard areas) should be
                   reviewed by registered engineering geologists and structural engineers.
             3)    Continue ensuring that other appropriate State regulations regarding the
             OJM GENERAL PLAN                       42                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
             Safety Element
                   identification and mitigation of seismic hazards are implemented.
             4)    Promote and encourage additional seismic investigations within the City by
                   Federal, State, and local agencies and organizations.
             Implementing Programs
             1)    The City shall require, prior to approval of a project located in a seismic
                   hazard zone, (as depicted on Exhibit GEO-3 in the City of Ojai MEA), a
                   geotechnical report defining and delineating any seismic hazard. Such
                   investigations shall include a site-specific characterization of anticipated
                   ground motion, which would include estimates of peak horizontal ground
                   acceleration and duration of shaking. If the City finds that no undue hazard
                   of this kind exists, based on information resulting from studies conducted on
                   sites in the immediate vicinity of the project and of similar solid composition
                   to the project site, the geotechnical report may be waived. After the report
                   has been approved or a waiver granted, subsequent geotechnical reports shall
                   not be required, provided that new geological datum, or data, warranting
                   further investigation is not recorded. The City shall submit one copy of each
                   approved geotechnical report, including the mitigation measures, if any, that
                   are to be taken, to the State Geologist within 30 days of its approval of the
                   report.
             2)    The City's Grading Ordinance shall be modified to include specific
                   regulations for identified areas with seismic hazards.
liQUEFACTION
             Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 of
             the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan.
             General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
             document.
             Policy
             1)    Require that measures identified in any soils, geologic, and/or any struetural
                   reports to adequately mitigate liquefaction and be imposed as conditions of
                   project approval, to the extent feasible.
             OJM GENERAL PLAN                       43                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
           Safety Element
           Implemenrinv Prol!!lUD
           1)   Prior to the issuance of building or grading permits critical facilities or
                essential facilities located within areas prone to liquefaction (as depicted on
                Exhibit GEO-4 of the City of Ojai MEA), a soils engineering and geologic-
                seismic analysis shall be prepared in order to assess the liquefaction potential
                and mitigation.         Such investigations shall include a site-specific
                characterization ofanticipated ground motion, which would include estimates
                of peak horizontal ground acceleration and duration of shaking.
DAMFAILURE
           General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
           document.
           Policies
           1)   Current Dam Inundation maps shall be obtained from the County Sheriff's
                Department - Office of Emergency Services.
           2)   Dams shall be designed and located to ensure their safety from all maximum
                credible seismic events.
           3)   The City of Ojai shall provide development standards and restrictions to
                minimize potential risk within areas that would be subject to inundation as a
                result of dam failure.
           1)   The City Planning Department shall maintain current copies of the Ventura
                County Office of Emergency Services Dam Failure Response Plan
                Contingency section of the Multi-Hazard Emergency Response Plan.
           2)   The City Public Works Department shall develop and maintain a dam inun-
                dation warning plan for the. Stewart Debris Basin area to alert affected
                governmental agencies, residents, and businesses located in the potential
                hazard areas. This dam inundation plan should be coordinated with local
                television and radio media. This plan shall be revised if future dams are
                proposed in the areas upstream of the City of Ojai.
           DJM GENERAL PLAN                       44                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
           Safety Element
           3)    The City should conduct a public education program to inform Ojai citizens
                 of the City's dam inundation warning plan.
LANDSliDES
           Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 of
           the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan.
           General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
           document.
           Policies
           1)    The City Public Works Department will continue to enforce Chapter 70
                 (Excavation and Grading) of the Uniform Building Code to ensure that areas
                 oflandslide or hillside areas are adequately investigated and that any develop-
                 ment incorporates appropriate design provisions to prevent landsliding.
           2)    Development in existing landslide/mudslide hazard areas shall not be
                 permitted unless adequate geologic and soils engineering investigations are
                 performed, and appropriate and sufficient safeguards are incorporated into
                 the project design.                                          .
           3)    In landslide/mudslide hazard areas, there shall be no avoidable alteration of
                 the land which is likely to increase the hazard, including concentration of
                 water through drainage, irrigation or septic systems, removal of vegetative
                 cover, and no steepening of slopes or undercutting of the bases of slopes.
           4)    Drainage plans which direct runoff and drainage away from unstable slopes
                 shall be required for construction in hillside areas.
           Imp1ementine- Proer;uns
           1)    Geologic repotts, building plans, and environmental impact repotts prepared
                 for major construction projects (i.e., all critical facilities or uses with large
                 human occupancies in recognized or suspected hazard areas) shall be
                 reviewed by registered engineering geologists and structural engineers.
           2)    The City Public Works Department shall continue to enforce the City's
           OJAf GENERAL PLAN                       45                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
        Safety Element
              Hillside Erosion Control Ordinance (Section 9-11.101 through 9-11.406 of
              the Ojai Municipal Code).
        3)    Whenever there is a substantial landslide or significant damage to a
              foundation or structure occurs as a result ofa landslide, the City shall require
              a detailed study of the geologic materials, foundations, or structures involved
              to be prepared.
        4)    The City should conduct a public education program to inform Ojai citizens
              of the landslide hazards which exist in the area.
        EXPANSIVE SOILS
        Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 of
        the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan.
        General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
        document.
        Policy
        1)    No habitable structures or individual sewage disposal systems shall be placed
              on or in expansive soils (as depicted on Exhibit GEO-9 of the City of Ojai
              MEA) unless suitable mitigation measures are incorporated to prevent the
              adverse effect of these conditions.
        Implementing Program
        1)    In all areas of highly expansive soils (as depicted on Exhibit GEO-9 of the
              City of Ojai MEA) a soil test shall be required for each specific building site,
              and construction must conform to established standards of the City of Ojai
              Building Code.
EROSION
        Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page OS-13 of
        the Open Space Element of the City's General Plan.
        OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      46                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
              Safety Element
              General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
              document.
              Policies
              1)     Develop a program for onsite inspection of grading work for developments
                     in severe to very severe erosion areas (as depicted in Exhibit GEO-10 of the
                     City of Ojai MEA) to ensure that bedding plants are not undercut and that
                     proper fill material is carefully placed and compacted.
              2)     Encourage planting of vegetation on unstable slopes to protect structures at
                     lower elevations. Utilize native plants for landscaping in the hills to eliminate
                     the need for supplemental watering which can promote earth
                     movement/erosion.
              3)     Keep land uses which are subject to serious property damage from erosion
                     out of erosion hazard areas identified as severe to very severe (as depicted in
                     Exhibit GEO-lO of the City ofOjai MEA). Control the siting and design of
                     uses in these erosion hazard areas to minimize the danger of property
                     damage from erosion, such as requiring deep pilings for houses.
              Implementing Provam
              1)     For projects proposed in severe to very severe erosion areas (as depicted in
                     Exhibit GEO-10 of the City ofOjai MEA), the City shall require a geologic
                     report that includes analysis of soils foundation, grading, erosion, and
                     sediment control.
FLOOD HAZARDS
              Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on page CONS-8
              of the Conservation Element and page OS-13 of the Open Space Element of the
              City's General Plan.
              General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
              document.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                         47                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Policies
1)   Support measures for disclosure of the presence of flooding hazards during
      transactions of property located within areas of special flood hazard (as
     depicted in Exhibit S-1 of the City of Ojai MEA).
2)   Support measures for the abatement of flooding hazards, including but not
     limited to: (1) removal or relocation of development from flood hazard
     areas; (2) construction of impoundments or channel diversions provided that
     adequate mitigation of environmental impacts can be demonstrated; and (3)
     debris clearance and silt removal programs conducted by Ventura County
      Flood Control District in a manner so as not to disrupt existing riparian
     communities to the extent feasible.
3)   Consider higher density land uses to be appropriate within flood hazard areas
     in developed urban areas when adequate mitigation of the flood hazard can
      be demonstrated.
4)   Discourage the location of new critical facilities in flood hazard areas.
5)   Wherever possible, retain natural flood plains and guide development to areas
     outside of areas of special flood hazard.
6)   Promote subdivision design to avoid areas of special flood hazard when
      possible, and identify these areas on the approved subdivision map.
7)   Land use in the flood way should be limited to open space, agriculture, or
      passive to low intensity recreational uses, subject to the approval of the
     County Flood Control District.
8)   Development shall be protected from a 100-year flood if built within
     identified flood plain areas.
Implementine; Pro/lIlllIls
1)   The design of any structures which must be constructed in flood plain areas
     as depicted on the Flood Hazard Map (see Exhibit S-1 of the City of Ojai
     MEA) shall be governed by the County Flood Plain Management Ordinance
     and shall incorporate measures to reduce flood damage to the structure and
      to eliminate any increased potential flood hazard in the general area due to
     such construction.
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                     48                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
             Safety Element
             2)    The City Planning Department shall maintain current copies of the County
                   Office of Emergency Services Multi-Hazard Emergency Response Plan's
                   Flood Contingency section.
             3)    Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map and Flood way Map information shall be
                   maintained by the Public Works Department.
             4)    The flood plain limits shall be reviewed annually, as required by Government
                   Code Sec. 65302(a), by the Ventura County Flood Control District. All
                   changes shall be conveyed to the City Planning Department which will
                   process an amendment to the Flood Hazard Map (See Exhibit S-1 ofthe City
                   of Ojai MEA).
             5)    When development is proposed in areas of special flood hazards (as depicted
                   in Exhibit S-1 of the City of Ojai MEA), any structure shall be required to be
                   safely elevated above the base flood elevation and not contribute to the
                   flooding hazard to surrounding structures.
             6)    The City shall assure through a Master Drainage Plan and development
                   ordinances that proposed new development adequately provides for develop-
                   ment of onsite and downstream offsite mitigation of potential flood hazards
                   and drainage problems and require development fees to fund the required
                   improvements.
             7)    The City should monitor and participate in County Flood Control District
                   No. 1 policy-setting and budgeting, and should advocate preventative
                   maintenance programs and capital improvements aimed at reducing flood
                   hazards.
             8)    The City should conduct a public education program to inform Ojai citizens
                   of the flood hazards which exist in the area.
FIRE HAZARDS
             Related goals, policies, and implementing programs are included on pages LU-l
             and LU-2 of the Land Use and Circulation Element of the City's General Plan.
             General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
             document.
             OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      49                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Policies
1)   All applications for new subdivisions, development plans, conditional use
     permits, environmental impact reports, and business license applications, shall
     be made available for review and comment by the County's Fire Prevention
     Division to ensure compliance with fire safety regulations.
2)   The City shall suggest that the Fire Prevention Division review all applications
     for new development in hillside/canyon areas to assess potential impacts to
     existing fire protection services.
3)   Consider higher density land uses for fire hazard areas in cuca! areas if
     development is clustered near major roads, has adequate access for fire
     protection vehicles, and can demonstrate adequate water supplies and fire
     flow.
4)   In urban areas, consider higher density land uses to be appropriate if
     development can be served by the Fire Department, adequate access for fire
     protection vehicles is available, and sufficient water supply and fire flow can
     be guaranteed.
5)   Support efforts to identify all roads, streets, and major public buildings in a
     manner so that they are clearly visible to fire protection and other emergency
     vehicles.
6)   Provide adequate access to and fire breaks adjoining open space areas subject
     to fire hazard as part of new developments.
7)   Regulations for clearance of vegetation around oil production facilities shall
     continue to be strictly enforced.
Implemen rin &, Pr°lmllll s
1)   After April 1, 1991, all newconsteuction within the State Responsibility Areas
     (SRAs) in the City's Sphere of Influence shall meet or exceed the standards
     set by the State Board of Forestry pertaining to:
     o    Road standards for flre equipment access
     o   Standards for signs, identifying streets, roads, and buildings
OJM GENERAL PLAN                      50                     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991

Safety Element
     o     Minimize private water supply reserves for emergency fire use
     o     Fuel breaks and greenbelts
2)   All discretionary permits shall be required, as a condition of approval, to
      provide adequate water supply and access for fire protection and evacuation
      purposes.
3)   All discretionary permits in Fire Hazard Areas shall be conditioned to include
      fire-resistant vegetation, cleared fire breaks, or a long-term comprehensive
      fuel management program as a condition of approval. Fire hazard reduction
     measures shall be incorporated into the design ofany project in a Fire Hazard
     Area.
4)   New residential subdivisions shall provide not less than two means of access
     for emergency vehicles and resident evacuation. A deviation from this policy
     is only allowed when the proposed road conforms with the County Road
     Standards and when the proposed road is approved by the County Fire Chief.
5)   All applicants for subdivisions, multi-unit residential complexes, and
     commercial and industrial complexes shall be required to obtain, prior to
      permit approval, certification from the County Fire Protection District that
     adequate fire protection is available, or will be available prior to occupancy.
6)   The County Fire Protection District shall be responsible for the prescribed
      bum program as mandated by the Vegetation Management Program (VMP)
     SB 1704, along with fuel breaks and other fire prevention measures.
7)   The County Fire Protection District shall continue to work cooperatively
     with the U.S. Forest Service, California Department of Forestry, adjacent
     County fire departments, and local City fire departments, towards managing
     wildland fires.
8)   The County Fire Protection District shall continue to revise, maintain, and
     make available to the Planning Division their historical bum area maps in
     conjunction with the State Division of Forestry.
9)   The City Planning Department shall maintain current copies of the Ventura
     County Office of Emergency Services Multi-Hazard Emergency Response
OJAI GENERAL PLAN                      51                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
            Safety Element
                  notification, evacuation and sheltering due to fire.
            10)   The City shall ask the Ventura County Fire Protection District to consider
                  adoption of an automatic sprinkler ordinance for structures used for human
                  occupancy in hillside and canyon areas.
            11)   Require that the length of cul-du-sacs be limited to a maximum of 800 feet.
            12)   New subdivisions in hillside or canyon areas of the City shall be designed to
                  facilitate brush clearance around structures.
            13)   The City shall require water purveyors within the City to establish a priority
                  list for upgrading fire flow capabilities in neighborhoods that currently have
                  inadequate fire flows.
HAZARDOUSMATERIALSAND WASTE
            The City has adopted the Ventura County Ha:zardous Waste Plan. The goals,
            policies, and programs from the following Chapter of the County of Ventura
            General Plan is incorporated by reference into this report. The Chapter
            incorporated by reference is:
                  County of Ventura, 1988. Ventura County General Plan Goals. Policies. and
                  Prolm!ffis. Ha:zards Chapter - 2.15 Ha:zardous Material and Waste.
            In addition to the goals, policies, and programs contained within the Ventura
            County Ha:zardous Waste Plan, the following policy shall also apply.
            Policies
            1) The City shall coordinate with Ventura County to periodically establish days to
                collect household ha:zardous waste within the City of Ojai.
            DISASTERS
            Related goals, policies, and irnplementingprograms are included on pages LV-l and
            LU-2 of the Circulation Element of the City's General Plan.
            General goals which apply to all issue sections are identified on page 37 of this
            OJAf GENERAL PLAN                      52                   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
document.
Policies
1)   The City shall identify evacuation routes out of the City to be used by
      residents and emergency response personneL Please refer to Exhibit S-2 of
      the City of Ojai MEA for a description of evacuation routes out of the City.
2)    In the event that State Highways 33 or 150 become impassable for a period
      of over 30 minutes, the California State Highway Patrol (CHP) shall be
      notified, and will in turn shall notify Caltrans of the situation.
3)   The City shall ensure that adequate water supplies are available to Ojai
      residents following a major disaster.
4)   The City shall require streets serving new development to be wide enough to
      accommodate emergency response vehicles. The required widths shall be
      consistent with the standards located in Chapter 3 Subdivision Regulations,
     Title 10 Planning and Zoning.
5)   The City shall maintain an effective fire break of 100 feet around all habitable
      structures.
Implementing Provams
1)    Residential subdivisions shall have sufficient access for emergency vehicles
      and for the evacuation of residents. Two or more routes of access should be
      provided, preferably on different sides of the development. These access
      points shall be reviewed and approved by the City Police and County Fire
      Protection District prior to the development's approval.
2)   The City shall prepare for alternative sources of water in the event that
      existing supplies are cut off. Alternative sources may include the trucking in
      of water to affected areas.
3)   The City shall encourage the citizens of Ojai to include bortled water as part
      of their earthquake preparedness kits.
4)   The City has developed, and will be distributing, an earthquake emergency
      brochure as part of its public education program.
0IAI GENERAL PLAN                      53                    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
5)   The City shall request the Ventura County Office of Emergency Services to
     conduct regular simulated disaster training sessions for the Ojai Valley.
6)   The City's Disaster Plan shall be periodically updated to incorporate the use
     of the most advanced technology available to assist the population in disaster
     preparedness and relief efforts. The updates shall include coordination with
     the gas, telephone, and electric utilities and other appropriate agencies to
     provide for the use of portable telephones and other communication
     equipment during emergency situations.
7)   The City shall coordinate with local school districts to allow for the use of
     school facilities in the event of an emergency.
8)   The City shall encourage homeowners in higb risk fire zones to obtain
     swimming pool water pumps, and if possible, to provide for additional
     sources of water.
9)   All future roadways shall be constructed consistent with City standards and
     shall allow for two-way traffic with room for parking on at least one side.
10)  The City Public Works Department shall continue cooperative efforts with
      the County Fire Protection District's to enforce the weed abatement
     program.
11)  The City shall update its Disaster Plan to address issues raised in this
     Element. The City shall invite participation from the County of Ventura to
     address the Ojai Valley in a coordinated fashion.
OJAl GENERAL PLAN                     54                  SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
                     INFORMATION SOURCES
DOCUMENTS
Federal Emergency Management Agency   Flood Insurance Rate Map
                                      City ofOjai
                                      Community Panel
                                      Number 060416 0005C,
                                      April 19, 1983
California Stlte Division of Mines    Elementary Seismology
 and Geology
Stlte of California
 Office of Planning and Research      1990 General Plan
                                      Guidelines
Ventura County                        General Plan:
                                      Seismic Safety Element
                                      Multi-Hazard Functional
                                      Plan
City ofOjai                           Master Environmental
                                      Assessment
PERSONS AND ORGANIZATIONS CONTACfED
CityofOjai
Planning Department                   William Prince
                                      Marilyn Grauel
City Manager                          Andrew Belknap
City Attomey                          Monte Widders
City Engineer                         Glenn Hawks
DJAI GENERAL PLAN                  55    SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Public Works                     W.S.Moore
Ventura County
Fire Department                 Chief Jim Smith
                                 Fire Marshal
                                County Fire Protection
District
                                Bill Wright
                                Vegetation Management
                                County Fire Prevention
Division
                                Rick de Mom
                                County Fire Prevention
Division
                                Captain Tom Weir
                                County Station #21, Ojai
                                Sandy Wells
                                Public Information
Drafting Department             KayChuke
Office of Emergency Services    Karen Guidi
State of California
Board of Forestry               Fran Henson
CalifomiaHighway Pattol         Lieutenant Claude LaMont
Department of Conservation,
Mines and Geology Division       Roger Martin
Department of Forestry
and Fire Protection             Jim Bliss
0IAI GENERAL PLAN            56     SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
Safety Element
Department of T ntnsportation
(Caltntns)                       BmceDyar
Department of Water Resources    Marsha Lines
Office of Emergency Services     Nancy Hartacher
OJM GENERAL PLAN              57   SEPTEMBER 24, 1991
