                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
II. LAND USE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE LAND USE ELEMENT
              Cypress began as a small dairy community established as a result of the inception of Pacific
              Electric's Santa Ana rail line in 1903. Soon after the City's incorporation in 1956, Cypress began a
              period of rapid development; predominantly the development of single-family subdivisions. The
              master-planned Cypress Business Park began to flourish in the mid-1970s and 1980s, providing
              significant employment opportunities for the City's then 40,000 plus residents. An extensive parks
              and recreation system has been developed to serve City residents and workers, contributing to the
              well-balanced community Cypress has become.
              As Cypress continues to mature, this Land Use Element will serve as the City’s long-range guide
              for making land use decisions regarding the City's physical development.
              PURPOSE
              The scope and content of the Land Use Element is governed by State law (Section 65302(a) of the
              Government Code).
              The Land Use Element and the Land Use Policy Map represent two very important components of
              the General Plan. Together, they establish the overall policy direction for land use planning
              decisions in the City. The Land Use Policy Map displays graphically the location and distribution of
              land use in Cypress, whereas the text of the Land Use Element describes the form these uses will
              take, as well as the programs the City will pursue to implement the land use goals.
              Goals and policies set forth in the Land Use Element shape and reflect the policies and programs
              contained in the other General Plan elements. For example, the street system and circulation
              improvements described in the Circulation Element are designed to accommodate the intensity of
              use allowed by land use policy. Housing Element programs focus on neighborhood stabilization
              and rehabilitation of housing units.
              The Land Use Element is divided into seven sections: Introduction, Relationship to Other Plans
              and General Plan Elements, Relationship of Existing Plans and Programs to Citywide Economic
              Development Efforts, Summary of Existing Conditions, Key Land Uses, Description of the Land
              Use Plan, and Goals and Policies.
Land Use Element                                                                                            LU-1

Cypress General Plan
               RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER PLANS
               AND GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
               RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PLANS
               Due to the comprehensive nature of the Land Use Element, land use issues are not addressed in
               the same detail as they might be in certain physical planning documents, plans, and ordinances the
               City may adopt. The land use categories described in the Land Use Plan section of this element
               indicate general categories of allowed uses and development intensities within each land use
               category. Other documents, including the zoning ordinance, specific plans, and redevelopment
               plans, establish more specific regulations and policies influencing development. These are
               discussed below.
               In addition to locally adopted plans, ordinances, and regulations, a number of regional plans also
               affect the City. Regional planning agencies such as the Southern California Association of
               Governments (SCAG) recognize that planning issues extend beyond the boundaries of individual
               cities. Efforts to address regional planning issues such as affordable housing, transportation, and
               air pollution have resulted in the adoption of regional plans which affect Cypress. Relevant regional
               plans are discussed briefly at the end of this section to indicate the relationship of those plans to
               this General Plan.
               City of Cypress Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance establishes land use districts in which
               specific regulations apply, such as density, height, size, and development character. The
               Ordinance consists of two primary parts: a map that delineates the boundaries of zoning districts;
               and text that explains the purpose of the district, specifies permitted, conditional and accessory
               uses, and establishes development and performance standards.
               As a charter city, Cypress has no explicit requirement to ensure that its legislative enactments,
               including zoning, are consistent with the general plan. However, in the interest of sound planning,
               Cypress has and will make every effort to ensure consistency. Each of Cypress' general plan land
               use categories corresponds to one or more zoning districts. The relationship between the zoning
               and general plan land use categories is shown in Table LU-9, General Plan/Zoning Relationship, in
               the Land Use Designations section of this Element.
               Specific Plans. Specific Plans are designed to implement General Plan goals and policies by
               designating land uses, densities, development and design standards in more specific detail. This is
               accomplished by designating specific locations and intensities for land uses and specific
               development standards and design guidelines. A specific plan is able to address smaller areas
               that have unique qualities and require focused planning attention. A specific plan may be designed
               to implement any of a general plan's elements.
               Cypress has adopted six specific plans which provide development guidelines for the Cypress
               Business Park: Cypress Corporate Center Specific Plan; McDonnell Center Specific Plan;
               Warland/Cypress Business Center Specific Plan; Cypress View Limited Specific Plan; Cypress
               Business and Professional Center Specific Plan; and the Lusk Company Industrial Park. In
               addition, the City has adopted four other specific plans – one to guide the development of the
               Sorrento Homes project, two to guide development in focused areas on Orange Avenue, and
               another to guide the development and design of projects along Lincoln Avenue. The boundaries of
               each specific plan area are delineated on Exhibit LU-4, Land Use Policy Map, at the end of this
               Element.
LU-2                                                                                            Land Use Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
              Redevelopment Plans. The State legislature has enacted laws that allow cities and counties to
              adopt redevelopment plans that are intended to revitalize and rehabilitate blighted areas.
              Redevelopment plans provide a means for government agencies to encourage private
              reinvestment in blighted areas through initial government assistance.
              Redevelopment is intended to eliminate deficiencies and to cause the comprehensive planning,
              redesign, and reconstruction of specific areas in order to facilitate a higher and better utilization of
              land. It is also intended to increase construction activities and employment opportunities. An
              additional goal of redevelopment is to provide economic stimulation through commercial growth
              and expansion.
              Cypress has adopted redevelopment plans for three areas: the Civic Center, Lincoln Avenue, and
              Los Alamitos Race Track and Cypress Golf Course (refer to Exhibit LU-1, Redevelopment Project
              Areas).
                   •    The Civic Center Redevelopment Project Area was originally adopted in 1982 and
                        amended in 1988 to encompass the Texaco Tank Farm property. The Plan seeks to
                        establish a focal point for the Civic Center area, and to provide public uses to serve the
                        community.
                   •    The Lincoln Avenue Project Area was adopted in 1990. The Lincoln Avenue corridor is
                        lined with a variety of retail commercial establishments, some residential units, and a few
                        heavy commercial establishments. The area was designated as a redevelopment project
                        area due to a number of issues including: inadequate building maintenance, an
                        incompatible mixture of land uses, defective design and character of physical
                        construction, economic maladjustment, irregular parcelization, and deficient public
                        improvements and facilities. The goal of the Plan is to create a more economically viable
                        and physically attractive commercial corridor. The Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan also
                        helps to accomplish this goal.
                   •    In 1990, a redevelopment plan for the Los Alamitos Race Track and Cypress Golf Course
                        was adopted. The primary goal of the plan is to facilitate circulation, drainage, and sewer
                        improvements. In addition, the Plan will stimulate construction activity in the area, thereby
                        increasing employment opportunities in Cypress and improving the physical and
                        economic viability of the area.
              Development Agreements. Development agreements are authorized by State law to enable a
              city to enter into a binding contract with a developer in order to define for the city the type,
              character, and quality of development and guarantee the developer that the necessary
              development permits will be issued regardless of changes in regulations that may occur in the
              future.
              This ensures that a developer of a multi-phased project who has based project financing on
              conditions negotiated with the City at a particular time would not be adversely affected by
              subsequent change in regulations that might otherwise effect the project. This, in turn, enables the
              City to obtain additional contributions and benefits from the developer.
              Cypress has currently entered into five development agreements: Cypress Business and
              Professional Center, Cypress Corporate Center, Warland/Cypress Business Center, Sorrento
              Planned Community (which has been built), and Olson residential development. Each of these
              agreements acts as an implementation tool for the adopted specific plan for each area, providing
Land Use Element                                                                                                LU-3

Cypress General Plan
                                Insert Exhibit LU-1
                     “Redevelopment Project Areas”
LU-4                           Land Use Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
              the developer vested rights to proceed with the land use plan and development standards for the
              project area. Benefits to the City from these development agreements have included, but are not
              limited to: refurbishment of the golf course and race track, provision of permanent flood control
              facilities, dedication of land for parks, and provision of landscaped berms and parkways.
              Airport Environs Land Use Plan (AELUP). The Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los
              Alamitos (formerly referred to as the Armed Forces Reserve Center (AFRC) Los Alamitos) is
              located south of Cypress in the City of Los Alamitos. The prevailing approach path for the facilities
              at the Joint Forces Training Center traverses the southern portion of Cypress, primarily over the
              Business Park. The JFTC is basically a military helicopter reserve training facility with occasional
              operations by fixed wing transient military and civil support aircraft.
              Cypress has the sole authority to regulate land uses within the airport's flight approach and the
              planning area established by the Airport Land Use Commission (the 100:1 FAA imaginary surface)
              to protect the public's safety and welfare (refer to Exhibit SAF-7 in the Safety Element). Land uses
              that are appropriate for this area fall within general advisory guidelines established by the Airport
              Land Use Commission (ALUC). Recommendations include prohibiting residential development in
              noise impacted areas and avoiding excessively tall buildings or large concentrations of people in
              areas detrimental to an airport's operation.
              The ALUC for Orange County has adopted an Airport Environs Land Use Plan (AELUP). The
              AELUP seeks: 1) to protect the public from the adverse effects of aircraft noise (to ensure that
              people and facilities are not concentrated in areas susceptible to aircraft accidents), and 2) that no
              structures or activities adversely affect navigable airspace.
              City and county general plans must be consistent with the AELUP unless specific findings can be
              made by the local legislative body. State law grants review powers to the ALUC involving the
              following actions of local agencies within the planning boundaries:
                    •     Amendment of a City's General Plan;
                    •     Amendment of a City's Specific Plan;
                    •     Adoption of Zoning Ordinances; and
                    •     Adoption of Building Regulations.
              Prior to amending a general plan or specific plan, the involved locality must submit the proposal to
              the ALUC for review. In terms of assessing consistency between local general plans and the
              AELUP, the ALUC focuses on the following three areas: noise, safety, and building height. The
              Noise and Safety Elements address these issues; building height is also addressed in the Cypress
              Zoning Ordinance and Specific Plans for the Business Park. The following building criteria are
              utilized as part of the County's AEULP consistency review procedures:
                    •     Does the agency have a map or other graphic that depicts imaginary surfaces for the
                          airports which impact the City?
                    •     Are there policies in the General Plan that reference FAA studies and clearances?
              Regional Plans. In the latter half of the 1980s, growing regional concern and legislation regarding
              traffic, air pollution, rising housing costs, and other issues affecting the Southern California
              community as a whole led the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) to prepare
              comprehensive regional plans to address these concerns. Three plans that affect planning in
              Cypress include SCAG's Regional Mobility Plan, Growth Management Plan, and the Air Quality
              Management Plan prepared by the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).
Land Use Element                                                                                               LU-5

Cypress General Plan
               These three plans are intended to work in concert to help reduce traffic congestion and pollutant
               levels throughout the greater Los Angeles basin.
               The General Plan includes relevant policies and programs that reflect and respond to SCAG's and
               SCAQMD's regional goals. In particular, policies in the Land Use and Housing Elements address
               regional jobs/housing balance objectives, the Circulation Element contains programs aimed at
               reducing traffic congestion, the Housing Element discusses Cypress' role in providing affordable
               housing, the Growth Management Element addresses the need to balance growth with
               infrastructure capacities, and the Air Quality Element outlines the City's efforts to participate in
               programs aimed at improving regional air quality.
               RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
               The Cypress General Plan contains eight elements. Each element examines a specific issue area,
               such as land use, circulation, safety, or noise. Despite the subject division, each element's content
               may partially overlap with another element’s content. The relationship between the Land Use and
               Housing, Circulation, Open Space/Conservation/Recreation, Noise, Air Quality, Safety, and Growth
               Management Elements is described below.
               The Cypress Land Use Element sets forth standards that specify levels of residential, commercial,
               and industrial development intensities. By defining the extent and density of future residential
               development in Cypress, the Land Use and Housing Elements jointly work to meet the community's
               share of regional housing needs.
               The Land Use Element is coordinated with the Circulation Element and the Conservation/Open
               Space/Recreation (COSR) Element. As population increases gradually over time, additional
               services and facilities are needed to accommodate the new growth. Improvements to the City's
               transportation network and recreation facilities are examples of some of the improvements that will
               need to occur. Cypress' Circulation and COSR Elements outline needs, opportunities, and
               deficiencies which correspond to the development permitted within the Land Use Element.
               Policies and implementation measures contained in the Land Use Element are also partially
               derived from safety and health concerns delineated in the COSR, Noise, Air Quality, and Safety
               Elements. For example, the COSR and Safety Elements identify areas that should remain
               undeveloped because of flooding, geologic instability, and other safety concerns. Right-of-ways are
               established in the Land Use Element to create safety zones to protect the public's safety and
               welfare. Similarly, sensitive receptors (hospitals, schools) are identified in the Noise and Air Quality
               Elements because they are the most affected by noise and air pollution conditions. The Land Use
               Element utilizes this information to generally locate sensitive receptors away from primary noise
               and air pollution contributors.
               In addition, growth patterns established in the Growth Management Element provide input for the
               Land Use Element in guiding Cypress' future development. Combined, all of these issues influence
               development in the community, as the Land Use Element utilizes information presented in other
               elements to position land uses a safe distance from hazards and to provide sufficient services for
               new development.
               RELATIONSHIP OF EXISTING PLANS AND PROGRAMS TO CITYWIDE ECONOMIC
               DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS
               The following overview summarizes past and present economic development efforts that provide a
               solid base upon which to build future programs in the City of Cypress.
LU-6                                                                                               Land Use Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
              City of Cypress 1998 Strategic Plan. In May 1998, the City Council and Staff participated in a
              strategic planning orientation. This orientation provided an introduction and overview of strategic
              planning, its purpose and merits. In July 1998, a Focus Group comprised of randomly selected
              Cypress residents and another comprised of Cypress businesses representing a cross section of
              the community were convened. These focus groups were an important element in the strategic
              planning effort by providing an opportunity for the community to comment about City services and
              programs and offer insight into community desires for change in the future.
              At the request of the City Council, a Citizen Satisfaction Survey was incorporated into the strategic
              planning project. The survey indicated which public services residents and businesses were most
              and least satisfied with. Additional information about City programs and services was provided by
              City Staff along with an analysis to identify internal strengths and weaknesses, as well as external
              opportunities and threats to consider when developing plans for the future.
              As part of the Strategic Plan, the Mission and Vision Statements of the City of Cypress were
              established. The Vision Statement said: “The vision of the City of Cypress is to be an outstanding
              family-oriented community and premier business center.” Three-year goals were developed in
              conjunction with the Strategic Plan as follows:
                   •    Increase retail, restaurant and entertainment uses;
                   •    Complete the Lincoln Avenue streetscape and promote revitalization;
                   •    Develop and begin to implement a plan for adequate replacement funds for public
                        facilities and infrastructure;
                   •    Maintain and improve public safety; and
                   •    Enhance youth, senior, family and community programs and recreational facilities.
              Capital Improvement Program. Each year, portions of the City, Recreation and Park District and
              Redevelopment Agency budgets are devoted to projects that maintain and improve the City’s
              infrastructure of streets, storm drains, sewers, traffic signals, buildings and park facilities. The
              current Capital Improvement Program (CIP) for fiscal years 1999-2000 through 2005-2006
              appropriates $19.4 million for the seven-year period.
              The goal of the City of Cypress’ seven-year CIP is to identify all facility upgrades, infrastructure
              maintenance or new construction of facilities, along with their funding sources, so that the City can
              have a financial plan to meet those needs. In addition, it provides the means to effectively prioritize
              projects based on the health, safety and welfare of Cypress’ residents and businesses, when the
              financial resources are not available to fund all of the City’s needs. The CIP program ensures that
              Cypress will continue to maintain its distinctive high quality appearance for years to come.
              Redevelopment Plans. Cypress has adopted redevelopment plans for the following three areas
              to provide implementation tools to facilitate economic and residential development: the Civic
              Center (1982), Lincoln Avenue (1990), and the Los Alamitos Race Track and Cypress Golf Course
              (1990). Among the implementation tools are financing incentives and facilitating revitalization
              through assistance in lot consolidations and targeted public improvements, including streetscapes,
              roads and signalization, and other public services.
              Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan. In addition to the redevelopment plan, the Lincoln Avenue
              Specific Plan was completed and adopted by the City Council in 1999. The specific plan divides
              the corridor into specific land use districts and provides detailed development standards and
              design guidelines that are unique to the needs and character of the district. The City has
              completed an important streetscape improvement project that significantly upgraded the visual
              image of the Lincoln Avenue corridor. With the specific plan and the streetscape amenities in
Land Use Element                                                                                              LU-7

Cypress General Plan
                place, as well as efforts to revitalize and intensify housing development along the corridor, Lincoln
                Avenue becomes a key location for economic development and is positioned for significant
                changes in the future.
                Cypress Business Park and Professional Center Specific Plan. Another area that is targeted
                for significant economic development is around the Los Alamitos Race Track along Walker Street
                and Katella Avenue. The Cypress Business and Professional Center Specific Plan was
                established to provide comprehensive guidance and regulations for the development of
                approximately 298.2 gross acres within the City of Cypress. The Specific Plan will carry out the
                Land Use Plan which proposes approximately 11.8 acres of Mixed Use Business Park; 33.4 acres
                of Professional Office; 21.2 acres of Professional Office and Hotel and Support Commercial uses;
                8.2 acres of Mixed Use Business Park/General Retail commercial; 93.6 acres of renovated golf
                course and 130 acres of existing race track for a total of about 1.83 million square feet of building
                area. As mentioned above, this area is also has a redevelopment plan to provide economic
                development assistance.
                Restaurant Feasibility Marketing Program. As part of the ongoing effort to develop retail and
                entertainment uses consistent with the 1998 Strategic Plan, the City commissioned the generation
                of a “Restaurant Row Feasibility Study” to determine the demand for a restaurant oriented
                development within the Business Park area near the intersection of Walker Street and Katella
                Avenue. The study concluded that the market for middle and higher quality restaurants still has
                room for growth in Cypress and the surrounding area. Specifically, the study recommended that
                the City directly market the site to restaurants to gauge their interest in the location.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                This section describes existing land use characteristics in the City. Table LU-1, Existing Land Use,
                quantifies the amount of acreage devoted to each land use.
                RESIDENTIAL
                Cypress is a relatively young suburban community in northwestern Orange County. Residential
                land uses constitute the majority of development, comprising approximately 38 percent of the City's
                total acreage. Typical housing types include low density single-family homes, small multi-family
                projects, higher density apartments and condominiums, and mobile homes.
                LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
                Single-family homes account for approximately three-quarters of the total land occupied by
                residential uses with a total of 9,876 single-family detached units as of January 1, 2000.1 The
                majority of the City's low density single-family neighborhoods were constructed during the 1960s as
                Cypress' land converted from agricultural uses to large tracts of single-family homes. The low
                density neighborhoods are characterized by densities of up to five dwelling units per acre.
                The northern portion of Cypress contains a unique rural residential neighborhood located in the
                vicinity of Gay and Denni Streets. Development in this area occurred under the County's standards,
                prior to annexation into the City in 1988. Lot sizes and public improvements in this area vary from
        1 Source: State of California, Department of Finance, City/County Population and Housing Estimates, January 1,
2000.
LU-8                                                                                                 Land Use Element

                                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
                                                               Table LU-1
                                                         EXISTING LAND USE
                                                                                 Existing Acreage
                     Land Use Designation                                                                            Vacant1
                                                                                   (Developed)
 Low Density Residential                                                                      1,160.70                          1.30
 Medium Density Residential                                                                     238.84                          1.16
 High Density Residential                                                                       187.36                          4.64
 Mobile Home                                                                                     30.00                          0.00
                                                             Subtotal                         1,616.90                          7.10
 General Neighborhood Commercial                                                                100.46                          2.54
 Race Track                                                                                     129.00                          0.00
                                                             Subtotal                           229.46                          2.54
 Business Park                                                                                   16.68                          1.32
 Light Industrial                                                                                  6.00                         0.00
                                                             Subtotal                            22.68                          1.32
 Specific Plan                                                                                  694.22                        120.78
                                                             Subtotal                           694.22                        120.78
 Government                                                                                      11.00                          0.00
 Education                                                                                      273.00                          0.00
 Cemetery                                                                                       126.38                         17.62
 Flood Control                                                                                   71.00                          0.00
                                                             Subtotal                           481.38                         17.62
 Park                                                                                            79.00                          0.00
 Golf Course                                                                                    103.00                          0.00
                                                             Subtotal                           182.00                          0.00
 Railroad                                                                                        48.00                          0.00
 Transportation2                                                                                833.00                          0.00
                                                             Subtotal                           881.00                          0.00
                                                                  Total                       4,107.64                        149.36
 TOTAL ACRES CITYWIDE                                                                         4,257.00
 Notes:
 1. Acreage for vacant land are based upon acreages listed in the City of Cypress’ Vacant Land Directory, dated October 1999.
 2. Transportation refers to street right-of-way, and in some instances, railroad.
Land Use Element                                                                                                                LU-9

Cypress General Plan
                typical residential development standards found elsewhere in Cypress to more rural standards. In
                keeping with resident’s desires, the City has installed a special drainage system on Gay Street to
                maintain the existing rural character.
                One of the larger single-family residential projects that have occurred recently is the Sorrento
                Homes housing tract. The first houses in the 671-unit Sorrento tract were completed and made
                available for sale in 1991. All were built out in the 1990s.
                MEDIUM AND HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
                As available land for single-family development in Cypress diminished over time, development of
                multi-unit projects began to increase. According to the January 1, 2000 Department of Finance
                estimates, the City contained 2,383 attached single-family homes, 535 multi-family units (2 to 4
                units), and 2,659 multi-family units (five or more units).
                Two of the more recent and higher density single-family residential projects include the 30-unit
                Cypress Walk tract at the end of Gay and Denni Streets and the 18-unit Orange Avenue project.
                These projects are evidence of the continuing trend toward small lot single-family development.
                This trend is expected to continue as land prices and demand for single-family detached homes
                increase and larger development sites become non-existent. Small infill projects of 3 to 4 small lot
                single-family units on existing larger residential lots is a trend that is expected to continue.
                Condominium units represent a significant portion of the City's multi-family housing stock.
                Condominiums have been developed under Planned Residential Development standards along the
                City's western border by Ball Road (Tanglewood), and in the southeastern portion of the City.
                Smaller condominium projects have also been developed throughout Cypress, and particularly in
                the northern portion of the City. These residential projects have been primarily constructed since
                the 1970s when planned condominium developments became popular solutions to changing
                housing demands.
                MOBILE HOMES
                Mobile homes supplement the supply of affordable housing opportunities in the City of Cypress.
                Two mobile home parks are located within the City's jurisdiction along Lincoln Avenue. There were
                373 mobile home units within Cypress as of January 1, 2000.2
                COMMERCIAL
                Commercial uses encompass approximately 103 acres of Cypress' total acreage. Lincoln Avenue
                serves as the City's primary commercial thoroughfare and includes a mix of commercial uses, such
                as retail centers, service-oriented business, offices, and motels. Additional neighborhood-serving
                commercial uses are located throughout the City. The following section describes the type and
                extent of commercial uses in Cypress.
                RETAIL
                Retail uses are the most widely distributed commercial land use in Cypress. This land use
                category includes restaurants and other uses that are sales oriented such as apparel shops, and
                grocery stores. Several of the larger commercial centers include major anchor tenants including
                Home Depot, Mervyn's, Target, and Ross.
        2 Source: State of California, Department of Finance, City/County Population and Housing Estimates, January 1,
2000.
LU-10                                                                                                 Land Use Element

                                                                                           Cypress General Plan
              SERVICE
              Service commercial uses include those businesses that provide some type of service, such as dry
              cleaners, barber and beauty shops, and travel agencies. Their distribution in Cypress is fairly
              limited and have historically been located along Lincoln Avenue.
              OFFICE
              Offices have been defined to include professional and administrative offices, and do not
              encompass the large office complexes developed in the Cypress Business Park. Small-scale
              offices are scattered throughout the community with the largest concentrations along Lincoln and
              Orange Avenues.
              HOTEL/MOTEL
              The majority of the City's motels are located along Lincoln Avenue, and are generally smaller
              facilities. However, as part of the growing Cypress Business Park, three full service hotels have
              been developed – Courtyard by Marriott, Homestead Village and Woodfin Suites - to accommodate
              business travelers.
              RACE TRACK
              The 129-acre Los Alamitos Race Track is located in the southwestern portion of the City. Over 1.2
              million people annually attend the quarter horse and harness races featured at the race track. The
              Los Alamitos Race Track is a significant regional recreation resource.
              LINCOLN AVENUE SPECIFIC PLAN
              Lincoln Avenue serves as Cypress' main commercial thoroughfare. Until the annexations occurred
              in the northern portion of the City, control over development along Lincoln Avenue was shared
              among several jurisdictions. As a result, properties along the corridor were developed without a set
              of cohesive controls. This fragmented pattern of development is evidenced in the varied
              development standards and irregular parcel sizes throughout the corridor.
              In order to provide a more cohesive and organized pattern of development, the City adopted a
              Redevelopment Plan for Lincoln Avenue in 1990. The Lincoln Avenue Redevelopment Plan is
              intended to facilitate the economic development of the corridor through upgrading of existing
              businesses and attraction of new development. The Redevelopment Plan is consistent with the
              General Plan.
              In order to provide organization to the fragmented pattern of land uses along Lincoln Avenue, the
              1993 General Plan Committee felt it was important to define focal points of development with
              cohesive groupings of land uses, including higher density residential. The Committee also
              stressed the importance of upgrading the visual image along the entirety of Lincoln Avenue. As a
              means of implementing a cohesive urban design plan, the Committee recommended preparation of
              a specific plan.
              The Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan was completed and then adopted by the City Council in 1999.
              The specific plan divides the corridor into specific land use districts and provides detailed
              development standards and design guidelines that are unique to the needs and character of the
              Avenue. The City has completed an important streetscape improvement project that significantly
Land Use Element                                                                                           LU-11

Cypress General Plan
               upgraded the visual image of the Lincoln Avenue corridor. With the specific plan and streetscape
               amenities in place, Lincoln Avenue stands poised for impressive changes.
               INDUSTRIAL
               The Industrial land use designation includes both business park and light industrial uses.
               BUSINESS PARK
               The majority of business park uses are located within six specific plan areas, which are listed
               below. Refer to the Land Use Categories section of this Element for a more detailed breakdown of
               uses allowed in the Business Park area specific plans. The remaining land designated for
               business park uses comprises approximately 18 acres.
               LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
               The number of light industrial land uses are limited and cover only six (6) acres of land in the City.
               Parcels identified as light industrial are primarily located adjacent to Lincoln Avenue, with light
               industrial parks located at Cerritos Avenue and Walker Street, as well as at Valley View Street and
               Lakeshore Drive. The majority of light industrial uses in Cypress are related to automotive repair.
               CYPRESS BUSINESS PARK
               The 587-acre Cypress Business Park located in southern Cypress is approximately 81 percent built
               out with business park-related land uses. As of January 2000, the developed portion of the
               business park comprised approximately 475 acres.
               The Cypress Business Park has attained a high quality of development through the use of Specific
               Plans which coordinate development in the area and set forth design standards for development.
               The following Specific Plans govern development within the business park:
                    •    Cypress Corporate Center Specific Plan and Cypress Corporate Center Amended
                         Specific Plan
                    •    McDonnell Center Amended Specific Plan
                    •    Warland/Cypress Business Center Specific Plan
                    •    Cypress View Limited Specific Plan
                    •    Cypress Business and Professional Center Specific Plan
                    •    Lusk Company Industrial Park
               PARKS AND RECREATION
               Cypress contains substantial park and open space resources. The City’s Recreation and Park
               District currently operates 19 park sites encompassing 79 acres. In addition, the Cypress Golf
               Course and a portion of the Navy Golf Course are located in the southern portion of the
               community.
               PARKS
               The City classifies parks as community, neighborhood, or mini-use facilities based on park size and
               the range of facilities. Two community park facilities, Arnold/Cypress Park and Oak Knoll Park, are
               located on 14.5 and 22 acres of land, respectively. The City contains 14 neighborhood parks
LU-12                                                                                           Land Use Element

                                                                                          Cypress General Plan
              located throughout the community. These parks serve the adjacent neighborhoods within a 1/2-
              mile walking distance. Neighborhood parks comprise a total of approximately 45 acres. The
              remaining total park acreage is composed of mini-parks, which generally encompass less than one
              acre of land and are located near schools, and residential developments.
              GOLF COURSES
              Cypress contains two golf courses within its jurisdictional boundaries. The Cypress Golf Course
              located adjacent to the Los Alamitos Race Track is a premier privately-owned golf facility. The 103-
              acre golf course has undergone major improvements, and includes an 18-hole course, driving
              range, and club house. A portion of the Navy Golf Course associated with the Los Alamitos Joint
              Forces Training Center is located in southern Cypress. This golf course is restricted for use by
              Navy personnel.
              COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES
              Community services and facilities include government buildings, schools, churches, drainage
              channels/utilities, railroad rights-of-way, and a cemetery. These uses comprise a total of 547 acres
              of Cypress' land.
              GOVERNMENT FACILITIES
              Government buildings are primarily concentrated at the City's Civic Center. The Civic Center
              grounds include the City Hall, police station, library, and tennis courts. Landscaping surrounds
              these facilities, thereby creating a substantial amount of open space land amongst the adjoining
              residential uses. The City uses a facility in northern Cypress as an operation center for the Public
              Works Department and as storage yard for their maintenance supplies, as well as the Community
              Center facility located on Orange Avenue.
              SCHOOLS
              Cypress contains approximately 273 acres of land dedicated to education facilities. There are nine
              elementary schools, two junior high schools, one high school, and Cypress Junior College located
              in the community. In addition, Oxford Academy, a six-year college preparatory secondary school
              for grades 7 through 12 is located in the City.
              All of these school facilities are currently being utilized for educational purposes. However,
              MacKay Elementary School is currently being leased to the Head Start Program, ABC
              Development, and a special education school.
              CEMETERY
              Forest Lawn Cemetery and Mortuary north of Lincoln Avenue encompasses approximately 144
              acres. This large expanse of rolling green land serves as the western entrance to the City, and
              provides a significant open space resource for the community.
              CHURCHES
              A number of churches are located throughout the community of Cypress. Churches are generally
              less than five acres in size.
Land Use Element                                                                                            LU-13
Cypress General Plan
                DRAINAGE CHANNELS/UTILITIES
                Six storm drain channels, Moody Creek, Coyote Creek, Carbon Creek, Stanton Creek, Bolsa Chica
                Creek, and an unnamed channel traverse Cypress. The Moody Creek and Coyote Creek Channels
                cross the northwest portion of Cypress through Forest Lawn Cemetery. The central portion of the
                community is encompassed by the 2A and Carbon Creek Channels. Bolsa Chica Creek and
                Stanton Creek Channels provide drainage facilities for the southern portion of the City.
                Combined, public utilities and drainage channels encompass approximately 71 aces of land in
                Cypress.
                VACANT
                The majority of Cypress has been developed; however, approximately 149 acres of vacant land3
                exist comprising 3.5 percent of the City's total acreage. The majority of the remaining large vacant
                parcels are located in the Cypress Business Park. Lands in the Business Park are subject to the
                regulations outlined in the various specific plans that guide development in these areas.
                TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES
                A hierarchy of local streets create Cypress' transportation network. The Circulation Element
                identifies three major arterial streets: Lincoln Avenue, Valley View Street, and Katella Avenue. The
                Congestion Management Plan (CMP) has also designated Katella Avenue as a CMP street. The
                Circulation Element designates the following streets as primary arterials: Ball Road, Cerritos
                Avenue, Moody Street, and Knott Street. Both the "major" and "primary" arterials provide through
                access to large volumes of traffic between major activity uses.
                In addition to the local vehicle transportation network, two railroad rights-of-way traverse Cypress
                in the northern and southern portions of the City. The Pacific Electric right-of-way traverses the
                northeast corner of the City in a northwest-southeast alignment. This right-of-way has been
                purchased by the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) for a potential commuter rail
                line. Cypress is a member of the Western Orange County Cities Association (WOCCA), which is
                evaluating the feasibility of an urban rail system serving the cities of West Orange County. No
                specific alignment for this potential urban rail system has yet been established.
                The former Union Pacific right-of-way traverses the southern portion of the City in an east-west
                alignment. The tracks have been removed from the right-of-way and several adjacent property
                owners in the Cypress Business Park have expressed interest in acquiring portions of the right-of-
                way for development purposes.
KEY LAND USE ISSUES
                As part of the 1993 General Plan Update, City staff and the City Council identified six "Special
                Study Areas" for further review. These study areas included: Lincoln Avenue; the 1988
                Crescent/Walker Annexation Areas; Cypress Business Park; Wicker Drive; DeLong Street; and
                properties designated Public/Semi-Public. Citizen Advisory Committees consisting of five to six
                members each were formulated for each Study Area to evaluate land use issues and ultimately to
                develop General Plan land use recommendations.
        3 Source: City of Cypress, Vacant Land Directory, Draft dated October 1999.
LU-14                                                                                             Land Use Element
                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
              Subsequent to the 1993 General Plan Update, a variety of actions were initiated by the City
              Council to implement the Committees’ recommendations. The following section describes the
              issues that still require resolutions and new issues that have been identified since the 1993
              General Plan Update.
              BALANCED DEVELOPMENT WITH ECONOMIC GROWTH
              A well-balanced community provides employment, housing, and recreation opportunities for its
              residents and a strong tax base for the City. By encouraging a mix of land uses, the City can meet
              the housing needs of all income groups, enjoy a stable employment and tax base, and provide
              residents with suitable recreational opportunities.
              COMPATIBLE AND COMPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT
              A variety of land uses enable a community to provide housing, employment, and recreation
              opportunities to City residents. However, many land uses are incompatible, such as residential and
              industrial development, due to the differences in traffic and noise levels, physical scale, and hours
              of operation.
              REVITALIZATION
              While the majority of development in Cypress is in good physical condition, the City does contain a
              small number of residential and commercial structures that are in need of rehabilitation or
              replacement. The City has adopted redevelopment plans to facilitate revitalization of the following
              areas: the Civic Center, Lincoln Avenue, and Los Alamitos Racetrack and Cypress Golf Course.
              These plans provide for the upgrading of primarily commercial, business park, and commercial
              recreation uses, and associated public facilities. The Housing Element also establishes and
              supports a number of rehabilitation programs to rehabilitate residential units. The requirement for
              redevelopment agencies to set aside 20 percent of a project's tax increment for low and moderate
              income housing can provide a significant source of funding for implementation of Cypress' housing
              programs.
              IMPROVED CITYWIDE URBAN DESIGN
              Urban design influences how residents and visitors perceive the community. Many factors
              contribute to the City's design, including compatibility of development, transitions between land
              uses, and public and private landscaping. The following goal and policies outline policy direction for
              Cypress to attain a quality urban environment.
              COORDINATE DEVELOPMENT WITH PUBLIC FACILITIES
              AND SERVICES
              Future development in Cypress is somewhat limited because of the few remaining large parcels of
              vacant land. However, new construction will still occur through continued buildout of the Business
              Park and through smaller infill development, private development and Lincoln Avenue
              redevelopment. As new development occurs, public facilities and services will need to be upgraded
              to handle the increased employee and resident population of Cypress.
Land Use Element                                                                                             LU-15

Cypress General Plan
               LINCOLN AVENUE SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
               The adoption of the Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan in 1999 marked an important step in the
               revitalization of the Lincoln Avenue corridor. However, much work still remains if the community’s
               vision for the area is to be achieved. Additional efforts are needed to carry forward the
               revitalization efforts that were begun with the Lincoln Avenue Redevelopment Plan and Specific
               Plan.
               ANNEXATION STUDY AREAS
               The Crescent Street/Lincoln Avenue area was annexed to the City in 1988. This 148-acre area is
               generally located north of Lincoln Avenue and extends as far as Grindlay Street to the east, Camp
               Street to the south, and Carob Street to the west. Based on differing characteristics of the
               neighborhoods that comprise the Annexation Area, the 1993 General Plan divided this area into
               five subareas for closer study. This resulted in the General Plan Committee making specific
               recommendations for three of the subareas:
                    •    Gay/Denni Street Area
                    •    Belmont/La Salle Street Area
                    •    Bishop Street Area
               Subsequent to the 1993 General Plan Update, the City has conducted further studies and has
               otherwise resolved issues that were previously identified except for the Gay/Denni Street Area and
               the Belmont/La Salle Street Area. These are discussed below and shown in Exhibit LU-2,
               Annexation Study Areas.
               GAY/DENNI STREET AREA
               Single-family residential land uses comprise the majority of this area with farm animals present on
               several of the larger residential parcels. The absence of sidewalks, curbs, and gutters further
               perpetuates the area’s rural ambiance that characterized the area’s original agricultural orientation.
               The residential units between Gay and Denni Streets are over 30 years of age. Deferred
               maintenance and the age of the structures contribute to some physical decline. To maintain the
               neighborhood's rural ambiance, the Low Density General Plan designation should remain. Rural
               street and drainage designs have been implemented along Gay Street.
               Because of the existing large lots and as an incentive for investment, the City should consider
               Planned Residential Development (PRD) zoning as a possible overlay zone to allow for more than
               one unit per lot. However, the current provisions of the PRD zone would need to be revised to
               apply to the Gay/Denni Street area in particular. The existing PRD overlay requires a one-acre
               minimum lot size; however, the average lot size is considerably smaller in the Gay/Denni Street
               area. Overall, existing development standards in the PRD overlay need to be reviewed to avoid
               over-building and to maintain the single-family character of the area.
               BELMONT/LA SALLE STREET AREA (DISTRICT 8)
               Single-family residences comprise the majority of the Belmont/La Salle Street Area with some
               multi-family infill development occurring in compliance with the High Density General Plan
               designation and RM-20 zoning. Though there is no vacant land remaining in this area, it is
                                                                                                 Insert Exhibit LU-2
LU-16                                                                                           Land Use Element

                   Cypress General Plan
                 “Annexation Study Areas”
Land Use Element                   LU-17

Cypress General Plan
               anticipated that the area will recycle into a higher density residential neighborhood, thereby
               providing additional rental housing opportunities in the City. The area could also provide
               opportunities for small lot single-family development.
               As the Belmont/La Salle Area recycles, it will be essential to ensure the compatibility between the
               higher density multi-family and small lot single-family development with existing residential
               development. Additionally, a variety of development issues exist relative to small lot single-family
               development (e.g., parking, circulation, open space, trash disposal, etc.) that will need to be
               addressed. Consideration should be given to the provision of development guidelines to help
               ensure the compatibility of new and existing development and the proper design of small lot single-
               family projects.
               The Belmont/La Salle Street Area still exhibits many of the rural characteristics typical of the
               Annexation Area. However, both the Farm Animal Overlay, which permits the continued keeping of
               existing farm animals, and the lack of complete public improvements are incompatible with higher
               density residential development. Improvements to the area’s infrastructure network will be
               essential to provide adequate facilities in conjunction with future higher density residential
               development. This is one of the areas in Cypress that can accommodate higher density residential
               infill development, and is thus essential to fulfill the City’s share of regional housing needs. The
               current High Density General Plan designation and RM20 zoning should be maintained. An
               amortization period should be established to eliminate Farm Animal Overlay from the area in order
               to improve land use compatibility.
               WICKER DRIVE STUDY AREA
               The Wicker Drive Study Area, partially cleared of previous development, encompasses 4.64 acres
               of property located immediately east of the Cypress Civic Center. The Cypress Redevelopment
               Agency owns the majority of the site, with the Cypress School District owning an unspecified half
               (2.32 acres) of the site. The Cypress School District acquired the property as part of an exchange
               for property on the Cypress Elementary School site. The Redevelopment Agency and the School
               District continue to proceed with studies for potential development of the Wicker Drive property.
               The current General Plan designation for the Wicker Drive Study Area is for High Density
               Residential use, permitting up to 20 dwelling units per acre. The Study Area is zoned for Planned
               Residential Development (PRD), providing for flexibility in project design by allowing General Plan
               densities to be averaged over the entire parcel.
               In addition to the PRD base zoning, a Civic Center Combining zone has been designated for
               Wicker Drive to encourage the linkage of this Study Area with the adjacent Civic Center. The
               Wicker Drive Study Area is also part of the Civic Center Redevelopment Plan, which seeks to
               improve the focal point of the downtown Civic Center Core.
               Given the adjacent location of the Wicker Drive Study Area to the Civic Center and the policy
               direction of the City to provide linkage between the two areas, the 1993 General Plan supported
               community-oriented development on Wicker Drive. More specifically, the 1993 General Plan
               recommended the development of a multi-purpose cultural arts center on Wicker Drive.
               Subsequent to the recommendations listed in the previous paragraph, the Redevelopment Agency
               purchased the 1.2-acre Orange Avenue frontage directly south of the Study Area. This property
               will need to be evaluated with the Wicker Drive site to determine future uses. Given the issues
               regarding multiple land ownership on Wicker Drive, the need to assess market feasibility of a
               cultural arts center, and the desire to establish a cohesive vision for the entire Civic Center
LU-18                                                                                             Land Use Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
              Redevelopment Project Area, the City prefers to keep the policy direction for Wicker Drive general
              at this time.
              The Wicker Drive Study Area represents a significant opportunity to enhance the focal point of the
              Civic Center core. City/Agency ownership of the majority of this five-acre parcel provides a variety
              of land use options.
              CYPRESS BUSINESS PARK
              The 587-acre Cypress Business Park represents the single largest remaining development
              opportunity in the City. A series of six specific plans have been adopted to govern future
              development in the area.
              Several property owners adjoining the unused Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way have expressed
              interest in purchasing or leasing pieces of the right-of-way to provide additional parking, outdoor
              storage, or new structures.
              COMMUNITY FACILITIES/SERVICES AND PUBLIC/
              SEMI-PUBLIC STUDY AREA
              The Public/Semi-Public designation in the City's 1986 General Plan encompassed a variety of
              publicly owned land uses, including public parks, educational facilities, public buildings, and
              community facilities. The wide range of land uses also included non-publicly owned land uses,
              including a golf course, race track, railroad right-of-way and cemetery, which has resulted in some
              confusion as to the City's control of Public/Semi-Public land uses.
              PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE OWNERSHIP
              The 1993 General Plan Land Use Map differentiated between public and private ownership under
              the Community Facilities and Services land use designation, specifically identifying the Forest
              Lawn Cemetery, Los Alamitos Race Track, Cypress Golf Course and Country Club and railroad
              rights-of-way as "Community Facilities and Services, Privately Owned." The Zoning Ordinance, on
              the other hand, does not differentiate between public and private ownership.
              The “Community Facilities and Services” land use classification applies to the wide range of land
              uses. The primary issue is, should private land uses (e.g., golf course, racetrack, railroad rights-of-
              way, and cemetery) be removed from the “Community Facilities and Services” category to avoid
              confusion between public and private ownership?
              The 1993 General Plan Committee initially recommended disaggregating what was then the
              “Public/Semi-Public” land use designation into four or five discrete General Plan and zoning
              categories. However, such a change would constitute a modification to property within the
              Public/Semi-Public Zone, and would, therefore, trigger Measure D. (This measure requires a public
              vote when allowed land uses within a PS zoned area are altered). The Committee, therefore,
              recommended that the Public/Semi-Public land use category be re-titled "Community Services and
              Facilities." To further distinguish uses within this category, it was recommended that the Land Use
              Policy map identify separate subcategories for educational facilities, parks, government facilities,
              golf course, race track, railroad rights-of-way, and cemetery, and specifically identify which of these
              uses are privately owned.
Land Use Element                                                                                              LU-19

Cypress General Plan
               AGRICULTURAL USES
               The Zoning Ordinance permits by right the following uses in the Public/Semi-Public (PS-1A) zone:
               farms or ranches including the sale of agricultural products; raising of certain livestock; and
               commercial or accessory uses incidental to permitted or conditional uses. All public and
               quasi-public uses are subject to a Conditional Use Permit within the PS-1A zone.
               The agricultural and farm related uses allowed in the Public/Semi-Public zoning district are
               obsolete and incompatible with current urban development and as such should be eliminated.
               FORMER UNION PACIFIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
               The former Union Pacific Right-of-Way traverses the Cypress Business Park and currently has a
               General Plan land use designation of “Community Facilities and Services.” The City’s Zoning Map
               designates the right-of-way as PS-1A (Public and Semi-public Zone). Interest has been expressed
               by several adjoining property owners in acquiring pieces of the right-of-way for parking and other
               development purposes.
               In order to determine the future disposition of the former Union Pacific Right-of-Way, further
               investigation of options and associated impacts will need to occur. Options include 1) leave the
               current land use and zoning designations in place which would preclude business park uses but
               would allow a public trail; 2) amend the list of allowed uses for the PS-1A zoning district to permit
               parking as a separate use in the PS-1A zoning district; or 3) amend the list of allowed uses for the
               PS-1A zoning district to permit appropriate industrial park uses.
               Options 2 and 3 above would require a vote of the people to amend the PS-1A zoning district
               because of Measure D. Additionally, the adjacent Cypress Business Park is covered by several
               specific plans which regulate the amount of building square footage within specific plan areas.
               Allowing additional building square footage within an established specific plan area would require a
               specific plan amendment and further environmental documentation, especially relative to traffic
               impacts.
               JOINT FORCES TRAINING CENTER (JFTC) LOS ALAMITOS
               The approach pattern to the JFTC Los Alamitos crosses the southern portion of Cypress. The
               following General Plan goals and policies are created to ensure that appropriate land uses are
               allowed within the flight pattern.
               WEST ORANGE COUNTY LIGHT RAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY
               Since the November 1990 passage of Measure M, which includes funding for an advanced rail
               system in Orange County, the feasibility of an 87-mile countywide rail network has been studied by
               the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA). Recently, a number of cities in western
               Orange County, including the City of Cypress, have joined together to sponsor a feasibility study of
               a light rail system that would link the cities of Fountain Valley, Huntington Beach, Westminster,
               Buena Park, Stanton, Cypress, Los Alamitos, Seal Beach and Cerritos. Eventually this system, if
               implemented, would be linked with the light rail system into Los Angeles County along the 105
               Freeway.
               The study is examining both the positive and negative aspects of the light rail system to estimate
               the benefits versus the costs of implementation. For Cypress, the light rail line would potentially
               cross Lincoln Avenue over an existing rail right of way that would be near Cypress College and the
LU-20                                                                                           Land Use Element

                                                                                                Cypress General Plan
              intersection of Lincoln Avenue and Valley View Street. A transit station would also be proposed for
              location somewhere in this vicinity.
              While light rail is currently designed to most immediately serve the transit dependent, the system
              would have the ability to also serve commuters and eventually shoppers as the full system was
              completed. This has the potential, over time, to stimulate economic development by creating
              another means of accessibility along the Lincoln Avenue corridor. However, while the extent of the
              economic benefits are highly speculative at this time, the City has chosen to better understand the
              tradeoffs through the ongoing study. The economic development policies are designed to provide
              the flexibility to capitalize upon this public improvement if the opportunity is judged feasible.
              LONG-TERM CITYWIDE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
              LINCOLN AVENUE SPECIFIC PLAN
              The Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan has led to the implementation of attractive streetscape
              improvements and has set the framework for guiding the intensification of residential, service and
              commercial uses along the corridor. However, the City should continue to facilitate revitalization in
              order to fully realize the complete vision of the Plan. For example, continuing efforts could focus
              on the overall appearance of Lincoln Avenue, including selected signage, lack of maintenance of
              some buildings, façade improvements and landscape enhancement. Also, the City needs to
              encourage the location of retail, restaurant and entertainment uses at key locations and to intensify
              the residential development in close proximity to Lincoln Avenue.
              COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS PARK AREAS
              The City should coordinate with local business groups in order to identify key economic
              opportunities for Cypress. The City could also enhance the attractiveness of the business
              opportunities through effective information and marketing programs.
              EXPANSION OF BUSINESSES CITYWIDE
              One of the most important economic development activities that the City can undertake is to
              develop a program to retain existing businesses and encourage their expansion in Cypress. This
              would involve ongoing monitoring and understanding of the needs of the business community. Of
              particular importance from a taxable sales perspective are the industrial businesses that generate
              a sizable amount of taxable sales outside of traditional retail establishments. Also, the 1998
              Strategic Plan identified the desirability of attracting more retail, restaurant and entertainment
              establishments.
              MAINTAIN BUSINESS PARK’S COMPETITIVENESS
              Business parks that maintain a full range of support services, restaurants, hotel and meeting rooms
              can maintain a competitive edge in attracting new occupants. Three land uses that have been
              identified as desirable in the business park are additional restaurants, hotels and conference
              facilities. This allows businesses to meet their needs while minimizing travel outside the local area.
              EXPAND RETAIL SECTOR
              While current retail analysis has indicated that there is a relatively large outflow of household
              consumer expenditures (i.e., sales tax leakage), there are still potential opportunities for the City to
              increase its retail base in selected areas. In most cases, the focus would be on local serving retail
Land Use Element                                                                                                LU-21

Cypress General Plan
               establishments which might include additional retail services, restaurants and entertainment. Two
               specific areas already identified are along Lincoln Avenue corridor and in the Cypress Business
               Park. However, the retail environment along Valley View Street and at selected shopping centers
               elsewhere in the City could benefit from revitalization efforts and the attraction of new tenants. The
               enhancement of retail activities also benefits the fiscal health of the City through increased retail
               sales tax.
               MARKET BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES
               Marketing materials and information about development opportunities in Cypress can increase the
               potential that the City would attract new businesses in a timely manner. The City is creating a new
               Economic Development website with links to the City and map of frequently used services and
               dining guide.
               DIVERSIFY TRANSPORTATION CHOICES
               As urban areas become more congested, the expansion of transportation choices for both work
               and non-work related trips can increase the attractiveness of Cypress. For example, a number of
               options for light rail are still under study by OCTA and the City should continue to support efforts to
               enhance transit choices in western Orange County. Light rail, serving a broader area than
               Cypress, would have the ability to draw more customers to Lincoln Avenue and would serve a
               portion of the commuters to the Cypress Business Center.
               PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES
               Locational decisions by both new residents and businesses can be influenced by the quality of
               public services. The City regularly updates its capital improvement program, which identifies
               funding sources and sets implementation priorities. The ongoing improvement of public facilities
               and services should remain a high priority.
               ECONOMIC MONITORING
               A successful strategy will require regular monitoring of progress made toward the adopted goals
               and policies. As part of the monitoring effort, a series of performance indicators should be
               developed and reported, such as: 1) new types businesses attracted; 2) existing businesses
               expanding; 3) change in employment, square footage and acreage; 4) change in residential units,
               acreage and population; and 5) changes in retail and non-retail taxable sales.
DESCRIPTION OF THE LAND USE PLAN
               Land use designations (categories) indicate the type and nature of development that is allowed in a
               given location. While terms like "residential", "commercial", and "industrial" are generally
               understood, State General Plan law requires a clear and concise description of land use categories
               that are depicted on Exhibit LU-4, Land Use Policy Map.
               The Land Use Element contains nine land use categories as follows:
                    •    Low Density Residential
                    •    Medium Density Residential
                    •    High Density Residential
                    •    Mobile Home Park
                    •    General and Neighborhood Commercial
LU-22                                                                                              Land Use Element

                                                                                               Cypress General Plan
                    •   Specific Plan
                    •   Light Industrial
                    •   Business Park
                    •   Community Facilities and Services
              These are also shown in Table LU-9, General Plan/Zoning Relationship, along with their
              corresponding zoning districts.
              LAND USE INTENSITY/DENSITY
              State General Plan law requires that the Land Use Element indicate the maximum building
              intensities/densities allowed in a City. The Cypress Land Use Element contains nine land use
              designations; each category allows certain land uses and establishes corresponding intensity/
              density standards (refer to Table LU-9, General Plan/Zoning Relationship). Table LU-9 also
              includes the expected overall levels of development within each land use designation on a citywide
              basis.
              A number of terms are utilized to define the land use designations or categories described in this
              element. The term "intensity" refers to the degree of development based on building characteristics
              such as height, bulk floor area ratio, and percentage of lot coverage. Intensity is most often used to
              describe non-residential development levels.
              For most non-residential land use categories (commercial, industrial, and public), the measure of
              intensity known as "floor area ratio" (FAR) provides the most convenient method of describing
              levels of development (refer to Exhibit LU-3, Definition of Floor Area Ratio). The floor area ratio is
              the relationship of total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot in square feet to the total land area
              of the lot in square feet expressed as a ratio. For example, a 21,780 square foot building on a
              43,560 square foot lot (one acre) yields an FAR of 0.50:1. The FAR describes use intensity on a
              lot, but not the actual building height, bulk, or lot coverage. As Exhibit LU-3 shows, a 0.50:1 FAR
              can yield a building of one story in height covering one half of the lot area, or a taller building which
              covers less of the lot and provides more open space.
              The term "density," in a land use context, is a measure of the population or residential development
              capacity of the land. Density is described in terms of dwelling units per gross acre (du/ac); thus, the
              density of a residential development of 100 dwelling units occupying 20 acres of land is 5.0
              du/acre. A dwelling unit is a building or a portion of a building used for human habitation and may
              vary considerably in size (square footage) from small apartments at 400-500 square feet to large
              single family homes exceeding 5,000 square feet. Along with difference in size is a corresponding
              difference in the number of persons occupying a given unit (i.e., larger units usually house more
              persons than smaller units). For purposes of calculating population, an average number of persons
              per dwelling unit for all types and sizes of dwelling units is assumed.
              LAND USE CATEGORIES
              Descriptions of each of the land use categories depicted on the Land Use Policy Map are provided
              below to delineate the types of uses allowed and their corresponding intensities or densities. These
              use descriptions, types, and limitations are more specifically defined within the City's Zoning
              Ordinance.
Land Use Element                                                                                                  LU-23

Cypress General Plan
                                         Insert Exhibit LU-3
                     “Definition of Floor Area Ratio (FAR)”
LU-24                                   Land Use Element

                                                                                                Cypress General Plan
               Low Density Residential. The Low Density Residential designation provides for the development
               of low density, detached single-family dwellings. The maximum density allowed under this
               designation is five (5) units per acre. Uses such as public/institutional facilities, churches, schools,
               and others, which are determined to be compatible with, and oriented toward serving the needs of
               low density single-family neighborhoods, may also be allowed. The average population density for
               this designation is 3.35 persons per dwelling unit.4
               Medium Density Residential. The Medium Density Residential designation provides for the
               development of medium density duplexes, townhomes, condominiums, and apartments, in addition
               to allowing low density single-family development. This land use designation allows for a maximum
               of 15 dwelling units per acre. Uses such as public/institutional facilities, churches, schools,
               and others, which are determined to be compatible with, and oriented toward serving the needs of
               medium density residential neighborhoods, may also be allowed. The average population density
               for this designation is 2.8 persons per dwelling unit.5
               High Density Residential. The High Density Residential land use designation allows for the
               development of apartments, condominiums, townhouses and other group dwellings in addition to
               single-family development at maximum densities of 20 units per gross acre. Uses such as
               public/institutional facilities, churches, schools, and others, which are determined to be compatible
               with and oriented toward serving the needs of high density neighborhoods, may also be allowed.
               The average population density for this designation is 2.5 persons per dwelling unit.6
               Mobile Home Park. The Mobile Home Park land use designation provides for the development of
               mobile home parks subject to certain zoning restrictions. This designation allows for a maximum of
               12 dwelling units per gross acre of land with an average population density of 2.0 per dwelling
               unit.7
               General and Neighborhood Commercial. The General and Neighborhood Commercial
               designation includes retail, professional office, and service-oriented business activities,
               encompassing both local-serving and broader community-serving uses. The types of uses allowed
               within this designation include: professional and administrative offices; convenience and
               neighborhood commercial developments; restaurants; community shopping centers; retail and
               wholesale commercial activities; and light industrial in conjunction with commercial uses. The
               maximum intensity of development is a FAR of 0.5:1.
               Specific Plan. The Specific Plan designation is intended to address specific areas within the
               community that warrant a comprehensive set of land use policies and standards to provide
               flexibility in the design of development projects. The Specific Plan designation is consistent with all
               other land use designations of the General Plan.
               Sites within a Specific Plan designation are to be developed according to standards adopted within
               the applicable specific plan to address specific site constraints and opportunities, including land
               use, building envelope standards, site design, buffering, traffic, noise, and other land use
               compatibility impacts.
       4
         Source: 1990 Census.
       5 Source: 1990 Census.
       6 Source: 1990 Census.
       7 Source: 1990 Census.
Land Use Element                                                                                                LU-25
Cypress General Plan
                                                               Table LU-2
                                                    SORRENTO SPECIFIC PLAN
                                   Area                                                         Potential Development
             Use                                       Land Use Designation         Net Density
                                  (Acres)                                                                (DU)
  SFD-6000                          54.4          Residential Detached                   4.9              268
  SFD-5000                          64.6          Residential Detached                   6.2              339
  Streets                           10.5          Infrastructure
  Landscaped Area                    4.6          Infrastructure
  Drainage Channel                   3.5          Infrastructure
  Community Park                     6.3          Infrastructure
                   Total           143.9                                                 5.6              667
  Source: Sorrento Specific Plan, September 1988.
                                                               Table LU-3
                                        ORANGE AVENUE SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENT
                                                            Area               Gross Density    Potential Development
       Phase                 Land Use
                                                          (Acres)                 (DU/AC)                (DU)
           I                  SF-2500                       0.78                    12.8                   10
          II                  SF-3500                       2.06                    8.7                    18
               Total                                        2.80                    10.0                   28
  Source: Orange Avenue Specific Plan Amendment, Adopted July 10, 2000.
                                                               Table LU-4
                               CYPRESS CORPORATE CENTER AMENDED SPECIFIC PLAN
                                   Area                                                         Potential Development
    Planning Area                                      Land Use Designation             FAR1
                                  (Acres)                                                           Capacity (sq.ft.)
             1                      39.1          Business Park                         0.50            851,598
             2                      71.9          Business Park                         0.37           1,161,485
                   Total           111.0                                                               2,013,083
Notes:
1. The maximum intensity allowed on any site is 1.0 FAR.
Source: Cypress Corporate Center Amended Specific Plan, Final EIR, March 1989.
LU-26                                                                                                Land Use Element
                                                                                                                  Cypress General Plan
                                                                 Table LU-5
                                      MCDONNELL CENTER AMENDED SPECIFIC PLAN
                                   Area                                                                         Potential Development
    Planning Area                                      Land Use Designation                    FAR1
                                 (Acres)                                                                             Capacity (sq.ft.)
             1                    16.14            Industrial/Warehouse/Office                  0.50                     334,0003
             2                    15.32            Industrial/Warehouse                                                  338,653
             3                     5.02            Office                                                                106,866
             4                    10.54            Office/Commercial                                                    270,8162,3
             5                     9.18            Office                                                                356,895
             6                     8.47            Office/Commercial                            0.37                     353,0002
         Roads                     6.56
                   Total          71.23                                                                                 1,760,230
 Notes:
 1. The maximum intensity allowed on any site is 1.0 FAR.
 2. Total reflects the transfer of 15,000 square feet of building floor area from Planning Area 6 to Planning Area 4. The transfer was
      approved in conjunction with the City Council approval of Design Review Committee Permit No. 97-33 on December 8, 1997.
 3. Total reflects the transfer of 27,000 square of building floor area from Planning Area 1 to Planning Area 4. The transfer was approved
      in conjunction with City Council approval of Conditional Use Permit 2000-03 on June 12, 2000.
 Source: Cypress Corporate Center Amended Specific Plan, Final EIR, March 1989.
                                                                 Table LU-6
                                 WARLAND/CYPRESS BUSINESS CENTER SPECIFIC PLAN
                                   Area                                                                         Potential Development
    Planning Area                                      Land Use Designation                    FAR3
                                 (Acres)                                                                             Capacity (sq.ft.)
             1                    100.51           Business Park                                0.40                    1,532,800
             2                     82.42           Business Park                                0.37                    1,243,970
             3                     29.0            Business Park/Commercial                     0.40                       515,000
                   Total          211.9                                                         0.36                    3,291,770
 Notes:
 1. Includes 14.3 acres of roads and other rights-of-way.
 2. Includes 6.8 acres of roads and other rights-of-way.
 3. Based on existing development and typical development intensity for the land use considered. The maximum intensity allowed on any
      site is 1.0 FAR.
 Source: Warland/Cypress business Center Specific Plan, 1984.
                                                                 Table LU-7
                                            CYPRESS VIEW LIMITED SPECIFIC PLAN
                                                                                                                Potential Development
          Area                    Acres                Land Use Designation                    FAR1
                                                                                                                     Capacity (sq.ft.)
 Vacant                             6.0            Business Park                                0.50                     135,036
 Developed                         41.0            Business Park                                0.44                     771,664
                   Total           47.0                                                         0.44                     906,700
 Notes:
 1. The maximum intensity allowed on any site is 1.0 FAR.
 Source: Cypress View Limited Specific Plan, November 1985.
Land Use Element                                                                                                                       LU-27
Cypress General Plan
                                                                  Table LU-8
                           CYPRESS BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL CENTER SPECIFIC PLAN
                                   Area                                                                           Potential Development
   Planning Area                                        Land Use Designation                     FAR1
                                  (Acres)                                                                             Capacity (sq.ft.)
           1                        35.7            Golf Course                                     --                         --
                                                    Mixed-Use Business Park
           2                         8.2             And/or                                       0.45                     165,7363
                                                    General Retail Commercial
           3                        7.7             Mixed-Use Business Park                       0.45                     155,9353
           4                        4.1             Mixed-Use Business Park                        0.5                     108,0002
           5                        33.4            Professional Office                            0.6                    844,0002,3
                                                    Professional Office Hotel and
           6                         2.2                                                           0.6                     554,083
                                                    Support Commercial
           7                        57.9            Golf Course                                     --                         --
           8                       130.6            Race Track                                      --                         --
                  Total            298.2                                                                                  1,827,754
Notes:
1. The maximum intensity allowed on any site is 1.0 FAR.
2. Total reflects the transfer of 19,000 square feet of building floor area from Planning Area 5 to Planning Area 4. The transfer was approved
     in conjunction with the City Council approval of Design Review Committee Permit No. 96-18.
3. Total reflects the transfer of 10,000 square feet of building floor area from Lots 7, 8 and 9 of Parcel Map 96-121 (Planning Area 5) to
     Planning Areas 2 and 3. The transfer was approved by the Community Development Director on December 28, 1998.
Source: Cypress Business and Professional Center Specific Plan, 1990.
                      Business Park. The Business Park designation is intended to foster the development of large
                      scale, planned commercial and industrial projects. To ensure compatibility of land uses allowed
                      within the Business Park classification with the character of surrounding development, and within a
                      development area, the location, land use type, and building intensity standards will be governed
                      through the adoption of a specific plan, or by standard zoning mechanisms. The maximum intensity
                      of development is a FAR of 1.0:1 on a given parcel.
                      Light Industrial. The Light Industrial designation is designed to accommodate a variety of light
                      industrial uses. Permitted uses would include but not be limited to wholesale businesses, light
                      manufacturing, warehousing and product distribution, storage, and related uses. Heavy industrial
                      uses are not allowed in this category. The maximum intensity of development is a FAR of 0.5:1.
                      Community Facilities and Services. The Community Facilities and Services designation
                      includes a wide range of public and private uses that are necessary to support the community by
                      providing educational, cultural and recreational opportunities and government services. Land uses
                      within this category include publicly-owned uses (parks, government offices and facilities),
                      privately-owned community facilities (private golf courses, race tracks, cemeteries) and institutional
                      facilities (schools and colleges). The maximum intensity of development is a FAR of 0.5:1.
                      GENERAL PLAN/ZONING RELATIONSHIP
                      As a charter City, Cypress has no explicit requirement to ensure that zoning is consistent with the
                      General Plan. However, in the interest of sound planning, the City has formulated its Zoning
                      Ordinance and General Plan to be consistent.
LU-28                                                                                                                   Land Use Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cypress General Plan
                   The relationship between the Cypress General Plan land use designations and zoning districts is
                   shown in Table LU-9, General Plan/Zoning Relationship. This table indicates how properties
                   citywide should be zoned to be consistent with the Land Use Policy Map. As presented in the table,
                   there are nine General Plan land use categories and 18 zoning categories.
                                                   Table LU-9
                                        GENERAL PLAN/ZONING RELATIONSHIP
                                                                                                                                                                General and Neighborhood Commercial                                      Community Facilities and Services
                                                           Low Density Residential   Medium Density Residential   High Density Residential
                     Zoning Categories
                                                                                                                                             Mobile Home Park                                         Light Industrial   Business Park                                         Specific Plan
RS – 15,000 Residential Single-Family                         
RS – 6,000 Residential Single-Family                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
RS – 5,000 Residential Single-Family                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
PRD – 5A Planned Residential Development                                                                           
PC – 25A Planned Community Zone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
RM – 15 Residential Multi-Family                                                        
RM – 20 Residential Multi-Family                                                                                     
MHP – 20A Mobile Home Park                                                                                                                     
OP – 10,000 Office Professional                                                                                                                                      
CN – 10,000 Commercial Neighborhood                                                                                                                                  
CG – 10,000 Commercial General                                                                                                                                       
PCM – Planned Commercial/Light Industrial                                                                                                                                                              
CH – 10,000 Commercial Heavy                                                                                                                                                                           
ML – 10,000 Industrial Light                                                                                                                                                                            
BP – 20,000 Business Park                                                                                                                                                                                                
PBP – Planned Business Park Industrial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
PC – Planned Community                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
PS – 1A Public and Semi-Public                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Land Use Element                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU-29

Cypress General Plan
               IMPLICATIONS OF THE LAND USE PLAN
               Future development in Cypress is directed by the Land Use Element which contains a map and
               text describing the community's future land use pattern. The Cypress Land Use Policy Map (refer
               to Exhibit LU-4) presents the distribution of land uses in the City. Total acreages for each of these
               land use designations are presented in Table LU-10, Land Use Policy Implications. The table also
               provides estimates of the total number of residential dwelling units planned and the resulting
               population. For commercial and industrial land uses, estimates of building square footage at
               General Plan buildout are included. The estimates are based on the Average Density/Intensity
               factors listed in Table LU-10.
               RESIDENTIAL
               The General Plan accommodates a range of residential densities from low to high density
               development. These densities are compatible with existing residential developed densities. The
               Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan allows residential development along Lincoln Avenue to reduce
               reliance on the automobile and provide housing that is convenient to shopping and employment
               opportunities.
               Table LU-10 depicts the quantitative results of the Land Use Policy Map based on potential
               buildout. Each land use designation is listed with its average density/intensity factors and
               associated net acres. Each residential land use designation also includes a maximum potential
               population based on an average persons per dwelling unit. Based on household size information
               derived from the 1990 census, the following average persons per dwelling unit are assumed for
               Cypress: 3.35 for Low Density Residential, 2.8 for Medium Density Residential, 2.5 for High
               Density Residential, and 2.0 for Mobile Home Park. The residential component along Lincoln
               Avenue is assumed at an average of 20 du/acre, although higher densities may be approved
               pursuant to the Specific Plan.
               Residential buildout at General Plan densities would result in a total of 17,415 dwelling units, with
               an associated population of 51,524 residents. While the Plan provides for several residential
               development opportunity areas, the Plan's 17,415 dwelling unit buildout represents approximately
               1,230 additional dwelling units citywide. Residential development will primarily be accommodated
               through intensification of residential uses in some areas zoned for higher density and through
               integration of multi-family units on Lincoln Avenue.
               COMMERCIAL
               The General Plan accommodates growth in the commercial sector of Cypress which includes
               Lincoln Avenue and other commercial areas citywide. All commercial uses within the City are
               designated as General Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, or Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan.
               The allowed development intensity of 0.5:1 FAR is assumed for all commercial areas.
               Properties within the Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan area may be allowed a FAR increase of up to
               1.0:1 as an incentive to facilitate the development of specific land uses and larger scale projects
               consistent with General Plan and Redevelopment Plan goals and policies. The purpose of this
               approach is to encourage the types of development appropriate to Lincoln Avenue by providing the
               incentive of increased density/intensity.
LU-30                                                                                           Land Use Element
                                                                                                   Cypress General Plan
                                                            Table LU-10
                                               LAND USE POLICY IMPLICATIONS
                                                     Average
                                                                                 Potential                      Potential
    Land Use Category and Maximum                   Density or           Net                   Population
                                                                                 Dwelling                         Square
        Permitted Density/Intensity                  Intensity        Acreage                   Forecast
                                                             1                     Units                         Footage
                                                      Factor
Low Density Residential
                                                         6              1,162      7,555         25,309              -
(0 – 5 du/gross acres)
Medium Density Residential
                                                        16               240       3,840         10,752              -
(5.1 – 15 du/gross acre)
High Density Residential
                                                       21.5              192       4,130         10,325              -
(15.1 – 20 du/gross acre)
Mobile Home Park
                                                        12                30        380            768               -
(0 – 12 du/gross acre)
General and Neighborhood Commercial
                                                       0.5:1             103         -              -          2,100,000
(0.5:1 FAR)
Business Park (1.0:1 FAR)                              0.5:1              18         -              -            400,000
Light Industrial
                                                       0.5:1              6          -              -            112,000
(0.5:1 FAR)
                                                                                   8102           2,025
Specific Plan                                          0.5:1             815                                  15,000,000
                                                                                    700           2,345
Education                                              0.4:1             273                                   4,800,000
Government                                                                11                                     192,000
                                        Total            -                 -      17,415         51,524       22,604,000
Notes:
1. Projected overall levels of development on a citywide basis at General Plan buildout. Because much of the City is already
     developed at residential densities at or above those permitted by the plan.
2. Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan.
Land Use Element                                                                                                     LU-31

Cypress General Plan
               Since the majority of land designated for commercial uses has already been developed, the
               recycling of properties is anticipated over time, especially along Lincoln Avenue. This Land Use
               Element covers a time frame of ten to twenty years. Applicable goals and policies are intended to
               be continually reviewed and implemented well into the future in subsequent updates of the Land
               Use Element. Therefore, many properties that are currently underdeveloped or improperly utilized
               will be recycled and redeveloped at higher densities in compliance with the General Plan.
               SPECIFIC PLAN
               Specific Plan areas in Cypress encompass residential, commercial and industrial uses.
               Residential. The two specific plans regulating residential uses only are the Sorrento Specific Plan
               and the Orange Avenue Specific Plan Amendment. Buildout of the Sorrento Specific Plan has
               occurred and only 18 dwelling units in the Orange Avenue Specific Plan remain to be constructed.
               Commercial. The Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan regulates primarily commercial uses along Lincoln
               Avenue. Refer to the discussion above under the commercial subheading regarding the land use
               implications of the Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan.
               Industrial. The Cypress Business Park encompasses a total of 587 acres of which approximately
               81 percent has been developed. Remaining vacant land in the business park will be developed in
               compliance with the specific plans adopted for the area. Based on the development entitlements
               under the approved specific plans, a total of 12.4 million square feet of development is allowed.
               This equates to an overall average of 0.5:1 FAR. However, based on economic trends which have
               resulted in development below the maximum entitlement, combined with development constraints
               (such as height restrictions imposed by the JFTC Los Alamitos), total buildout in the Business Park
               will likely be below the permitted 12.4 million square feet.
               INDUSTRIAL
               Industrial areas in Cypress include both light industrial and business park development. No
               additional development is anticipated to occur in the light industrial areas of the community. This
               use is assumed to have an average development intensity of 0.4:1 FAR.
               COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SERVICES
               All existing Community Facilities and Services uses will be retained under the General Plan. This
               use has an average development intensity of 0.5:1 FAR.
GOALS AND POLICIES
               The Land Use Element's goals and policies direct future growth and development in Cypress, while
               minimizing existing and potential land use conflicts. The goals and policies are designed to
               encourage:
                      •   Balanced Development with Economic Growth
                      •   Compatible and Complementary Development
                      •   Revitalization of Older, Obsolete Commercial and Industrial Properties
                      •   High Quality Urban Design
LU-32                                                                                            Land Use Element

                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
                  •    Coordination of Development with Public Facilities and Services
                  •    Long-Term Citywide Economic Development
              BALANCED DEVELOPMENT WITH ECONOMIC GROWTH
              LU-1:         Create a well balanced land use pattern that accommodates existing and future
                            needs for housing, commercial, industrial and open space/recreation uses, while
                            providing adequate community services to City residents.
                            LU-1.1:      Preserve single-family neighborhoods           in  Cypress    which    are
                                         economically and physically sound.
                            LU-1.2:      Allow for multi-family infill in designated areas to satisfy regional
                                         housing needs.
                            LU-1.3:      Encourage mixed use development within the Lincoln Avenue Specific
                                         Plan area by providing incentives for senior citizen and multi-family
                                         housing.
                            LU-1.4:      Locate residential uses within close proximity of commercial centers to
                                         encourage pedestrian access, and to provide a consumer base for
                                         commercial uses.
                            LU-1.5:      Encourage the development of neighborhood-serving commercial uses
                                         in areas of Cypress presently underserved by such uses.
                            LU-1.6:      Continue to encourage business parks as the preferred method of
                                         accommodating light industrial growth.
                            LU-1.7:      Where feasible, increase the amount and network of public and private
                                         open space and recreational facilities for active or passive recreation as
                                         well as for visual relief.
              Related Goals and Policies: Refer to Goals LU-13 through LU-20 and their associated policies,
              which further address long-term citywide economic development.
              COMPATIBLE AND COMPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT
              LU-2:         Ensure that new development is compatible with surrounding land uses, the
                            circulation network, availability of public facilities, and existing development
                            constraints.
                            LU-2.1:      Ensure a sensitive transition between commercial or business park
                                         uses and residential uses by implementing precise development
                                         standards with such techniques as buffering, landscaping, and
                                         setbacks.
                            LU-2.2:      Where residential/commercial mixed use is permitted, ensure
                                         compatible integration of adjacent uses to minimize conflicts.
                            LU-2.3:      Encourage non-conforming uses and buildings to be brought into
                                         compliance with City codes.
Land Use Element                                                                                            LU-33

Cypress General Plan
                           LU-2.4:       Mitigate traffic congestion and unacceptable levels of noise, odors, dust,
                                         and light and glare which affect residential areas and sensitive
                                         receptors, where feasible.
                           LU-2.5:       Monitor the impact and intensity of land uses in adjacent jurisdictions on
                                         Cypress' transportation and circulation systems, so that they are able to
                                         provide for the efficient movement of people and goods with the least
                                         interference.
                           LU-2.6:       Encourage consolidation of parking and reciprocal access agreements
                                         among adjacent businesses to minimize curb cuts and disruption of
                                         traffic flow.
                           LU-2.7:       Encourage the provision of pedestrian linkages between adjacent
                                         commercial uses and commercial and residential uses to encourage
                                         pedestrian activity and reduce vehicle trips.
                           LU-2.8:       Ensure adequate monitoring of those uses that utilize hazardous
                                         materials to avoid industrial accidents, chemical spills, fires, and
                                         explosions.
               REVITALIZATION
               LU-3:       Revitalize older commercial and residential uses and properties.
                           LU-3.1:       Encourage and continue the use of redevelopment activities in the Civic
                                         Center project area, on Lincoln Avenue, and on the Los Alamitos Race
                                         Track and Cypress Golf Club.
                           LU-3.2:       Support the provision of incentives for private development (as
                                         appropriate), joint public-private partnerships, and public improvements
                                         through redevelopment actions.
                           LU-3.3:       Provide incentives to encourage lot consolidation and parcel
                                         assemblage to provide expanded opportunities for coordinated
                                         development.
                           LU-3.4:       Continue to provide rehabilitation assistance in targeted residential
                                         neighborhoods and commercial districts to eliminate code violations and
                                         enable the upgrading of residential and commercial properties.
                           LU-3.5:       Vigorously enforce City codes, including building, safety, and housing
                                         codes, to promote property maintenance.
               Related Goals and Policies: Refer to Goal HOU-1 and Policies HOU-1.1 through HOU-1.5,
               which address the conservation and maintenance of housing, and Goal HOU-3 and Policies HOU-
               3.1 through HOU-3.3, which address the development of affordable housing in the Housing
               Element.
LU-34                                                                                          Land Use Element
                                                                                     Cypress General Plan
              IMPROVED CITYWIDE URBAN DESIGN
              LU-4: Improve urban design in Cypress to ensure that development is both architecturally
                    and functionally compatible and to create identifiable neighborhoods, commercial,
                    and business park districts.
                    LU-4.1:      Develop citywide visual and circulation linkages through strengthened
                                 landscaping, pedestrian lighting, and bicycle trails.
                    LU-4.2:      Encourage development projects to utilize high quality design for
                                 architecture and site planning through the City’s design review process.
                    LU-4.3:      Implement the design guidelines of the Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan to
                                 improve the overall appearance of existing buildings, streets, and
                                 parking areas consistent with the Lincoln Avenue streetscape.
                    LU-4.4:      Preserve Cypress' low density residential neighborhoods through
                                 enforcement of land use and property development standards to create
                                 a harmonious blending of buildings and landscape.
                    LU-4.5:      Improve the quality of Cypress' multi-family neighborhoods through a)
                                 improved buffers between multi-family residences, and commercial, and
                                 business park uses; b) provision of usable private and common open
                                 space in multi-family projects; c) increased code enforcement; and d)
                                 improved site, building, and landscape design.
                    LU-4.6:      Continue to emphasize the Civic Center as the focal point of the
                                 community, civic, cultural, and recreational activities.
                    LU-4.7:      Review and revise, as necessary, the City's development standards and
                                 project review/approval process to improve the quality of new
                                 development and to protect the public health and safety.
              COORDINATE DEVELOPMENT WITH PUBLIC FACILITIES
              AND SERVICES
              LU-5: Ensure that public facilities and services are available to accommodate development
                    allowed under the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
                    LU-5.1:      Encourage within economic capabilities a wide range of accessible
                                 public facilities and community services, including fire and police
                                 protection, flood control and drainage, educational, cultural and
                                 recreational opportunities and other governmental and municipal
                                 services.
                    LU-5.2:      Identify public facility and service deficiencies and introduce priority
                                 projects into the City's budget process.
Land Use Element                                                                                   LU-35

Cypress General Plan
                           LU-5.3:     Coordinate and collaborate with other agencies providing public utility
                                       service to Cypress to define areawide and regional needs, projects and
                                       responsibilities.
                           LU-5.4:     Coordinate the construction of all public utilities to minimize disruption of
                                       vehicular traffic and negative impacts on roadways.
                           LU-5.5:     Continue to make incremental improvements to the City’s flood control
                                       and drainage system.
                           LU-5.6:     To ensure an orderly extension of essential services and facilities, and
                                       preservation of a free-flowing circulation system, continue to require
                                       provision of essential facilities and services at the developer's expense
                                       where these systems do not exist or are not already part of the City's
                                       financed capital improvement program.
               LINCOLN AVENUE SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
               LU-6:       Enhance the visual image and economic vitality of the Lincoln Avenue corridor.
                           LU-6.1:     Monitor development activity along Lincoln Avenue, and re-evaluate the
                                       mix of land uses and development incentives provided for in the Lincoln
                                       Avenue Specific Plan every five years.
                           LU-6.2:     Utilize the City’s redevelopment authority to facilitate the revitalization of
                                       Lincoln Avenue. Encourage lot consolidation to achieve more cohesive
                                       development projects.
                           LU-6.3:     Continue to provide development incentives which comply with
                                       guidelines and standards of the Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan.
                           LU-6.4:     Encourage mixed use development on Lincoln Avenue by providing
                                       incentives for senior citizens and multi-family housing.
                           LU-6.5:     Continue to maintain a “pedestrian scale and orientation” and improve
                                       pedestrian circulation and amenities.
                           LU-6.6:     Promote economic revitalization through business attraction and
                                       retention activities.
               Related Goals and Policies: Refer to Goal LU-13 and Policies LU-13.1 through LU-13.5, which
               address economic development in the Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan area.
               ANNEXATION STUDY AREA
               LU-7:       Ensure the compatibility of new multi-family residential infill with existing residential
                           uses.
                           LU-7.1:     Require new multi-family development to provide adequate buffers
                                       (such as decorative walls and landscaped setbacks) along boundaries
                                       with single-family residential uses to prevent impacts on residences due
                                       to noise, traffic, parking, light and glare, and differences in scale; to
                                       ensure privacy; and to provide visual compatibility.
LU-36                                                                                          Land Use Element

                                                                                    Cypress General Plan
                     LU-7.2:       Allow small lot single-family development as infill projects and provide
                                   adequate development standards to ensure compatibility with
                                   surrounding residential uses.
                     LU-7.3:       Ensure adequate infrastructure improvements are provided to support
                                   new multi-family development.
              LU-8:  Preserve the rural ambience of the Gay and Denni Street area, and encourage the
                     upgrading of existing properties.
                     LU-8.1:       Adopt a Planned Residential Development (PRD) overlay for the area to
                                   allow for more than one unit per lot as a means of encouraging new
                                   investment. Modify the PRD overlay zone to accommodate the area's
                                   smaller lot sizes.
                     LU-8.2:       Provide standards in the PRD zone to avoid overbuilding on lots, and to
                                   maintain the area's single-family streetscape.
                     LU-8.3:       Upgrade infrastructure as necessary to support additional development
                                   but keep standards for streets and drainage rural in character.
                     LU-8.4:       Conduct a code enforcement program to improve property and building
                                   maintenance.
              WICKER DRIVE STUDY AREA
              LU-9:  Encourage the development of Wicker Drive with community-oriented uses which
                     provide linkage with the adjacent Civic Center.
                     LU-9.1:       Study the feasibility of developing public uses on the Wicker Drive site,
                                   and pursue City/Agency ownership of the entire Wicker Drive Study
                                   Area.
                     LU-9.2:       Provide consistent landscaping and streetscape design along the
                                   Orange Avenue frontage to enhance the visual connection with the
                                   Civic Center.
                     LU-9.3:       Ensure the compatibility of development on Wicker Drive with the
                                   single-family residences to the north.
                     LU-9.4:       Preserve landmark trees in the area, including the significant California
                                   Sycamore tree on Orange Avenue.
              CYPRESS BUSINESS PARK
              LU-10: Carefully regulate future development in the Business Park to ensure the current high
                     quality environment is maintained.
                     LU-10.1:      As a condition of development approval in the Business Park, consider
                                   the impacts of site utilization, access, and occupancy on traffic
                                   generation.
Land Use Element                                                                                    LU-37
Cypress General Plan
                      LU-10.2:       Encourage use of alternative modes of transportation through continued
                                     implementation of the Cypress Business Park Trip Reduction
                                     Ordinance.
                      LU-10.3:       Support the Orange County Congestion Management Program which
                                     requires traffic impact studies be prepared for most development
                                     proposals.
                      LU-10.4:       Provide redevelopment assistance for needed improvements to
                                     circulation, drainage, and sewer systems in the Los Alamitos Race
                                     Track and Cypress Golf Course areas, and to support business park
                                     development in the area. An assessment district, formed in December
                                     1997, began undergrounding utilities in the area with anticipated
                                     completion of work scheduled by the end of 2000.
                      LU-10.5:       Amend the “Business Park” land use category to recognize the building
                                     intensities established by existing specific plans that regulate
                                     development in the Cypress Business Park.
                      LU-10.6:       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow property owners adjoining the
                                     Union Pacific right-of-way to use portions of the right-of-way for parking
                                     but do not allow total building square footage to exceed that allowed by
                                     the applicable specific plan.
                      LU-10.7:       Determine the need and desirability for providing a public multi-use trail
                                     along the former Union Pacific right-of-way.
               COMMUNITY FACILITIES/SERVICES AND PUBLIC/
               SEMI-PUBLIC STUDY AREA
               LU-11: Provide clarification as to the City's authority over currently designated community
                      facilities and services.
                      LU-11.1:       Remove the former Union Pacific right-of-way from the "Community
                                     Services and Facilities" land use category.
                      LU-11.2:       Review land uses currently allowed in the PS-1A (Public/Semi-Public)
                                     zone and establish discrete subdistricts within the PS-1A zone with
                                     appropriate land uses and development regulations for each.
               JOINT FORCES TRAINING CENTER (JFTC) LOS ALAMITOS
               LU-12: Establish land use patterns that protect the public from impacts (noise, potential
                      accidents) associated with the Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos.
                      LU-12.1:       Prohibit structures that are determined to be a "hazard" by the FAA
                                     because the proposed structure would:
                                          •    Raise the ceiling or visibility minimums at an airport for an
                                               existing or planned instrument procedure (i.e., a procedure
LU-38                                                                                      Land Use Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                                                   consistent with the FAA-approved airport layout plan or a
                                                   proposed procedure formally on file with the FAA);
                                               •   Result in a loss in airport utility, such as causing the usable
                                                   length of the runway to be reduced;
                                               •   Conflict with the VFR air space used for the airport traffic
                                                   pattern or enroute navigation to and from the airport.
                          LU-12.2:       Consult with the Airport Land Use Commission to ensure consistency
                                         with the scope and intent of the Airport Land Use Commission Law
                                         (Public Utilities Code Section 21670, et seq.)
                          LU-12.3:       Continue to prohibit new residential development on existing vacant
                                         land within the 65 CNEL contour of the Joint Forces Training Center
                                         (JFTC) Los Alamitos.
              LONG-TERM CITYWIDE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
              LINCOLN AVENUE SPECIFIC PLAN
              LU-13: Promote the revitalization of Lincoln Avenue.
                     LU-13.1:            Continue the current plan of action, including market feasibility analysis
                                         as appropriate, to attract desired retail, restaurant and entertainment
                                         uses and facilitate private investment.
                     LU-13.2:            Build public/private cooperation through the development of business
                                         relationships and a continued high level of public infrastructure and
                                         services.
                     LU-13.3:            Utilize Redevelopment, when feasible, to encourage the higher intensity
                                         development of residential and commercial activities at key locations.
                     LU-13.4:            Continue to improve the overall appearance of Lincoln Avenue through
                                         façade, signage and landscaping and related programs.
                     LU-13.5:            Continue to support the West Orange County Cities Association’s
                                         (WOCCA) rail feasibility and alignment study and leave land use options
                                         open for possible passenger station either on or near Lincoln Avenue
                                         close to the intersection with Valley View Street.
              COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS PARK AREAS
              LU-14: Attract high quality businesses to Commercial and Business Park areas.
                     LU-14.1:            Survey local businesses and organizations to identify and track
                                         economic trends that present opportunities for Cypress.
                     LU-14.2:            Actively market and promote Cypress by identifying development
                                         opportunities in the City’s commercial and business park areas and
                                         displaying on City’s website along with key contacts.
Land Use Element                                                                                            LU-39

Cypress General Plan
                      LU-14.3:           Assist in the development of the property surrounding the Los Alamitos
                                         Race Course by providing site marketing and City permit procedure
                                         assistance.
                      LU-14.4:           Develop a Real Estate Broker Network to inform local and regional
                                         commercial/industrial brokers of City plans and policies, while utilizing
                                         their expertise for business attraction and retention.
                      LU-14.5:           Promote and increase Film Production in Cypress in coordination with
                                         the Orange County Film Council.
               EXPANSION OF BUSINESSES CITYWIDE
               LU-15: Retain and facilitate the expansion of businesses throughout the City.
                      LU-15.1:           City management, economic development and planning staff should
                                         monitor the needs of the business community through ongoing contacts
                                         with the local business leaders and business groups and respond
                                         appropriately to those needs.
                      LU-15.2:           Develop a sense of public/private cooperation through the development
                                         and maintenance of business relationships and a continued high level of
                                         public service.
                      LU-15.3:           Provide incentives, such as through redevelopment and the ongoing
                                         improvement of public infrastructure and services that will attract more
                                         retail, restaurant and entertainment business.
                      LU-15.4:           Using the City’s sales tax tracking information, identify the major non-
                                         retail sales tax generating businesses to better understand their
                                         economic needs and to attract similar businesses to Cypress.
               MAINTAIN BUSINESS PARK’S COMPETITIVENESS
               LU-16: Continue to diversify the Cypress Business Park to maintain its competitiveness.
                      LU-16.1:           Continue to identify business park needs to create an attractive,
                                         competitive and diversified economy, such as facilitating the
                                         development of restaurants, hotels and meeting rooms.
                      LU-16.2:           Encourage the development of commercial land uses at key
                                         intersections in the business park, such as Katella Avenue/Valley View
                                         Street and Katella Avenue/Walker Street.
                      LU-16.3:           Through contacts with brokers and business owners, pursue the market
                                         for unique retailing concepts, such as a “restaurant row,” that can serve
                                         both the employment and the local residential market.
               EXPAND RETAIL SECTOR
               LU-17: Facilitate the expansion of the local serving retail sector.
LU-40                                                                                           Land Use Element

                                                                                           Cypress General Plan
                      LU-17.1:          Increase the fiscal benefits to the City by attracting new retail,
                                        restaurant and entertainment businesses that can better serve the local
                                        population and employment.
                      LU-17.2:          Target locations for new retail establishments in heavily traveled areas,
                                        such as along Lincoln Avenue and Valley View Street, as well as
                                        locations for a potential restaurant row.
                      LU-17.3:          Examine possible joint opportunities for retail development with property
                                        owners and Cypress College at the southeast corner of Lincoln Avenue
                                        and Valley View Street.
                      LU-17.4:          Assist local merchants that wish to revitalize older retail shopping
                                        centers through various strategies that might include: assistance in
                                        providing parking and merchant and property owner business
                                        improvement districts.
              MARKET BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES
              LU-18: Develop marketing materials identifying business opportunities in Cypress.
                      LU-18.1:          Develop an inventory of sites that can attract and expedite the
                                        development of new businesses.
                      LU-18.2:          Regularly update marketing materials that highlight the quality of life,
                                        geographic location, accessibility and market area demographics.
                      LU-18.3:          Coordinate with local realtors and business organizations in marketing
                                        Cypress.
                      LU-18.4:          Utilize new technologies, such as the City of Cypress’ website, local
                                        cable access and high speed communications networks.
              DIVERSIFY TRANSPORTATION CHOICES
              LU-19: Continue to diversify transportation choices in Cypress for residents and businesses.
                      LU-19.1:          Encourage the extension of Light Rail through the City to serve Lincoln
                                        Avenue and Cypress College.
                      LU-19.2:          Participate in the Orange County Transportation Authority’s program to
                                        expand light rail and other forms of transportation in western Orange
                                        County.
                      LU-19.3:          Identify locations for potential transportation facilities that serve both
                                        commuters and residents.
              Related Goals and Policies: Refer to Goal CIR-2 and Policies CIR-2.1 through CIR-2.9, which
              address alternative modes of transportation.
Land Use Element                                                                                            LU-41

Cypress General Plan
               PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES
               LU-20: Continue to provide a high quality of public infrastructure and services.
                      LU-20.1:          Continue to improve the quality of public improvements through the
                                        capital budgeting process.
                      LU-20.2:          Continue to identify new funding sources to leverage local resources.
                      LU-20.3:          Continue to target high priority implementation areas.
               ECONOMIC MONITORING
               LU-21: Economic strategy monitoring.
                      LU-21.1:          Evaluate plans and programs annually and identify the
                                        accomplishments of ongoing economic activities using a series of
                                        performance indicators.
                      LU-21.2:          Use the monitoring program to re-evaluate goals, policies and priorities
                                        in response to changing economic conditions.
LU-42                                                                                           Land Use Element
                 Cypress General Plan
                     Insert Exhibit LU-4
                 “Land Use Policy Map”
                    11 x 17 color exhibit
Land Use Element                 LU-43

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
III. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                The City of Cypress circulation and transportation system plays an important role in shaping the
                overall structure and form of the City. Circulation relates not only to the actual physical
                transportation system such as streets, highways, bicycle routes, and sidewalks, but also to the
                various modes of transportation, such as cars, buses, trucks (goods movement), rail, bicycles,
                ridesharing, and walking, as well. These systems are shaped by land use patterns and provide the
                means to move people and goods through and within the City of Cypress. Land use and
                circulation must be closely tied to ensure that citizens are able to move in and around the City to
                locations where they live, work, shop, and spend leisure hours.
                PURPOSE
                The Circulation Element of the General Plan identifies the existing circulation system, circulation
                related issues, and goals and policies; and provides a comprehensive circulation plan which
                incorporates the various modes of transportation. The circulation plan is developed to meet
                present and future travel demand throughout the City. This Element is a general guide for the
                planning, development, and enhancement of the City of Cypress circulation system, based on
                existing and anticipated land uses.
                RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER PLANS AND GENERAL PLAN
                ELEMENTS
                RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
                Transportation issues extend beyond the Cypress city limits. As a result, regional agencies have
                developed programs to forecast and manage countywide and region-wide traffic. The City must
                consider other transportation system planning efforts as it prepares for buildout of its own General
                Plan.
                Most transportation-related plans and programs are established with the goal of maintaining
                acceptable operating Levels of Service (LOS) on the City’s transportation system. LOS
                designations are qualitative descriptions of roadway and intersection operations which range from
                “A” to “F”. Level of Service designations are analogous to letter grades received in school, where
                “A” is the best and “F” is the worst. Operating conditions at intersections and on street segments
                are evaluated using standard analysis methodologies that result in number values, which then
                correspond to Level of Service letter designations. This description of Level of Service provides a
                general background for the following discussion of related programs. A more detailed description
                of Level of Service standards is provided in Appendix A in Technical Appendix A.
                Measure M - Growth Management Program (GMP)
Circulation Element                                                                                        CIR-1

Cypress General Plan
               As a result of the Orange County Measure M (a ½-percent sales tax increase), passed by Orange
               County voters in 1988, all Orange County cities are required to develop a Growth Management
               Program (GMP). The stated purpose of the GMP is to ensure that the planning, management, and
               implementation of traffic improvements and public facilities are adequate to meet the current and
               projected mobility needs of Orange County.
               A traffic Level of Service (LOS) policy is to be established by each City, whereby LOS "D" or better
               is to be designated as the overall goal. However, it is recognized that some arterials are influenced
               by traffic factors beyond the control of the City; therefore, a lower LOS goal may be adopted for
               certain arterials. A Deficient Intersection List must also be developed for "problem" locations, and
               if future developments significantly impact these locations, they may provide mitigation in the form
               of pro-rata share fees.
               The overall objective of the GMP is to ensure that new developments provide their fair share of
               public facilities and that services and infrastructure keep pace with anticipated growth. The
               program calls for an annual evaluation of compliance with LOS policies, a development phasing
               program, participation and interaction with other jurisdictions (Growth Management Areas or
               GMA’s) to prioritize and receive funding for regional transportation improvements, provision of a
               Capital Improvement Program (CIP) to address specific City roadway needs, and development of a
               Transportation Demand Management (TDM) trip reduction program. In summary, the GMP
               requires development of a comprehensive program to ensure that improvement of public facilities
               keeps pace with development, and that new developments provide their fair share of those
               improvements.
               Proposition 111 – Congestion Management Program (CMP)
               Assembly Bill (AB) 471 (Proposition 111), as subsequently modified by AB 1791, requires every
               urbanized county with a population of 50,000 or more to adopt a Congestion Management Program
               (CMP) in order to be eligible for gasoline tax revenues. The City of Cypress must comply with the
               Orange County CMP requirements in order to receive its allocated portion of Measure M funds.
               The CMP has an established Highway System (CMPHS), which consists of principal local arterials,
               Smart Streets and State Highways. In the City of Cypress, Valley View Street and Katella Avenue
               are on the Orange County CMPHS, and the intersection of Valley View/Katella is designated as a
               CMP intersection. A minimum operating Level of Service of LOS “E” is required on CMP facilities,
               unless the facility was operating at a worse level when the baseline counts were conducted in
               1991. Cities will be required to maintain LOS “E” or better (or baseline levels, if worse than “E”) on
               the CMPHS.
               The CMPHS is monitored through CMP requirements and minimum Level of Service standards
               must be maintained in order to remain eligible for the gas tax revenues. One alternative to physical
               mitigation (widening streets, adding lanes at intersections, etc.) is to develop a deficiency plan,
               whereby the CMPHS system as a whole is improved and air quality benefits are provided.
               An important aspect of the CMP regulations is the requirement that new developments mitigate any
               significant traffic impacts to the CMPHS. This means that cities need to develop a review process
               whereby the traffic impacts of new projects are evaluated and impacts mitigated. This serves to
               ensure that the LOS standards on the CMPHS are maintained. In addition, the CMP contains
               requirements similar to the GMP, such as a Capital Improvement Program (CIP) submittal, a trip
               reduction program (TDM), and the need for inter-jurisdictional coordination.
CIR-2                                                                                         Circulation Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
                In 1985, the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) implemented Regulation XV
                (Rule 1501), which required employers of more than 100 employees to implement trip reduction
                programs, to reduce peak hour traffic coming to and from the job site. Measures to reduce peak
                hour traffic included establishment of a Transportation Management Association to promote
                Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs, with carpool matching and vanpool
                programs, transit and parking incentives, provision of on-site daycare facilities, and many other
                approaches. The SCAQMD has since significantly relaxed its TDM program requirements for most
                businesses, but as a result of the initial Regulation XV emphasis and also by requirement of the
                Orange County GMP, all Orange County cities still have an adopted a Trip Reduction Ordinance.
                Articles XVI, XVII, and XVIII of the City of Cypress Municipal Code provide detailed findings and
                guidelines for trip reduction air pollution reduction measures to be undertaken by businesses in the
                Cypress Business Park and throughout the City.
                RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
                The Circulation Element is related to several other elements of the General Plan, perhaps most
                closely to the Land Use Element. Circulation facilities are designed around the City’s pattern of
                land use, to ensure safe and efficient access to and from each development. The type and design
                of the circulation system is determined by the nature and density of surrounding land uses, as well
                as inter-city access patterns and loads.
                The Circulation Element is also related to the Noise, Air Quality, Conservation/Open Space/
                Recreation, and Safety Elements. As described in the Noise Element, the circulation system is one
                of the major components of urban noise. The circulation system network also has a direct impact
                on natural resources, particularly air quality. Safety factors affect the location and design of
                circulation facilities and dictate the need for evacuation and emergency routes.
                Because of its transportation-related issues, the Growth Management Element also relates to the
                Circulation Element. In 1988 Orange County voters approved Measure M, which increased sales
                tax revenues in order to fund needed transportation improvements throughout the County. To
                qualify to receive a portion of these revenues, each jurisdiction within the County must adopt a
                Growth Management Element.
                Major components of the required Growth Management Element concern transportation-related
                issues. For example, the Element must contain a policy that establishes a minimum Level of
                Service (LOS) to be maintained at intersections impacted by new development. In addition, the
                Element must contain a policy to promote TDM measures in the City and must contain a
                Comprehensive Phasing Program to ensure coordination between new development and roadway
                capacities. These issues will be addressed in a consistent fashion between the Circulation and
                Growth Management Elements.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                REGIONAL ACCESS
                The City of Cypress is well served by area freeways, although none are actually located within the
                City boundaries. The Artesia Freeway (SR-91), Garden Grove Freeway (SR-22), San Diego
                Freeway (I-405), and San Gabriel River Freeway (I-605) are located to the north, south, and west
                of the City of Cypress, respectively. Each of these freeways is located within one to two miles from
                the Cypress City limits.
Circulation Element                                                                                      CIR-3

Cypress General Plan
               Bloomfield Street, Moody Street, Valley View Street, and Knott Avenue are all north-south arterials
               through the City of Cypress, and all have interchanges with the SR-91 Freeway to the north of the
               City. Valley View Street and Knott Street have interchanges with SR-22/I-405, to the south of the
               City. To the west of the City, freeway access at the I-605 is provided by Lincoln Avenue, Cerritos
               Avenue (access to and from the north only), and Katella Avenue.
               Valley View Street and Katella Avenue are both regional arterials, which are included on the CMP
               Highway System (CMPHS). The CMPHS includes the Orange County Transportation Commission
               (OCTC) adopted Smart Street Network and all State Highways. Under a 20-year traffic
               improvement program, Orange County will establish 21 "Smart Streets," designed to carry
               significant volumes of inter-city and intra-city traffic, with enhanced geometrics, including extra
               travel lanes, limited mid-block access, bus turnouts, left- and right-turn pockets, synchronized
               signal timing and other improvements. Valley View Street and Katella Avenue are included in the
               Smart Street Network.
               LOCAL ACCESS
               EXISTING ARTERIAL SYSTEM
               The City of Cypress circulation needs are served by a traditional grid system of arterials, with
               approximately ½-mile spacing, and signals at each arterial intersection. In three areas of the city,
               this grid street system is interrupted by established land uses, the most significant being the Joint
               Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos (formerly known as the Los Alamitos Armed Forces
               Reserve Center) at the south edge of the city. Because of the size and location of this military
               installation, access to and from the south is limited to Bloomfield Street, Valley View Street and
               Knott Avenue. The Los Alamitos Race Track just north of the JFTC, and the Forest Lawn
               Cemetery at the north end of the city, also cause some discontinuity in the City’s grid street
               system.
               The east-west arterials through the City of Cypress that serve the City’s circulation needs are
               Lincoln Avenue, Orange Avenue, Ball Road, Cerritos Avenue, Katella Avenue, and Orangewood
               Avenue. Those arterials with a north-south alignment that play an important role in the City's
               circulation system are Bloomfield Street, Denni Street, Moody Street, Walker Street, Valley View
               Street, Holder Street, and Knott Avenue.
               The existing roadway system in the City of Cypress is presented on Exhibit CIR-1, Existing Arterial
               System. The information presented on this exhibit includes the number of travel lanes, existence
               or lack of a center street divider, where on-street parking is allowed, and where bicycle lanes are
               provided.
               EXISTING TRAFFIC VOLUMES
               Average Daily Traffic (ADT) volumes on City of Cypress arterials were collected by the City of
               Cypress in 1999. ADT volumes on each roadway segment are shown on Exhibit CIR-2, Existing
               Daily Traffic Volumes (1999). In general, Valley View Street and Katella Avenue carry the highest
               volumes of traffic on a daily basis. The street segment that presently carries the most traffic is
               Valley View Street, between Katella Avenue and Orangewood Avenue, at 51,500 vehicles per day.
CIR-4                                                                                        Circulation Element

                      Cypress General Plan
                     INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-1
                    “Existing Arterial System”
Circulation Element                CIR-5

Cypress General Plan
                                    INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-2
                     “Existing Daily Traffic Volumes (1999)”
CIR-6                                  Circulation Element

                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
                 A total of 13 intersections located along Valley View Street, Lincoln Avenue, and Katella Avenue
                 were also analyzed for the Circulation Element. Morning and evening peak hour turning movement
                 counts were conducted at each intersection. Peak hours are generally designated as the highest
                 volume hour within the morning peak period (7:00 - 9:00 AM) and the evening peak period (4:00 -
                 7:00 PM). Peak hour traffic volumes are presented in the intersection analysis worksheets in
                 Appendix A in Technical Appendix A.
                 EXISTING LEVELS OF SERVICE
                 A Level of Service (LOS) analysis was conducted to evaluate the existing operating conditions of
                 the City street system and study intersections. The results are presented in the following
                 paragraphs.
                 The City of Cypress has adopted LOS “D” or better as the desired citywide operating standard for
                 most City streets. However, given the influence of regional traffic on Valley View Street, Lincoln
                 Avenue, and Katella Avenue, which are beyond the control of the City of Cypress, LOS “E” or
                 better has been adopted as the minimum operating Level of Service for street segments and
                 intersections on these arterials.
                 Exhibit CIR-1 (previously referenced) illustrates the existing roadway configurations in the City.
                 Corresponding roadway capacities for each type of roadway are summarized below on Table CIR-
                 1, Daily Roadway Capacities. These daily capacities are based on County of Orange daily
                 roadway capacities, and represent a theoretical maximum number of vehicles that can be
                 accommodated by each type of roadway, at each Level of Service. As described earlier, Levels of
                 Service range from "A" (excellent conditions) to "F" (severely congested conditions), and
                 represents a qualitative description of operating conditions.
                                                      Table CIR-1
                                          DAILY ROADWAY CAPACITIES
                                                                          Level of Service
  Type of Arterial    Description                    A              B            C              D                E
 Collector            2-Lane Undivided             7,500          8,800        10,000        11,300           12,500
 Secondary            4-Lane Undivided            15,000         17,500        20,000        22,500           25,000
 Primary              4-Lane Divided             22,500          26,300        30,000        33,800           37,500
 Major – 6            6-Lane Divided              33,900         39,400        45,000        50,600           56,300
 Major – 8            8-Lane Divided              45,000         52,500        60,000        67,400           75,000
                 Existing daily traffic volumes and daily roadway are shown on Exhibit CIR-2 (previously
                 referenced). This provides a general comparison of existing traffic volumes to the roadway
                 carrying capacity, and offers an overview of the operating conditions of the existing arterial system.
                 Review of Exhibit CIR-2 shows that the existing daily volumes for most street segments are within
                 the daily LOS “D” or “E” capacity limits. The segment of Knott Avenue from Cerritos to Katella
                 Avenue is currently carrying a daily volume of 38,100 vehicles, which is slightly in excess of its
                 LOS “E” capacity of 37,500 vehicles. A tabular summary of existing roadway operating conditions
                 for all city street segments is provided on Table CIR-2, Summary of Roadway Operations for
                 Existing Conditions (1999).
Circulation Element                                                                                         CIR-7

Cypress General Plan
                                               Table CIR-2
                                  SUMMARY OF ROADWAY OPERATIONS FOR
                                       EXISTING CONDITIONS (1999)
Roadway Segment                                Existing    LOS “E”   ADT   V/C Ratio      LOS
                                              Conditions   Capacity
CRESCENT AVENUE:
West of Bloomfield Street                     Secondary     25,000  12,200   0.49          A
Bloomfield Street to Moody Street             Secondary     25,000  12,300   0.49          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                 Secondary     25,000  14,600   0.58          A
LINCOLN AVENUE:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street               Major       56,300  21,800   0.39          A
Denni Street to Moody Street                    Major       56,300  25,700   0.46          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                   Major       56,300  20,100   0.36          A
Walker Street to Valley View Street             Major       50,600  24,000   0.47          A
East of Valley View Street                      Major       56,300  21,300   0.38          A
ORANGE AVENUE:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street             Secondary     25,000   7,100   0.28          A
Denni Street to Moody Street                  Secondary     25,000  10,600   0.42          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                 Secondary     25,000  13,300   0.53          A
Walker Street to Valley View Street           Secondary     25,000  12,900   0.52          A
Valley View Street to Holder Street           Secondary     25,000  13,200   0.53          A
BALL ROAD:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street              Primary      37,500  18,100   0.48          A
Denni Street to Moody Street                   Primary      37,500  15,300   0.41          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                  Primary      37,500  20,300   0.54          A
Walker Street to Valley View Street            Primary      37,500  18,400   0.49          A
Valley View Street to Holder Street            Primary      37,500  18,600   0.50          A
CERRITOS AVENUE:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street              Primary      37,500  23,100   0.62          B
Denni Street to Moody Street                   Primary      37,500  21,800   0.58          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                  Primary      37,500  24,000   0.64          B
Walker Street to Valley View Street            Primary      37,500  20,600   0.55          A
Valley View Street to Holder Street            Primary      37,500  14,800   0.39          A
Holder Street to Knott Avenue                  Primary      37,500  15,100   0.40          A
KATELLA AVENUE:
West of Valley View Street                      Major       56,300  41,300   0.73          C
Valley View Street to Holder Street             Major       56,300  31,500   0.56          A
Holder Street to Knott Avenue                   Major       56,300  31,200   0.55          A
ORANGEWOODAVENUE:
West of Valley View Street                     Primary      37,500   2,200   0.06          A
Valley View Street to Holder Street            Primary      37,500   8,900   0.24          A
Holder Street to Knott Avenue                  Primary      37,500   8,000   0.21          A
BLOOMFIELD STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue               Secondary     25,000  11,400   0.46          A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                    Secondary     25,000  11,200   0.45          A
Ball Road to Cerritos                         Secondary     25,000  11,200   0.45          A
CIR-8                                                                         Circulation Element

                                                                                       Cypress General Plan
                                                       Table CIR-2
                                         SUMMARY OF ROADWAY OPERATIONS FOR
                                          EXISTING CONDITIONS (1999) – CONTINUED
Roadway Segment                                        Existing    LOS “E”      ADT   V/C Ratio    LOS
                                                      Conditions   Capacity
DENNI STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                       Secondary      25,000     5,800   0.23        A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                            Secondary      25,000     6,300   0.25        A
Ball Road to Cerritos                                 Secondary      25,000     5,100   0.20        A
MOODY STREET:
North of Lincoln Avenue                                Primary       37,500    18,800   0.50        A
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                        Primary       37,500    15,900   0.42        A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                             Primary       37,500    13,600   0.36        A
Ball Road to Cerritos Avenue                           Primary       37,500    10,100   0.27        A
WALKER STREET:
North of Lincoln Avenue                               Secondary      25,000    16,600   0.66        B
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                       Secondary      25,000    17,100   0.68        B
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                            Secondary      25,000    17,200   0.69        B
Ball Road to Cerritos Avenue                          Secondary      25,000    13,100   0.52        A
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                     Secondary      25,000    15,300   0.61        B
VALLEY VIEW STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                          Major       56,300    38,800   0.69        B
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                               Major       56,300    39,100   0.69        B
Ball Road to Cerritos Avenue                             Major       56,300    39,800   0.71        C
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                        Major       50,600    40,800   0.72        C
Katella Avenue to Orangewood Avenue                      Major       56,300    51,500   0.91        D
South of Orangewood Avenue                               Major       56,300    46,200   0.82        D
HOLDER STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                       Secondary      25,000     8,300   0.33        A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                            Secondary      25,000     7,800   0.31        A
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                     Secondary      25,000     7,300   0.29        A
Katella Avenue to Orangewood Avenue                   Secondary      25,000     2,200   0.09        A
South of Orangewood Avenue                            Secondary      25,000     6,200   0.25        A
KNOTT AVENUE:
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                      Primary       37,500    38,100   1.02        F
Katella Avenue to Orangewood Avenue                    Primary       37,500    32,000   0.85        D
South of Orangewood Avenue                             Primary       37,500    32,100   0.86        D
Note: V/C Ratio = Volume-to-Capacity Ratio
Source: City of Cypress 1999 Traffic Flow Map
Circulation Element                                                                              CIR-9

Cypress General Plan
                   Intersection analyses were also conducted at the 13 study intersections located along Valley View
                   Street, Lincoln Avenue, and Katella Avenue in the City of Cypress. The Intersection Capacity
                   Utilization (ICU) methodology was used, as specified by the Orange County CMP and GMP. The
                   ICU methodology provides a comparison of intersection volumes to the intersection capacity and
                   the results are then related to LOS values, ranging from "A" to "F", according to the following
                   corresponding chart:
            Intersection Capacity Utilization                           Corresponding Level of Service
                         0.00 – 0.60                                                 LOS A
                         0.61 –0.70                                                  LOS B
                         0.71 – 0.80                                                 LOS C
                         0.81 – 0.90                                                 LOS D
                         0.91 – 1.00                                                 LOS E
                      Greater than 1.00                                              LOS F
                   A summary of the existing intersection operating conditions is presented on Table CIR-3,
                   Intersection Analysis – Existing Conditions (1999). With the exception of one intersection, all study
                   intersections are operating at LOS “D” or better. The intersection of Katella Avenue and Knott
                   Avenue is currently operating at LOS “E” in the evening peak hour. The City LOS standard for this
                   intersection is LOS “E”, since it is located along Katella Avenue, one of the regional arterials
                   through the City.
                                                      Table CIR-3
                                             INTERSECTION ANALYSIS
                                            EXISTING CONDITIONS (1999)
                                                                          Existing Conditions
                                                            AM Peak Hour                      PM Peak Hour
                    Intersection
                                                         ICU             LOS               ICU              LOS
 Lincoln / Bloomfield                                    0.48              A              0.49                A
 Lincoln / Moody                                         0.53              A              0.69                B
 Lincoln / Walker                                        0.59              A              0.87                D
 Lincoln / Valley View                                   0.64              B              0.78                C
 Valley View / Orange                                    0.72              C              0.74                C
 Valley View / Ball                                      0.90              D              0.82                D
 Valley View / Cerritos                                  0.62              B               0.68               B
 Valley View / Katella                                   0.72              C               0.84               D
 Valley View / Orangewood                                0.77              D               0.62               B
 Katella / Lexington                                     0.58              A              0.59                A
 Katella / Walker                                        0.71              C              0.74                C
 Katella / Holder                                        0.43              A              0.65                B
 Katella / Knott                                         0.75              C              0.92                E
CIR-10                                                                                          Circulation Element

                                                                                                 Cypress General Plan
                The CMP LOS standard is “E" or "baseline", if it was measured worse than "E" in 1991 when the
                "baseline" counts were conducted. All intersections are currently operating within CMP standards.
                The general LOS goal under GMP requirements is a Level of Service "D" or better operations.
                However, certain streets/intersections can be designated to have lower LOS standards, if certain
                conditions exist, as described earlier. For the City of Cypress, a Level of Service “E” standard
                applies to Valley View Street and Katella Avenue, given that they serve regional, as well as local,
                traffic. All other roadways in the City have a LOS “D” standard. These standards are consistent
                with the GMP.
                BUS SYSTEM
                The City of Cypress is currently served by five Orange County Transportation Association (OCTA)
                bus lines (Routes 21, 25, 42, 46, and 50), as illustrated in Exhibit CIR-3, Existing Bus Routes.
                Routes 21 and 50 serve the Cypress Business Park along Valley View and Katella, respectively;
                Route 42 serves the Lincoln Avenue corridor, Route 46 provides east-west service generally
                through the middle of the city, and Route 25 provides north-south service along Knott Avenue. All
                of the routes, with the exception of Route 25, operate 7 days a week, including holidays. Route 25
                operates Monday through Saturday, with no Sunday or holiday service. Service frequencies and
                times are reviewed and modified by OCTA from time to time. Up-to-date route schedules and
                information for all OCTA services are posted on the OCTA web site at “www.octa.net”.
                OCTA routes connect with other transit providers from other cities, including Long Beach Transit
                and Long Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA). OCTA also provides the ACCESS
                Service, which is a shared-ride service for people with functional limitations caused by a disability.
                BIKEWAY SYSTEM
                Existing bikeways in the City of Cypress are shown on Exhibit CIR-4, Existing Bikeways. Bicycle
                trails provide access to schools, parks, open space areas, as well as commercial and employment
                centers within the community. A bikeway can either be an on-road bikeway, which would include
                both striped bike lanes and signed-only bikeways; or an off-road paved bikeway. In some cases,
                off-road bikeways utilize City sidewalks, where there is sufficient width to accommodate both
                bicycles and pedestrians.
                The trail system within the City includes Class I, II, and III paths. Class I bike paths are separate
                from the street and are the highest quality bike path. Class II and III are both located on the street.
                Class II paths include a designated bike lane and Class III paths are only marked by a sign.
                RAIL TRANSPORTATION
                Existing rail lines in the City of Cypress are illustrated on Exhibit CIR-5, Existing Truck Routes and
                Rail Lines. The existing Southern Pacific Rail Line, with a northwest-southeast alignment, crosses
                the northeast corner of the City. The right-of-way was purchased some years ago by the Orange
                County Transportation Authority (OCTA) for potential use as a commuter rail line. This purchase
                precludes freight use of the east-west rail line, which crosses through the Cypress Business Park
                at the south end of the City, since it is a spur line off of the purchased main line.
                Cypress is a member of The Western Orange County Cities Association (WOCCA), which is
                evaluating the feasibility of an urban rail system serving the cities of West Orange County. No
                specific alignment for this potential urban rail system has yet been established.
Circulation Element                                                                                         CIR-11

Cypress General Plan
                     INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-3
                       “Existing Bus Routes”
CIR-12                 Circulation Element

                     Cypress General Plan
                    INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-4
                        “Existing Bikeways”
Circulation Element              CIR-13

Cypress General Plan
                                    INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-5
                     “Existing Truck Routes And Rail Lines”
CIR-14                                Circulation Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                TRUCK CIRCULATION
                Designated truck routes through the City of Cypress are illustrated on Exhibit CIR-5 (referenced
                previously). Truck routes are established to designate specific roadways on which trucks may
                travel within and through the City. These routes direct trucks away from streets which are
                inappropriate or inadequate to serve substantial truck traffic. Trucks are allowed to access
                locations on Secondary and Local Streets for site deliveries (i.e. goods delivery or moving vans),
                however, they must take the most direct route to and from the designated truck routes.
KEY CIRCULATION ISSUES
                A comprehensive network of regional freeways, local roadways, public transit routes, and rail lines
                serve the transportation needs of Cypress and surrounding jurisdictions. The following section
                identifies local and regional issues as they relate to the transportation system. Future traffic
                volumes under General Plan buildout are projected, and the ability of the General Plan circulation
                system to accommodate this traffic is evaluated.
                REGIONAL ACCESS
                Cypress enjoys good regional access via area freeways to the north, west, and south of the City.
                Access to these freeways is by arterial streets such as Katella Avenue, Valley View Street, Lincoln
                Avenue, and Knott Street. The greatest traffic volumes are borne by Katella Avenue and Valley
                View Street, which carry volumes approaching or in excess of their LOS “E” capacity. As
                employment increases in the Business Park and retail use expands along Lincoln Avenue, peak
                period congestion is anticipated that may in turn diminish the ease of freeway access. This is
                anticipated to be especially noticeable on Valley View and Knott Streets because of the interruption
                of the north-south grid pattern caused by the JFTC Los Alamitos.
                ARTERIAL STREET SYSTEM
                ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
                The existing City of Cypress arterial system and classifications are based on the County Master
                Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH). The three classifications of arterials in Cypress are "Major",
                "Primary", and "Secondary". Brief descriptions of these classifications are provided below and
                street sections are illustrated in Exhibit CIR-6, Standard Street Sections.
                Major Roadway
                This classification calls for a 104-foot curb-to-curb width within a 120 feet of right-of-way. A six-
                lane, divided roadway can be provided within this street section. Based on County of Orange EMA
                standards, the estimated daily volume capacity for LOS “D” operations is 50,600 vehicles per day
                (vpd), and 56,300 vpd for LOS “E”. Within the City of Cypress, Valley View Street, Lincoln Avenue,
                and Katella Avenue are classified as Major Roadways.
                Primary Roadway
                A Primary Roadway provides an 84-foot curb-to-curb width within 100 feet of right-of-way. This
                street section provides a four-lane, divided street with a LOS “D” capacity of 33,800 vehicles per
Circulation Element                                                                                       CIR-15

Cypress General Plan
                       INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-6
                     “Standard Street Sections”
CIR-16                    Circulation Element

                           Cypress General Plan
                         INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-7
                    “General Plan Arterial System”
Circulation Element                    CIR-17

Cypress General Plan
               day. Within the City of Cypress, Moody Street, Knott Avenue, Ball Road, and Cerritos Avenue are
               classified as Primary Roadways.
               Secondary Roadway
                A Secondary Roadway provides a 64-foot curb-to-curb width within 84 feet of right-of-way. A
               Secondary Roadway is a four-lane, undivided roadway with a daily LOS “D” capacity of 22,500
               vehicles per day. City of Cypress streets that currently have a Secondary Roadway designation
               are Bloomfield Street, Denni Street, Walker Street, Holder Street, Crescent Avenue, Orange
               Avenue and Orangewood Avenue.
               Exhibit CIR-7, General Plan Arterial System, illustrates the City's General Plan roadway
               designations and identifies locations where street segments have not yet been constructed. The
               analyses below evaluates the ability of the City's existing arterial system to accommodate the
               anticipated development allowed under the General Plan Land Use Plan.
               FUTURE TRAFFIC VOLUMES
               The Circulation Plan incorporates data from a number of sources, most importantly the Land Use
               Element, to design a balanced, functional, and efficient transportation system. The following
               section describes the assumptions utilized in the traffic study to determine the City's future
               transportation needs.
               The Land Use Element is directly related to the Circulation Plan. To evaluate the ability of the
               Circulation Element to accommodate Buildout of the Land Use plan, the City was first divided into
               35 land use areas. For traffic analysis purposes, these areas are referred to as Traffic Analysis
               Zones (TAZ). The layout of the TAZ system is shown on Exhibit CIR-8, Transportation Analysis
               Zones.
               Within each TAZ, vacant and underutilized parcels were identified, and the type and quantity of
               potential land uses allowed by buildout of the General Plan Land Use Plan was quantified. Trip
               generation estimates of the amount of traffic that would be generated by this potential development
               were developed, using the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual (6th
               Edition). The trip generation rates utilized in the analyses are summarized on Table 2 in Technical
               Appendix A. A summary of the potential development at buildout by TAZ, and the associated trip
               generation for that development is provided on Table 3 in Technical Appendix A.
               TDM reductions were applied to the business park uses, reflecting the City's commitment to the
               development of alternatives to the single-person vehicle commute trip. In addition, reductions for
               "passby" traffic were applied to the retail trip generations. "Passby" traffic is a documented
               occurrence which accounts for vehicles that are already on the road system and simply make a
               mid-trip stop at a retail use (i.e. on the way home from work, a person stops at the grocery store or
               at a drive-through restaurant).
               Net traffic generation was then distributed from each TAZ to other TAZ’s in the city, and to areas
               outside the City of Cypress. Trip distribution assumptions were based on the locations of trip
               producers (residential areas) and trip attractors (employment, shopping, school, entertainment, and
               other uses), and the interrelationships between the two. Trip distribution assumptions also took
               into account the street system in place to carry project traffic, and accessibility to the area
               freeways.
CIR-18                                                                                       Circulation Element

                            Cypress General Plan
                           INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-8
                    “Transportation Analysis Zones”
Circulation Element                      CIR-19

Cypress General Plan
                    The resulting future daily traffic volumes on the arterial street system, assuming the buildout of the
                    General Plan Land Use Plan are shown on Exhibit CIR-9, Future Daily Traffic Volumes (2020).
                    Buildout peak hour traffic volumes, which serve as a basis for the intersection analysis, are
                    provided in the ICU worksheets contained in Appendix A in Technical Appendix A.
                    FUTURE LEVELS OF SERVICE
                    The City’s General Plan arterial system is shown on Exhibit CIR-7 (presented previously). The
                    buildout roadway and right-of-way widths (shown in Exhibit CIR-6) are assumed to be in place for
                    this future condition. A buildout analysis was conducted to determine if the future roadway system
                    can accommodate the anticipated traffic volumes under buildout of the General Plan Land Use
                    plan. As shown in Table CIR-4, Summary of Roadway Operations for Buildout Conditions (2020),
                    with the exception of one roadway segment, the projected traffic volumes do not exceed the
                    planned roadway capacities, and the City’s roadway system will operate within the designated
                    Level of Service standard for each roadway segment, when built out to its General Plan
                    designations. The segment of Knott Avenue, between Cerritos and Katella Avenues will continue
                    to operate at LOS “F” with the addition of buildout traffic. This segment of Knott Avenue is already
                    built to its primary standards.
                                                         Table CIR-4
                                      SUMMARY OF ROADWAY OPERATIONS FOR
                                              BUILDOUT CONDITIONS (2020)
                                                           Existing      LOS “E”
                 Roadway Segment                                                         ADT      V/C Ratio      LOS
                                                          Conditions     Capacity
CRESCENT AVENUE:
West of Bloomfield Street                                 Secondary       25,000        12,596      0.50          A
Bloomfield Street to Moody Street                         Secondary       25,000        12,740      0.51          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                             Secondary       25,000        14,888      0.60          A
LINCOLN AVENUE:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street                           Major         56,300        24,656      0.44          A
Denni Street to Moody Street                                Major         56,300        29,000      0.52          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                               Major         56,300        24,020      0.43          A
Walker Street to Valley View Street                         Major         50,600        26,260      0.52          A
East of Valley View Street                                  Major         56,300        22,086      0.39          A
ORANGE AVENUE:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street                         Secondary       25,000        10,866      0.43          A
Denni Street to Moody Street                              Secondary       25,000        12,996      0.52          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                             Secondary       25,000        15,484      0.62          B
Walker Street to Valley View Street                       Secondary       25,000        15,548      0.62          B
Valley View Street to Holder Street                       Secondary       25,000        15,570      0.62          B
BALL ROAD:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street                          Primary        37,500        20,090      0.54          A
Denni Street to Moody Street                               Primary        37,500        19,388      0.52          A
Moody Street to Walker Street                              Primary        37,500        22,448      0.60          A
Walker Street to Valley View Street                        Primary        37,500        20,520      0.55          A
Valley View Street to Holder Street                        Primary        37,500        18,900      0.50          A
CERRITOS AVENUE:
Bloomfield Street to Denni Street                          Primary        37,500        24,276      0.65          B
Denni Street to Moody Street                               Primary        37,500        23,038      0.61          B
Moody Street to Walker Street                              Primary        37,500        26,266      0.70          B
Walker Street to Valley View Street                        Primary        37,500        22,214      0.59          A
Valley View Street to Holder Street                        Primary        37,500        16,498      0.44          A
Holder Street to Knott Avenue                              Primary        37,500        16,114      0.43          A
CIR-20                                                                                              Circulation Element

                                                                                   Cypress General Plan
                                                    Table CIR-4
                                       SUMMARY OF ROADWAY OPERATIONS FOR
                                       BUILDOUT CONDITIONS (2020) - CONTINUED
Roadway Segment                                       Existing    LOS “E”    ADT   V/C Ratio   LOS
                                                    Conditions    Capacity
KATELLA AVENUE:
West of Valley View Street                             Major        56,300  48,652   0.86       D
Valley View Street to Holder Street                    Major        56,300  33,892   0.60       A
Holder Street to Knott Avenue                          Major        56,300  32,312   0.57       A
ORANGEWOODAVENUE:
West of Valley View Street                            Primary       37,500   2,200   0.06       A
Valley View Street to Holder Street                   Primary       37,500  10,486   0.28       A
Holder Street to Knott Avenue                         Primary       37,500   9,048   0.24       A
BLOOMFIELD STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                      Secondary      25,000  11,400   0.46       A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                           Secondary      25,000  14,966   0.60       A
Ball Road to Cerritos                                Secondary      25,000  11,200   0.45       A
DENNI STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                      Secondary      25,000   8,014   0.32       A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                           Secondary      25,000   7,142   0.29       A
Ball Road to Cerritos                                Secondary      25,000   8,536   0.34       A
MOODY STREET:
North of Lincoln Avenue                               Primary       37,500  20,756   0.55       A
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                       Primary       37,500  21,206   0.57       A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                            Primary       37,500  16,170   0.43       A
Ball Road to Cerritos Avenue                          Primary       37,500  11,130   0.30       A
WALKER STREET:
North of Lincoln Avenue                              Secondary      25,000  21,930   0.88       D
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                      Secondary      25,000  22,042   0.88       D
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                           Secondary      25,000  21,362   0.85       D
Ball Road to Cerritos Avenue                         Secondary      25,000  18,712   0.75       C
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                    Secondary      25,000  21,180   0.85       D
VALLEY VIEW STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                        Major        56,300  40,798   0.72       C
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                             Major        56,300  42,592   0.76       C
Ball Road to Cerritos Avenue                           Major        56,300  42,858   0.76       C
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                      Major        50,600  47,478   0.84       D
Katella Avenue to Orangewood Avenue                    Major        56,300  56,100   1.00       E
South of Orangewood Avenue                             Major        56,300  51,518   0.92       E
HOLDER STREET:
Lincoln Avenue to Orange Avenue                      Secondary      25,000   8,632   0.35       A
Orange Avenue to Ball Road                           Secondary      25,000   9,230   0.37       A
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                    Secondary      25,000   8,730   0.35       A
Katella Avenue to Orangewood Avenue                  Secondary      25,000   4,314   0.17       A
South of Orangewood Avenue                           Secondary      25,000   6,200   0.25       A
KNOTT AVENUE:
Cerritos Avenue to Katella Avenue                     Primary       37,500  39,594   1.06       F
Katella Avenue to Orangewood Avenue                   Primary       37,500  33,456   0.89       D
South of Orangewood Avenue                            Primary       37,500  34,278   0.91       E
Note: V/C Ratio = Volume-to-Capacity Ratio
Circulation Element                                                                          CIR-21

Cypress General Plan
                                  INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-9
                     “Future Daily Traffic Volumes (2020)”
CIR-22                               Circulation Element

                                                                                                           Cypress General Plan
                    For the buildout intersection analysis, programmed intersection improvements are assumed to be
                    in place. These include the addition of a southbound right-turn lane at the intersection of Ball Road
                    and Valley View Street, and the addition of a fourth eastbound through lane at the intersection of
                    Katella Avenue and Valley View Street. Buildout intersection analyses results are presented on
                    Table CIR-5, Intersection Analysis – Buildout Conditions (2020). The ICU worksheets are provided
                    in Appendix A in Technical Appendix A. It should be remembered that the study intersections are
                    located along Valley View Street, Lincoln Avenue, and Katella Avenue, for which the City has
                    adopted an LOS standard of E. All intersections are projected to operate at LOS “E” or better in
                    both peak hours. Even with buildout traffic added, 10 of the 13 intersections meet LOS “D” or
                    better operations in both peak hours.
                                                            Table CIR-5
                                                  INTERSECTION ANALYSIS
                                               BUILDOUT CONDITIONS (2020)
                                                                                     Buildout Conditions
                                                                   AM Peak Hour                           PM Peak Hour
                    Intersection
                                                              ICU                  LOS                ICU             LOS
 Lincoln / Bloomfield                                         0.49                   A               0.52               A
 Lincoln / Moody                                              0.58                   A               0.80               C
 Lincoln / Walker                                             0.69                   B               0.99             E (1)
 Lincoln / Valley View                                        0.69                   B               0.85               D
 Valley View / Orange                                         0.78                   C               0.89               D
 Valley View / Ball                                           0.92                 E (1)             0.91              E (1)
 Valley View / Cerritos                                       0.70                   B               0.79               C
 Valley View / Katella                                        0.77                   C               0.88               D
 Valley View / Orangewood                                     0.85                   D               0.68               B
 Katella / Lexington                                          0.58                   A               0.59               A
 Katella / Walker                                             0.82                   D               0.84               D
 Katella / Holder                                             0.45                   A               0.67               B
 Katella / Knott                                              0.78                   C               0.95              E (2)
 (1) Intersection worsens from LOS “D” under Existing Conditions to LOS “E” with Buildout Traffic.
 (2) Intersection remains at LOS “E”.
                    CMP, GMP, AND AQMP
                    The City of Cypress is eligible for Proposition 111 (CMP) and Measure M (GMP) funding, as long
                    as it demonstrates compliance with program requirements. Both programs are directly linked to
                    transportation issues, with requirements that new developments mitigate their traffic impacts on the
                    surrounding street system.
                    Although the specific requirements of the CMP and GMP differ, both include issues such as Level
                    of Service (LOS) standards, coordination with other jurisdictions, Transportation Demand
                    Management (TDM) ordinances and application, monitoring of conditions, and mitigation of
                    impacts. The AQMP supplements these two programs, although its focus is on achieving and
                    maintaining air quality standards.
Circulation Element                                                                                                  CIR-23

Cypress General Plan
               Overall, these programs acknowledge that land use, transportation, and air quality issues are all
               interrelated. The requirements under each of these programs serve to ensure a safe and efficient
               transportation system, which is a primary goal of the Circulation Element of a General Plan.
               HOLDER AND DENNI STREETS
               With a few exceptions, the street system within the City of Cypress is largely built out. Short
               sections of Holder Street and Denni Street are the two uncompleted connections of the arterial
               system identified in the Circulation Element. The incomplete segment of Denni Street (Lexington
               Drive) is a ¼-mile segment between the current terminus of Lexington Drive and Katella Avenue.
               Holder Street is incomplete over the Stanton Storm Channel, between Katella Avenue and
               Orangewood Avenue. Both links would provide additional north-south travel parallel to Valley View
               Street and Knott Avenue in the southern portion of the City.
               The City of Cypress conforms to a typical grid street system, with generally ½-mile spacing
               between arterials. However, the city’s north-south arterials are interrupted by the Forest Lawn
               Cemetery, in the northwest corner of the City; and the Los Alamitos Race Track and the Joint
               Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos at the south end of the City. Currently, there are no
               north-south streets connecting Katella Avenue and Cerritos Avenue between Walker Street and
               Bloomfield Street (a distance of about 1-1/2 miles). The Denni Street connection, at the west edge
               of the Los Alamitos Race Track would improve north-south circulation in this part of the City.
               The Holder Street connection would help to mitigate circulation constraints caused by the JFTC
               Los Alamitos. The JFTC precludes north-south connections between Katella Avenue and the SR-
               22/I-405 Freeways to the west of Valley View Street, and the missing Holder Street bridge
               precludes same to the east of Valley View Street. As a result, access to the freeway, and north-
               south movement through the southern area of the City is limited to Valley View Street and Knott
               Avenue. Valley View Street is currently carrying over 51,000 vehicles per day (vpd) south of
               Orangewood. The completion of Holder Street over the Stanton Storm Channel would complete an
               arterial link, which would provide an alternative parallel route to Valley View Street and Knott
               Avenue, both of which currently meet relatively high traffic demands.
               LINCOLN AVENUE
               In recent years, the Lincoln Avenue corridor, which runs through the northern part of the city, has
               undergone a redevelopment and streetscape project to revitalize the area. The Lincoln Avenue
               Redevelopment Project Area extends from Bloomfield Street to Valley View Street. Streetscape
               features include landscaped medians, on-street parking, enhanced pedestrian features, and street
               chokers (or bulb-outs) with planters which effectively narrow the travel width of the street to four
               through lanes. These features are intended to reduce through traffic, slow visitor traffic, and
               enhance pedestrian movement through the revitalized shopping district. Lincoln Street remains
               classified as a six-lane major roadway, consistent with the County of Orange Master Plan of
               Arterial Highways (MPAH). City policy would allow removal of the bulb-outs to return the street to
               six-lane operation, should future traffic volumes warrant.
               BUS SYSTEM
               Exhibit CIR-3 (previously referenced) shows that the business park and retail uses along Katella
               Avenue and Valley View Street have existing bus services. As these areas develop in the future
               and efforts are increased to reduce dependence on the single occupancy vehicle, there may be an
               increased need for expanded bus service. As urban rail develops in the West Orange County
CIR-24                                                                                        Circulation Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                area, expanded bus service can also provide feeder service between rail stations, park-and-ride
                lots, and the Cypress Business Park area.
                BIKEWAY SYSTEM
                Generally, the existing bikeway system serves most areas of the City, including the Cypress
                Business Park area. Completion of the bikeway system, to include all schools, community civic
                centers, service areas, parks, employment centers and regional bike paths should be strived for.
                JOINT FORCES TRAINING CENTER (JFTC) LOS ALAMITOS
                In the strictest sense, Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos is not a major regional
                transportation facility because it does not directly service the City's civilian population, and is
                limited exclusively to military aircraft operations. The facility does serve as a major emergency
                evacuation point for the region, and as such should be regarded as a significant element in the
                City's overall transportation and circulation system.
DESCRIPTION OF THE CIRCULATION PLAN
                The "Circulation Issues" section in this Element identifies the long-term transportation and
                circulation concerns in Cypress. This section describes the strategies that the City will pursue to
                address these issues and to develop a balanced transportation system that meets the future
                mobility needs of Cypress residents, as well as the business sector's demand to move goods most
                efficiently and effectively.
                MASTER PLAN OF STREETS
                The City's existing General Plan Arterial System is presented in Exhibit CIR-7.
                Review of projected daily traffic volumes and evaluation of intersection capacities under General
                Plan buildout indicate the City's current Master Plan of Streets is adequate to accommodate future
                growth. While one roadway segment on Knott Avenue will exceed the LOS “E” daily traffic volume
                capacity, the adjacent intersection of Katella Avenue and Knott Avenue will operate at LOS “E” or
                better with buildout traffic volumes.
                The intersection analysis indicates that minimum LOS “E” or better operations can be provided at
                all study intersections. Many of the intersections are projected to operate at LOS “C” or better
                under buildout conditions.
                As the City's circulation system is anticipated to be operating at capacity conditions at certain key
                locations, it will be imperative to closely evaluate and monitor development as it occurs to
                determine its impacts on the surrounding street system. The specific types and sizes of future
                projects will influence the related traffic impacts. This indicates the need to balance land use
                decisions with the potential traffic impacts.
                PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION PLAN
                The proposed urban rail system within Orange County could have significant beneficial effect on
                traffic conditions in Cypress, given the substantial employment base along Katella Avenue and
                Valley View Street. Benefits could be expanded by the West Orange County Cities Association,
                which is investigating the feasibility of an urban rail system serving western Orange County. The
Circulation Element                                                                                       CIR-25

Cypress General Plan
               actual location of the rail lines and accompanying stations will also greatly influence future bus
               routes.
               Given the TDM goals adopted by the City, particularly in the Business Park area of the City, public
               transportation is anticipated to play a vital role. With regard to bus service, city planners and
               developers will need to take an active role in incorporating bus stops into new development, and
               expanding bus service which will meet future travel demands. Development of the rail systems will
               also need to be monitored to determine how they can be best utilized to meet the TDM goals.
               TRUCK ROUTE PLAN
               The existing Truck Route Plan, shown on Exhibit CIR-5, serves the needs of the City and no
               beneficial modifications are apparent at this time.
               BIKEWAYS AND SIDEWALK FACILTIES PLAN
               While the existing bikeway system serves most areas of the City, a goal should be to provide the
               highest quality of bikeways possible along these routes, given the individual needs. For example,
               under existing conditions, there are individual locations where bicycle lanes and on-street parking
               occur at the same location, with each allowed at different times of the day. While this is allowable
               by Caltrans standards, wherever possible, as the Bikeway System is built out, the bikeway should
               be upgraded to either an exclusive bicycle lane, or an off-road bikeway. Future extensions to the
               Bike Path Systems are illustrated on Exhibit CIR-10, Bike Path Plan. The proposed systems
               provide additional access to recreation and open space resources, as well as to commercial and
               employment centers in the City.
               It also should be noted that some bicycle paths are currently designated on sidewalks, which is
               acceptable per the California Vehicle Code, given that a City ordinance has been passed to allow
               this operation. Sufficient sidewalk width should be provided to serve both bicycles and pedestrians.
               The County of Orange assumes that a 10-foot sidewalk indicates a bicycle route on the sidewalk.
               Sidewalks should be provided along all arterials to promote walking as an alternative to vehicle
               transportation. As mentioned above, adequate sidewalk widths will be required, if it is also planned
               to facilitate bicycles. If new development occurs where sidewalks are not provided, they should be
               included as a condition of the development, unless there are special circumstances.
GOALS AND POLICIES
               Circulation Element goals and policies define the City's vision for a balanced, efficient circulation
               system which incorporates many modes of travel and which allows for the safe movement of
               people and goods in and around Cypress. These goals recognize the constraints posed by the
               existing built environment, but also capitalize upon the opportunities created by established
               transportation routes. Through these goal statements, the City also lends it support to regional,
               long-range efforts to manage congestion and reduce pollutant emissions within the South Coast Air
               Basin.
CIR-26                                                                                        Circulation Element
                      Cypress General Plan
                    INSERT EXHIBIT CIR-10
                           “Bike Path Plan”
Circulation Element             CIR-27

Cypress General Plan
               BALANCED, FUNCTIONAL, AND EFFICIENT STREET
               SYSTEM
               CIR-1:      Maintain a safe, efficient, economical, and aesthetically pleasing transportation
                           system providing for the movement of people, goods, and services to serve the
                           existing and future needs of the City of Cypress.
                           CIR-1.1:      Respond to transportation problem areas with efforts to implement both
                                         interim and long-term solutions.
                           CIR-1.2:      Participate in transportation planning efforts which involve other
                                         governmental agencies, mandated programs, and regulations in order
                                         to minimize environmental impacts related to transportation and to
                                         enhance transportation systems.
                           CIR-1.3:      Encourage development which contributes to a balanced land use,
                                         which in turn serves to reduce overall trip lengths (i.e. jobs/housing
                                         balance, locate retail in closer proximity to resident/patrons).
                           CIR-1.4:      Require new development to conform to the standards and criteria of
                                         the City of Cypress and other mandated programs. This includes
                                         mitigation of traffic impacts to the surrounding street system.
                           CIR-1.5:      The City of Cypress will continue involvement in plans and programs
                                         related to the Circulation Element. This involvement is anticipated to
                                         result in traffic studies to be undertaken by City staff, to identify specific
                                         circulation programs and improvements to be implemented, in order to
                                         satisfy the various related programs.
                           CIR-1.6:      Encourage the development of aesthetic streetscapes to promote a
                                         positive City image and provide visual relief.
                           CIR-1.7:      Maintain consistency between the City Circulation Element and the
                                         Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH).
               Related Goals and Policies: Refer to Goal GM-1 and GM-2 and their associated policies in the
               Growth Management Element. Goal GM-1 addresses reducing traffic congestion, while Goal GM-2
               addresses adequate transportation facilities.
               ALTERNATIVE MODES OF TRANSPORTATION
               CIR-2:      To facilitate alternative modes of transportation, including public transportation,
                           bicycles, ridesharing, and pedestrians, to support the land use plans and related
                           transportation needs.
                           CIR-2.1:      Encourage development and improvements which incorporate
                                         innovative methods of accommodating transportation demands.
                           CIR-2.2:      Give high priority to the establishment of a high-quality public transit
                                         system that minimizes dependency on the automobile.
CIR-28                                                                                         Circulation Element
                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
                              CIR-2.3:     Ensure that effective Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
                                           measures and programs are being implemented.
                              CIR-2.4:     Encourage development and site design which facilitate implementation
                                           of high quality, desirable bicycle routes which meet or exceed
                                           established standards.
                              CIR-2.5:     Implement adequate sidewalks to meet the required uses and needs,
                                           which serves to encourage alternative modes of transportation. Bicycle
                                           routes which utilize sidewalks require establishment of a City ordinance,
                                           per the Vehicle Code.
                              CIR-2.6:     Respond to increases in demand for additional bus service through
                                           interaction with OCTA and other available resources.
                              CIR-2.7:     Implement plan to install handicap access ramps to improve disabled
                                           access to transportation facilities.
                              CIR-2.8:     Enhance the sidewalk environment to encourage pedestrian activities
                                           through streetscape and transit enhancement programs.
                              CIR-2.9:     Enhance transit environment by improving passenger loading sites by
                                           providing bus benches, safety lighting and other projects to enhance
                                           bus stops.
                Related Goals and Policies: Refer to Policy LU-13.5 and Goal LU-19 and its associated policies
                in the Land Use Element. Policy LU-13.5 calls for the City of Cypress to support rail feasibility,
                while Goal LU-19 and Policies LU-19.1 through LU-19.3 address the need to diversify
                transportation choices. Also refer to Goal AQ-1 and Policies AQ-1.3 through AQ-1.6, which call for
                ways to reduce vehicle trips through land use planning.
Circulation Element                                                                                      CIR-29
                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
IV. CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE/
      RECREATION ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE CONSERVATION/
OPEN SPACE/RECREATION ELEMENT
               The California Government Code mandates that all general plans include a Conservation and
               Open Space Element. For the City of Cypress General Plan, these two elements have been
               combined, along with the optional Recreation Element, primarily due to the overlapping nature of
               issues addressed in these elements, as they relate to Cypress.
               PURPOSE
               This Element meets State requirements concerning the conservation and open space elements as
               defined in Sections 65302(d) and 65302(e) of the Government Code. According to these
               requirements, the conservation element must contain goals and policies that further the protection
               and maintenance of the State's natural resources; such as water, soils, wildlife, minerals, and other
               natural resources; and prevents their wasteful exploitation, degradation, and destruction.
               The Open Space Element must contain goals and policies concerned with managing all open
               space areas, including undeveloped lands and outdoor recreation areas. Specifically, the Open
               Space Element includes open space that is left undeveloped for public health and safety reasons,
               and open space that is used for the preservation of natural resources, for the managed production
               of resources, and for outdoor recreation.
               The Recreation Element identifies planned park and recreation facilities designed to support the
               recreational needs of Cypress' population.
               RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
               All elements of a general plan must be internally consistent. This assumes a relationship between
               each element. The Conservation/Open Space/Recreation (COSR) Element contains goals and
               policies which support goals and policies within each of the other elements.
               The COSR Element relates to other elements in a variety of ways. The Land Use Element directly
               relates to the COSR Element by designating areas of the City where open space/recreational
               opportunities exist and by designating resources that should be preserved.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation         Element                                                     COSR-1
Cypress General Plan
               The COSR Element's relationship to the Housing Element is conditioned by the need to serve a
               growing population's recreational needs. Also, housing requirements for land must be balanced by
               the need to conserve natural resources.
               Utilizing basic design standards, the Circulation Element designs plans for an efficient and well
               balanced circulation system. The COSR Element may establish some of the roadway landscaping
               standards, thereby supplementing the Circulation Element's guidelines.
               The Safety Element relates to the COSR Element by designating areas within the City that are
               unsafe for development such as fault line areas and floodplains. Although these areas are unsafe
               for intensive development, such lands may be suitable for recreation and open space purposes.
               The open space resources preserved for the public’s health and safety are discussed in the COSR
               Element.
               Similar to the Safety Element, the Noise Element relates to the COSR Element by discussing a
               health and safety issue area. Techniques for reducing noise often involve open space or some
               buffer zone between noise sources and noise-sensitive land uses.
               The Growth Management Element accommodates growth at a slower rate that is more sensitive to
               the natural environment. Tiered growth patterns give a community the opportunity to plan open
               space networks and preserve natural resources.
               The Air Quality Element and COSR Element are closely related because both are concerned with
               preserving or conserving natural resources. The Air Quality Element focuses on protecting the air
               from further contamination by reducing vehicle trips and source point emissions. The City of
               Cypress has elected to create a separate Air Quality Element to adequately address air quality
               issues confronting the community.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
               CONSERVATION RESOURCES
               The following section inventories conservation resources in Cypress including water resources,
               biological resources, energy resources, solid waste, land resources, and cultural resources. This
               inventory will provide the basis to identify issues to be addressed in this Element.
               WATER RESOURCES
               Water resources are diminishing throughout Southern California with increased development. As
               the native water supply decreases, the region's dependence on imported water grows. This section
               describes the quantity and quality of surface and ground water resources within Cypress.
               Surface Water. No naturally occurring permanent surface water features exist within Cypress.
               The Los Alamitos Race Track and Cypress Golf Course in southwestern Cypress and Willow Park
               in the northwest portion of the City do, however, contain a number of man-made lakes. In addition,
               six storm drain channels intermittently carry water: Moody Creek Coyote Creek 2A, Carbon Creek,
               Stanton Creek and Bolsa Chica Creek. Moody and Coyote Creek Channels provide drainage
               facilities for northern Cypress. The central portion of the community drains into 2A and Carbon
               Creek Channels. Drainage of the southern portion of Cypress is accommodated by the Stanton
               Creek and Bolsa Chica Channels.
COSR-2                                                              Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                                                               Cypress General Plan
               Ground Water. The Southern California Water Company (SCWC) is responsible for water
               distribution in Cypress. Approximately 75 percent of Cypress' water use is obtained from the
               ground water basin managed by the Orange County Water District (OCWD). The remaining 25
               percent of water is imported through the Municipal Water District of Orange County. Created by
               the State legislature in 1933, OCWD is responsible for maintaining the quantity and quality of
               ground water underlying Cypress and much of northern Orange County. The OCWD prevents local
               water companies from overdrafting the basin's water supply. Each jurisdiction is allowed to extract
               only 75 percent of their water needs from ground water.
               Conservation of Water Resources. Southern California suffered a severe drought during the
               1980s and early 1990s and has had to import water to meet the growing demands of the region.
               The Metropolitan Water District imports water from the Colorado River via the Colorado River
               Aqueduct and from northern California via the State Water Project to obtain water supplies from
               sources outside of southern California.
               In recognition of California's limited water supply, the Southern California Water Company (SCWC)
               has created voluntary measures to promote water conservation in Cypress. Current programs
               include the distribution of low flush toilets and offering feedback to residential customers regarding
               their water use patterns.
               BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
               Cypress is almost completely urbanized and landscaped with mostly non-native species. No known
               rare or endangered plant or animal species have been identified within the City. The community's
               most significant plant resources are its ornamentals. The urban landscaping within Cypress
               provides habitat for smaller rodents and birds. However, the frequent disruptions caused by urban
               activities and the frequent cultivation of such plant life make these plant communities less than an
               ideal habitat for wild animals.
               Cypress Nature Park. The Cypress Nature Park located between Denni Avenue and Via Largo
               contains both native and non-native plants and is the city’s most valuable habitat for plants and
               animals. Examples of native plants include the Toyon and Willow trees. Non-native examples are
               the Orange and Eucalyptus trees.
               Landmark Trees. The City has identified a number of landmark trees within its jurisdiction. Many
               large and majestic trees were at one time contained on the large farms and dairies in Cypress. As
               development occurred in the community, many of these trees were lost.
               Cypress has created an ordinance controlling the disposition of “Landmark Trees". The Ordinance
               prohibits any individual from cutting, destroying, or removing any landmark tree without a permit
               from the City Council. A permit is also required to prune, trim, or otherwise modify a landmark tree.
               In addition, no structures shall be constructed within 30 feet of any landmark tree unless the City
               Council approves a permit.
               ENERGY RESOURCES
               Limited supplies and environmental concerns regarding conventional energy resources, such as
               oil, electricity, and natural gas, require their conservation. Domestic oil supplies continue to dwindle
               and has required the U.S. to become increasingly dependent on foreign oil imports. Though the
               current supply of electricity and natural gas is sufficient, there are disadvantages. First, expansion
               of the electrical supply may require additional nuclear facilities, thereby creating environmental
               pollution costs. Second, natural gas is a finite resource.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                    COSR-3

Cypress General Plan
                      Given the area's warm climate, the most important alternative and renewable energy resource in
                      Cypress is solar energy. This energy source has considerable potential and can be developed to
                      substitute for oil, gas, and other energy supplies. Because of solar energy's ability to substitute for
                      fossil fuels, it can be an important tool in the battle against air pollution.
                      Solar radiation in the form of sunlight can be utilized for energy production in two ways. The first
                      method, active solar systems, involves the use of mechanical devices to convert solar energy to
                      heat or electricity. The second, passive solar systems, utilizes natural heating and cooling from the
                      sun through proper orientation and building design. The amount and quality of solar radiation
                      received by Cypress is adequate for the use of solar technologies.
                      SOLID WASTE
                      Landfill sites throughout the State are nearing capacity. In Southern California, this is especially a
                      problem because new landfill sites are difficult to locate due to limited land resources. In 1989, the
                      State legislature passed AB 939, the California Integrated Waste Management Act. AB 939
                      requires all cities and counties within the State to prepare integrated waste management plans to
                      attain solid waste reduction goals of 25 percent reduction by 1995 and 50 percent reduction by
                      2000. These plans were to include components for source reduction, recycling, and composting.
                      In July 1992, Cypress prepared and adopted a source reduction and recycling element (SRRE).
                      The City has implemented the SRRE through the programs identified below.
                      Residential Curbside Recycling Program . In 1991, the City of Cypress implemented a curbside
                      recycling program. Residents utilize green containers for recyclable1 items and tan containers for
                      non-recyclable2 items. Briggeman Disposal, the City’s franchise trash hauler, picks up recycling
                      containers bi-weekly in accordance with a recycling schedule.
                      Yearly Recycling Calendar. The City prepares an annual calendar identifying recycling weeks,
                      and when waste removal would occur one day behind schedule as a result of holidays.
                      Commercial On-Site Recyclable Pick-Up. Briggeman Disposal offers recyclable pickup for
                      commercial businesses in the City.
                      Household Hazardous Wastes. The City informs residents and businesses what types of
                      materials constitute household hazardous wastes, as well as where and how to dispose of these
                      types of materials.
                      Best Management Practices for Construction Activities. The City’s Department of Public
                      Works has developed a one-page information sheet outlining the minimum standards to be used.
                      The standards listed on the information sheet are based upon the Best Management Practices
                      detailed in the California Storm Water Best Management Practices Handbook dated March 1993.
            1 Recyclable materials include aerosol cans, aluminum cans, aluminum foil, beverage cans, bottle caps, brochures,
cardboard boxes, cereal boxes, computer paper, coupons, drink boxes, egg cartons, food cans, glass food containers, juice
containers, junk mail, laundry bottles, magazines, metal coat hangers, milk cartons, newspapers, paper, paper tubes, phone
books, pizza boxes, all recyclable plastics (#1-6), plastic bags, plastic bottles, plastic containers, plastic milk jugs, styrofoam cups
and plates, tin cans, tissue boxes, unused envelopes, wrapping paper and yogurt containers.
            2 Non-recyclable materials include animal waste, bathroom waste, carbon paper, carpet, car parts, cat litter, ceramic
or glass plates/cups, cigarette butts, dirt/cement/rocks, disposable razors, disposable diapers, drinking glasses, electronic
equipment, flooring, food waste, freezer/refrigerator food boxes, mirrors, old clothes/shoes, plastic toys, sponges, soiled paper
plates, tires, toothpaste tubes/pumps, waxed paper, window glass, and yard waste/trimmings.
COSR-4                                                                         Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                                                                    Cypress General Plan
                    Guidelines for Cleaning Automotive Service Facilities. The City’s Department of Public Works
                    has developed a one-page information sheet outlining guidelines to be used for cleaning
                    automotive service facilities.
                    Public Education Program. The City informs its residents and businesses through a variety of
                    mediums about the ongoing recycling programs and efforts, including the City Newsletter/Quarterly
                    Recreation Brochure, City website, and local newspaper.
                    The California Integrated Waste Management Board is still focused on assisting local officials
                    around the State in meeting the 50 percent diversion requirement in 2000. As of August 2000,
                    neither the California Integrated Waste Management Board nor the State Legislature have
                    introduced new legislation to set diversion requirements beyond 2000.
                    Cypress generated 56,222 tons of solid waste in 1990, of which 4,959 tons were diverted through
                    individual business and household efforts. According to the Orange County Integrated Waste
                    Management Department, Cypress diverted 62 percent of its waste stream in 1995, 66 percent in
                    1996 and 84 percent in 1997.3 The City of Cypress Public Works Department reports that in 2000
                    63 percent of the trash generated in the City was diverted from landfills. The difference in
                    percentage numbers generated by the City and Orange County are most likely attributed to
                    composting.
                    LAND RESOURCES
                    Cypress is an urban community with little vacant land left for development. The largest remaining
                    acreages of undeveloped land are primarily in the southern portion of the City, which are currently
                    either vacant or utilized for agricultural production. All of these vacant lands are planned for
                    business park development. The following section describes the City's land resources including the
                    area's soils, agricultural production, and mineral resources.
                    Soils. The following discussion is based on information contained in the Soil Survey of Orange
                    County and Western Part of Riverside County conducted by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
                    The U.S. Soil Conservation Service identifies a number of soils in Cypress. These soils include the
                    San Emigdio Series, Metz Series, Hueneme Series and Bolsa Series, all of which are suitable for
                    urban development.
                         San Emigdio Series: These soils are found throughout the northern and central portions of
                         Cypress. They are nearly level and consist of well drained soils on floodplains and alluvial
                         fans.
                         Metz Series: These soils are also nearly level. They include somewhat excessively drained
                         sands on alluvial fans and flood plains. They are predominantly located in northeastern
                         Cypress.
                         Hueneme Series: This series consists of poorly drained soils on alluvial fans and floodplains,
                         which are located in northern Cypress.
           3 Source: Orange County Integrated Waste Management Division (IWMD). Information from IWMD website, page
titled City Reduction of Landfill Waste. The percentage of trash that has been diverted from landfill disposal includes waste
prevention, recycling and composting.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                          COSR-5

Cypress General Plan
                    Bolsa Series: The Bolsa Series consists of somewhat poorly drained soils on alluvial fans.
                    These soils are situated in southern Cypress near the Los Alamitos Race Track and Cypress
                    Golf Course.
               Agriculture Production Resources. Cypress was originally an agriculture and dairy community,
               featuring row crops and citrus trees. However, like much of Orange County, Cypress developed
               rapidly during the 1960s and 1970s, and agricultural acreages were converted to urban uses. A
               few row crops (predominantly strawberries) remain in southern Cypress. This land is, however,
               planned and zoned for business park development.
               Mineral Resources. The State Division of Mines and Geology identifies mineral resource areas
               throughout the State. According to the Geologic Map of Orange County showing Mines and Mineral
               Deposits, Cypress does not contain any mineral resources as defined.
               CULTURAL RESOURCES
               Historic Resources
               Historic Overview. The following historical overview of Cypress is summarized from a historical
               account presented in A Thumbnail History of Cypress, California 1565-1991.
               The entire region grew quickly in the 1880's, leading to the creation of Orange County. In 1905,
               Waterville (now recognized as Cypress) responded to its growing population by creating an eight
               block subdivision. This area was bounded by Lincoln on the south, Crescent on the north, Walker
               on the east, and Watson on the west. During this time of economic and population growth, the
               Pacific Electric Railway passed through the community, providing a link to surrounding
               communities.
               Accompanying the population boom, the community of Waterville supported a rural, yet diversified
               economy. The dairy industry became established in the community and the town was soon referred
               to as the "Dairy Capital of Southern California." Meanwhile, with innovations in irrigation, the citrus
               industry also flourished, and a mill producing sorghum (grass cultivated as a grain) located within
               the community.
               World War II brought a new kind of growth to the areas surrounding the area that became Cypress.
               Military installations in Los Alamitos, Seal Beach, El Toro, and Irvine created many jobs, which
               were desperately needed after the Depression. Many individuals traveled to these locations to be
               involved with the military effort. Meanwhile, workers to tend the fields were in short supply. Thus,
               German prisoners of war and people from Mexico were brought in to cultivate the fields.
               After World War II, rural industries once again flourished in the area. Dairy owners looking for land
               not threatened by the growing urbanization pressures of Los Angeles moved to the area that
               became Cypress. The dairy owners decided to incorporate to protect their lifestyle from
               encroaching development. Later, they sold their property as the area gradually changed from an
               agrarian area to a bedroom community serving Los Angeles.
               Waterville, named after its artesian wells, became known as Dairy City in 1956. On August 6,
               1957, based on a citizen vote, Dairy City changed its name to Cypress. The name was chosen
               because of the long established Cypress School District. Cypress supplanted Waterville as the
               preferred site name.
COSR-6                                                            Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element
                                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
                     Historic Resources. A record search was conducted by the Regional Information Center at UCLA
                     on November 1, 1991. The record search was negative for any recorded prehistoric or historic
                     sites. The search also included a review of maps dating from 1896, 1942, and 1943. The maps
                     showed extensive development commencing in the period between 1896 and 1942.
                     There are no National Register listed or eligible properties or State Landmarks in the City. The only
                     survey which has been conducted was done by Archaeological Associates (Van Horn 1978) for a
                     parking lot at Cypress College. Van Horn's survey was negative.
                     Archaeological and Paleontological Resources
                     Cultural History. When dealing with a cultural history for Southern California, it is important to
                     view the prehistoric and ethnographic periods for the range of human occupation. Three main
                     sequences for prehistoric through European contact and occupation have been delineated by
                     William Wallace (1971; 1978), and Claude Warren (1961), and are shown in Table COSR-1,
                     Regional Native American Chronology. Refer to the General Plan Environmental Impact Report for
                     a more detailed discussion of the prehistoric and ethnographic time periods.
                                                            Table COSR-1
                                         REGIONAL NATIVE AMERICAN CHRONOLOGY
              Wallace (1978)                                Wallace (1971)                                Warren (1961)
                                               Historic – A.D. 1800 –
                                               Horizon IV
                                               Late Prehistoric                               Shoshonean Tradition
                                               A.D. 1000 to A.D. 1800                         A.D. 500 to European Contact
                                               Horizon III
                                               Intermediate                                   Campbell Tradition
                                               1000 B.C. to A.D. 1000                         1000 B.C. to A.D. 1
 Period III                                    Horizon II
 Diversified Subsistence                       Millingstone                                   Encinitas Tradition
 3000 to 2000 B.C.                             5500 to 1000 B.C.                              5500 B.C. to A.D. 1
 Period II                                     Horizon I
 Food Collecting                               Early Man                                      San Diegito Tradition
 6000 to 3000 B.C.                             (?) to 5500 B.C.                               (?) to 5500 B.C.
 Period I
 Hunting
 9000 to 600 B.C.
 Sources: William Wallace, The California Indians: A Sourcebook, 1971.
            William Wallace, California, 1978.
            Claude Warren, Eastern New Mexico University Contributions to Anthropology, 1961.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                                 COSR-7

Cypress General Plan
                    Local Ethnohistory. Bean and Smith (1978:540 citing Kroeber 1925) believe the level of
                    Gabrielino culture that was encountered by the Spanish in the eighteenth century was a
                    continuation of a culture formation originating as far back as 1200 A D. Prior to Spanish contact,
                    the Gabrielino population was in excess of 5,000. Various Spanish explorers had been in the
                    region earlier, but in 1769, the Spanish under Gaspar de Portola began their colonization of the
                    region. The people were given the name “Gabrielino” by the Franciscan Priests for their association
                    with the Mission San Gabriel Arcangel, which was constructed by 1771. As a result of their
                    induction into the mission, the Gabrielino population was decimated through disease and ceased to
                    exist as a cultural entity.
                    The bulk of knowledge that is obtainable concerning Gabrielino culture is from the remains of their
                    material culture. Unfortunately, much of it was perishable and therefore not available for research
                    purposes. We do know they had abundant marine resources, terrestrial animals, and a heavy
                    reliance on acorns. They also engaged in trade networks that included the exchange of resources
                    from the Channel Islands, the mainland, and inland to Arizona. Over 89 percent of the Gabrielino's
                    physical environment was within the extremely rich Sonoran life zone (Bean and Smith 1978).
                    During construction of the Cypress Library in 1965, a skeleton was found. The skeleton was
                    identified by Dr. Polk from Compton College. In a clipping from the Long Beach Press Telegram,
                    Dr. Polk stated that the skeleton was Chumash. He claimed that this burial was proof that the
                    Chumash came down the coast in canoes on hunting ventures (Johnson 1991).
                    OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION RESOURCES
                    Cypress' open space and recreation resources include parks, schools, community facilities, and
                    privately owned recreation facilities. Combined, these resources offer the community’s residents a
                    number of recreational opportunities.
                    RECREATION FACILITIES
                    The Cypress Recreation and Park District operates 19 park sites encompassing approximately 82
                    acres (refer to Exhibit COSR-1, Existing Recreation Facilities.) The City classifies parks as
                    community, neighborhood, or mini facilities based on size. Each park classification has a general
                    area of service and typical park facilities, as described in Table COSR-2.
                                                             Table COSR-2
                                                 CYPRESS PARK STANDARDS
    Park Type           Typical Minimum Size               Service Area                       Typical Facilities
 Community             10 acres                        1 to 1½ miles      Athletic fields, picnic areas, community centers
 Neighborhood          3 to 5 acres                    ½ mile             Tot lots, public facilities, multi-use court
 Mini                  Less than 1 acre                ¼ mile             Tot lot, open space
 Source: City of Cypress Recreation and Park District.
COSR-8                                                                    Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                          Cypress General Plan
                                           INSERT 11” x 17” EXHIBIT COSR – 1
                                                  “Existing Recreation Facilities”
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                             COSR-9

Cypress General Plan
               This page left intentionally blank.
COSR-10                                            Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element
                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
               Community Parks. A community park serves neighborhoods within one to one and one-half miles
               of the site and generally encompasses over ten acres. Both active and passive uses are generally
               provided at these parks, offering recreation opportunities for large groups of people. Field sports,
               individual and group picnicking, play areas, and community centers are commonly found at these
               large parks.
               Cypress contains two community park facilities, Arnold/Cypress Park and Oak Knoll Park,
               encompassing approximately 14.5 and 22 acres, respectively. Both parks include a variety of
               facilities, listed in Table COSR-3. Arnold/Cypress Park offers active recreation opportunities
               through ball fields, volleyball courts, playground facilities, lighted roller hockey rink and lighted
               softball field. This park also includes a multi-purpose room available for public use, which can
               accommodate 75+ individuals. Additionally, Oak Knoll Park offers a number of active recreation
               opportunities and includes an exercise course, lighted sports fields, lighted sand volleyball court
               and courts. The Cypress Community Center is also located at Oak Knoll Park.
               Neighborhood Parks. Neighborhood parks are typically smaller in size than community parks,
               generally covering three to five acres in area. This type of park serves the immediate neighborhood
               within one-half mile walking distance, or a population ranging between 2,500 and 5,000. Many
               neighborhood parks are located adjacent to elementary schools to benefit from the additional open
               space acreage available at school sites. These parks normally include tot lots, picnic facilities, and
               a multi-use court.
               Cypress has 14 neighborhood parks, contributing approximately 45 acres to the City’s recreation/
               open space land. Table COSR-3 outlines the facilities available at the City's neighborhood parks.
               The Cypress Nature Park is a unique neighborhood park, which is a passive nature facility that also
               serves as a flood control retention basin. Some of the City’s most significant native and non-native
               plants and animals are located in the Nature Park.
               Mini-Parks. Mini-parks encompass less than one acre of land and are usually located near
               schools or residential developments. In Cypress the land that is designated for mini-parks is
               owned by the Cypress Elementary School District, while the Cypress Recreation and Parks District
               owns and maintains the mini-park equipment. These sites serve as playgrounds for children or as a
               place for workers to relax in an urbanized environment. Cypress has three mini-park sites.
               Schools. The City also has access to recreational facilities at 12 school sites, contributing an
               additional 119 acres to the City's open space and recreation resources (refer to Table COSR-4).
               School sites are available for public recreational use after school hours and on weekends. During
               school hours, only students can occupy the school premises.
               One elementary school in Cypress, MacKay, is currently closed. The School District currently
               leases the MacKay School site property to the Head Start Program, ABC Development and Alton
               School (Special Education). Despite the “closed” status of this elementary school site, City
               residents are able to utilize the open space land.
               Oxford Academy is a six-year college preparatory secondary school (grades 7-12) open to
               students that live within the boundaries of the Anaheim Union High School District. During the
               school hours, the school facility and adjoining open space are available only to the Academy.
               However, the Cypress Recreation and Park District schedules youth sports leagues at Oxford
               Academy during off-school hours.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                COSR-11

Cypress General Plan
                                                  Table COSR-3
                                        EXISTING RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                                                                                                                                                                             Facilities
                                                          Community Room(s)                                     On-Site Parking Lot   Volleyball court   Picnic Facilities             Multi-Use Court   Exercise Course   Roller Hockey Facility                                                Basketball Court
                                                 Acres
                                                                              Baseball Field   Softball Field                                                                                                                                       Horseshoe Pit   Restroom   Nature Facility
                                                                                                                                                                             Tot Lot
  Community       Arnold/Cypress Park             14.55                                                                                                                                                                                                      
    Parks
                  Oak Knoll Park                  22.00                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Neighborhood     Baroldi/Sycamore Park            1.50                                                                                                                      
     Parks
                  Cedar Glen                       2.54                                                                                                                               
                  Eucalyptus                       2.50                                                                                                                                                                                            
                  Evergreen                        5.06                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                  Manzanita                        4.04                                                                                                                                
                  Maple Grove North                3.14                                                                                                                                
                  Maple Grove South                1.87                                                                                                                                
                  Peppertree                       2.61                                                                                                                                
                  Pinewood                         2.41                                                                                                                                
                  Rosen/Acacia                     1.00                                                                                                                      
                  Darrel Essex                     2.50                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                  Willow                           2.90                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                  Nature Park                      5.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                  Veterans                         6.40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  Mini-Parks      Damron                           0.46                                                                                                                       
                  Laurel                           0.17
                  Vessels                          0.63                                                                                                                       
                            Total Park Acreage    82.03
 Source: City of Cypress Recreation and Park District, August 2000.
  = Existing Facility
COSR-12                                                                                                         Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                     In addition to these schools, Cypress Community College contains 93 acres of open space
                     (inclusive of parking) and includes large playing fields, a running track, tennis courts, a swimming
                     pool, and handball courts among its recreational facilities. Cypress College is part of the North
                     Orange County Community College District and permits public use of its facilities during specified
                     hours by reservation. Fees are charged for use of certain facilities, such as reserving playing fields
                     for organized practices.
                                                          Table COSR-4
                                              SCHOOL FACILITIES IN CYPRESS
                                                                                                Acreage
                                                                                Total                          Open Space
 Anaheim Union High School District
    Cypress High                                                                39.70                            21.892
    Lexington Junior High                                                       20.30                            13.302
    Oxford Academy                                                              24.00                            16.332
 Cypress Elementary School District
    Arnold Elementary                                                           13.08                              6.84
    Cawthon, Robert Elementary                                                  10.19                              7.62
    Damron, Charles Elementary                                                   9.81                              7.13
    King Elementary                                                             12.68                              8.81
    Landell, Margaret Elementary                                                10.50                              7.55
    MacKay, Daniel Elementary1                                                  10.00                              6.51
    Morris, Juliet Elementary                                                   10.17                              7.62
    Swain, Christine Elementary                                                 10.95                              8.15
    Vessels, Mildred Elementary                                                 10.26                              7.36
                                                      Total                    181.64                            119.11
 Source: Correspondence with Jill Evans from Anaheim School District and Terry Scott from Cypress Elementary
         School District on January 11, 2000.
 Notes:
 1. The School District currently leases the MacKay School site property to the Head Start Program, ABC Development and Alton School.
 2. Open Space numbers were taken from the 1993 General Plan Update and the 1986 General Plan.
                     Bike Paths. Bicycle trails provide access to schools, parks, and other open space areas within a
                     community. An inventory of existing and proposed bicycle paths are included in Exhibit COSR-1,
                     Existing Recreation Facilities. The trail system includes Class I, II, and III paths. Class I bike paths
                     are separate from the street and are the highest quality bike path. Class II and III are both located
                     on the street. Class II paths include a designated bike lane and Class III paths are only marked by
                     a sign.
                     RECREATION PROGRAMS
                     Cypress has a number of facilities and programs that supplement the City's recreation resources.
                     The City coordinates with many groups to provide these recreational programs to Cypress
                     residents. Programs include sports activities, youth services, classes, cultural arts, and senior
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                                 COSR-13
Cypress General Plan
               citizen/human services. A schedule listing available recreation classes is published quarterly by the
               Cypress Recreation and Park District.
               The Cultural Arts Commission is dedicated to improving cultural arts in the City. The Cultural Arts
               Commission operates as an advisory commission to the City Council. In addition to the
               Commission’s advisory role, they support a number of programs including an Arts Week, Quarterly
               Arts Recognition and High School Recognition, Holiday Home Decorating Contest, and various
               excursions. The Commission along with Friends of Cultural Arts (FOCCA) and assistance of the
               City’s Recreation and Park District, sponsors or supports the following events: Summer Concert
               Series, Scholarships and Oktoberfest.
               COMMUNITY FACILITIES
               Community facilities host many of the City's recreation and cultural programs.
               Community Center. The Cypress Community Center, located in Oak Knoll Park, is 18,000 square
               feet in size. A number of classes, including art, exercise, and etiquette, are regularly held at the
               Community Center, along with special festivities such as the Community Festival. The Community
               Center is also available for private rentals (wedding receptions, etc.) on weekends. According to
               the Recreation and Parks District, the Community Center is actively utilized and reservations must
               be made well in advance for City activities and private rentals.
               Civic Center. The Civic Center is located near the geographic center of the City and is
               surrounded by expanses of landscaped open space. Facilities located at the Civic Center include
               the City Hall, council chambers, City police department, library, and tennis courts. The open space
               at the Civic Center serves as a visual relief from the urban environment and also functions as a
               place for recreational and cultural programs, such as Concerts on the Green and the Holiday Sing.
               The Cypress branch of the Orange County Library, containing approximately 112,566 volumes,
               sponsors a number of programs including Pre-School Storytime and the Fun Club for Children.
               Senior Center. The Cypress Senior Center is located on Grindlay Street, just north of the Civic
               Center. The facility features a social galleria, exercise room, crafts room, billards room, social
               services office areas, large meeting room, kitchen, and office areas. The City offers a variety of
               educational, recreational, and social service programs through the Senior Center to address the
               needs of senior citizens.
               Cultural Arts Facility. Space for the Cypress Civic Theater, located at the Oxford Academy, just
               southwest of the Civic Center. The open space at the Oxford Academy is maintained by the City in
               lieu of lease payments. The Cypress Civic Theatre Guild, a private organization, coordinates six
               theatre performances annually. The City supports the theatre by allowing the Guild to utilize the
               cultural arts facility at no cost.
               A number of other programs provided by the City’s Recreation and Park District are conducted at
               the Community Center. Classes in the arts are provided by the Recreation and Park District,
               including dance, art and music classes. The Cultural Arts Commission supports a number of
               community events, such as Arts Week, Juried Art Exhibit and the Elementary Art Program.
               Currently, no Cultural Arts Facility is available; the activities the Cultural Arts Commission support
               are hosted at the Community Center.
COSR-14                                                             Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                                                                Cypress General Plan
               Community Art Gallery. The Community Art Gallery is located at the Community Center. A
               number of displays are shown throughout the year and are sponsored by the Cypress Art League
               and the City.
               REGIONAL PARKS
               A regional park typically serves several communities and contains substantially more acreage than
               parks in individual communities. Regional parks have a variety of recreation facilities including golf
               courses, a lake for boating, swimming facilities, and both winter and summer sports centers.
               While there are no regional park facilities within Cypress, nearby jurisdictions operate a number of
               regional recreational facilities. Five regional parks within close proximity to Cypress include:
                    •    El Dorado Park/Nature Center,
                    •    Heartwell Park,
                    •    Cerritos Regional Park,
                    •    Rynerson Park, and
                    •    El Rancho Verde Park and Bicycle Path.
               El Dorado Park in Long Beach includes four fishing lakes, an archery course, five miles of
               biking/walking trails and picnic facilities. The adjoining Nature Center includes two lakes (no
               fishing), trails, and a small museum. Heartwell Park also located in Long Beach, is a more active
               park with baseball fields, soccer fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, and volleyball facilities.
               Adjacent to both El Dorado Park and Heartwell Park are public golf courses.
               Other nearby regional park facilities include Cerritos Regional Park (84 acres), Rynerson Park (55
               acres situated adjacent to the San Gabriel River north of Lincoln Avenue), and El Rancho Verde
               Park and Bicycle Path (a 12-mile strip park running through the communities of La Palma and
               Buena Park). A public golf course, Old Ranch Country Club, is located in Seal Beach.
               PRIVATE FACILITIES
               In addition to public facilities, several private recreational facilities in Cypress contribute to the
               open/recreational resources within the community.
               Commercial/Industrial Open Space Facilities. Many companies provide on-site recreation and
               open space areas for employees to promote the employee's well being.
               The Cypress Business Park contains a number of large businesses, some of which offer indoor
               recreational facilities or outdoor open space areas with informal seating that offer a place for
               workers to relax. The City will continue to encourage developers to provide on-site recreation and
               open space facilities.
               Commercial Recreation. Three private commercial recreation uses are located within the
               Cypress boundaries: the Cypress Golf Club, the Los Alamitos Race Track, and the Navy Golf
               Course.
                    Cypress Golf Club: Is a 106-acre public golf course located in the southwestern portion of the
                    City, adjacent to the Los Alamitos Race Track. The facility includes an 18-hole course, driving
                    range and clubhouse. The clubhouse is a two-level 25,000 square foot facility housing
                    administrative offices, a lounge, a pro shop, and a restaurant.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                   COSR-15

Cypress General Plan
                    Los Alamitos Race Track: The track is adjacent to the Cypress Golf Club, is home to quarter
                    horse and harness racing and is visited by approximately 1.2 million people annually. As the
                    only commercial racetrack facility in Orange County, Los Alamitos functions as a significant
                    regional recreation resource for the City.
                    Navy Golf Course: A portion of the golf course is located in southern Cypress and is available
                    for use by military personnel and their relatives.
               Cemetery. The Forest Lawn Cemetery serves as the western entrance to the City along Lincoln
               Avenue. Forest Lawn's 144 acres of rolling green lawns serve as visual relief from the surrounding
               urbanized area. In addition, people utilize the area daily for quiet strolls and private reflection.
KEY CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE/RECREATION ISSUES
               The previous inventories of conservation, open space and recreation resources identified a
               number of issues relevant to Cypress. These issues are summarized in this section and provide
               the basis for the development of the Element’s goals and policies.
               WATER RESOURCES
               •    Despite the Orange County Water District's extensive management practices, overdraft of the
                    ground water basin continues. The availability of water is vital to Southern California's water
                    intensive lifestyle.
               •    New development in Cypress will increase the demand on limited water resources. While the
                    majority of water is extracted from local ground water supplies, there are limits on the amount
                    of additional water that can be taken from the basin. Water conservation is, thus, essential to
                    preserve the ground water table and minimize dependence on imported water supplies.
               BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
               •    Cypress has been extensively urbanized over time. As a result, preservation of the limited
                    remaining habitat is important. Ornamental plants are found throughout Cypress in the
                    landscape designs of homes and businesses.
               •    The City's landmark trees are scattered throughout Cypress. These majestic trees are
                    reminiscent of the city’s farming days when many of them were planted. The landmark trees
                    are a unique vegetative resource in Cypress, and shall be preserved whenever possible.
               ENERGY RESOURCES
               •    Cypress' population and business community are growing, placing additional demands on
                    energy resources, including fossil fuels. Conservation of these resources through land use
                    planning and development of alternative energy forms is important to the region's
                    environmental quality.
               SOLID WASTE REDUCTION
               •    Available landfill space is quickly diminishing. It is essential that the City continue to implement
                    source reduction and recycling programs to minimize the production of solid waste.
COSR-16                                                             Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
               CULTURAL RESOURCES
               •   Archaeological and paleontological resources assist humankind in understanding their history
                   and the history of the world in which they live. Although there are no known archaeological or
                   paleontological resources located in Cypress, methods of protecting new resources that may
                   be discovered, while permitting development, must be addressed.
               PARK FACILITIES
               •   Based on the City's adopted park standards, the current park system falls short of providing
                   enough acreage for City residents. The City will need to identify additional park sites and/or
                   augment existing facilities or programs to address this shortfall.
               •   While there is a strong desire by community residents for expanded senior activities, a cultural
                   arts/theatre center, a public swimming pool, and other facilities, funding sources for these
                   items is extremely limited. Additional funding sources will need to be explored.
               •   Parks are fairly evenly distributed throughout Cypress, creating a well dispersed park system.
                   The exceptions are the Cypress Business Park and portions of northwestern Cypress, which
                   do not lie within the service area of any park.
               •   Limited land is available for new parks or the expansion of existing parks. Approximately 3.5
                   percent of the City's land area is currently undeveloped. The majority of vacant land is located
                   in the business park.
               •   Increased employment in the business park may increase demand for open space and park
                   facilities in the area. The additional daytime population in Cypress will likely require open
                   space and recreation facilities, or at least access to such facilities.
               OPEN SPACE
               •   The Cypress Golf Club, the Los Alamitos Race Track, and the Forest Lawn Cemetery are
                   privately owned facilities that provide visual relief from the urban environment and are valuable
                   open space resources.
               •   As the City of Cypress, especially the business park, continues to develop, the community's
                   density will increase. Open space areas will serve as visual relief from the urban environment
                   and will also provide recreational opportunities.
               •   Flood control facilities, including the Nature Park, protect the public from possible flooding
                   hazards.
DESCRIPTION OF THE CONSERVATION/
OPEN SPACE/RECREATION PLAN
               THE CONSERVATION PLAN
               The Conservation Plan addresses preservation of the City's remaining natural resources.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                COSR-17

Cypress General Plan
               WATER RESOURCES
               The 1993 Ground Water Management Plan outlines strategies for conserving water resources in
               Orange County. The Plan outlines the following five goals for conserving water in Orange County:
               1) increasing basin water supplies, 2) protecting and enhancing water quality, 3) improving basin
               management, 4) improving relations with constituents, and 5) improving Orange County Water
               District management and operation.
               There are several programs being implemented to improve basin management and decrease
               reliance upon imported water. The MWD Seasonal Storage Program gives local agencies financial
               incentives to store water through the winter months, thus reducing peak loads in the drier summer
               months. The OCWD Conjunctive Use Well Program offers local agencies low interest loans for
               construction of up to three wells.
               Cypress, in conjunction with the Southern California Water Company (SCWC), will promote
               voluntary water conservation strategies to be implemented year round. Methods to reduce water
               consumption include drought-resistant landscaping and water saving irrigation, especially for City
               projects and new developments. Other measures include low-flow shower heads and toilets, flow
               restrictors, and drip irrigation. The City will provide information about these programs at City Hall.
               BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
               Cypress' existing biological resources primarily include ornamentals utilized for landscaping
               purposes. The City will promote the use of native plants and continue its street tree planting
               program to preserve water resources and enhance landscaping throughout the community.
               An important biological resource in Cypress is the landmark trees that are preserved through a
               Landmark Tree Ordinance. The Ordinance prohibits any person from removing or pruning a
               landmark tree without a permit from the City. In addition to limitations on pruning and removing
               landmark trees, no one may construct any building within 30 feet of a landmark tree.
               ENERGY
               The Land Use, Housing, Growth Management, and Air Quality Elements all have goals and
               policies to create a jobs/housing balance. The Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element
               intends to conserve resources such as fossil fuels through a jobs/housing balance, thereby
               reducing the number of home to work trips. The City will also require that new developments utilize
               energy saving devices and that existing structures be retrofitted to conserve energy.
               Cypress' location in southern California makes it well suited to take advantage of solar power. The
               design of buildings and subdivisions should take the mostly sunny winters and the hot summers
               into consideration. Southern exposures in the winter and limited western exposure in the summer
               are both important. Streets that run east-west are more adaptable to solar energy practices than
               north-south streets. The ideal building orientation recommended for the Southern California coastal
               inland regions is a 35 degree variation to the southwest of the building's long axis. State Title 24
               Energy Regulations establish energy performance Building Code requirements that the City will
               follow and implement.
               SOLID WASTE
               To reduce the amount of solid waste generated in Cypress, the City prepared and adopted a
               Source Reduction and Recycling Element and is currently implementing its programs. Strategies to
COSR-18                                                               Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element
                                                                                                 Cypress General Plan
               reduce waste include source reduction, recycling, composting, public education, and special waste
               and household hazardous waste provisions. Specific programs were implemented under each of
               these strategies that were projected to reduce the amount of waste generated in Cypress by 25
               percent in 1995 and 50 percent by 2000.
               Source reduction concentrates on eliminating waste before it is created. The City has a program to
               support state and federal legislation calling for less packaging or other pre-waste measures. Other
               City programs address land use/zoning modifications, public education, rate structure modification
               and on-site composting.
               Recycling focuses on retrieving goods that can be processed into new products. Recyclable waste
               is collected from multi-family, commercial and industrial uses and taken to a sorting facility by the
               City’s contract waste hauler. In addition, composting material may be retrieved through curbside
               collection to later be transferred to a regional processing facility. The City of Cypress is in the
               process of preparing a Green Waste Program, which is projected to reduce green waste by 20%.
               This Program was established in accordance with AB 939 and anticipated to be implemented in
               2000. Another City program involves assessing modifications to the building code, requiring new
               developments to contain both recycling and solid waste trash bins. This is implemented through
               site plan review.
               Special and household hazardous waste collection involves the City's cooperation with County
               programs. Items included in this special collection are household hazardous waste, tires,
               construction/demolition debris, asbestos, and medical waste.
               Ultimately, all of these programs rely on public education through printed materials, community
               outreach, mass media, and school programs. The City has established a program to educate the
               public about source reduction, recycling, and composting.
               CULTURAL RESOURCES
               Even though there are no historic, archaeologic or paleontologic resources known to currently exist
               in Cypress, there is still a potential for finding historic properties in some limited capacity. Certainly,
               the discovery of an Indian skeleton by a construction crew in 1965 suggests that there could be
               additional Native American burial sites in the area. New development on land areas not previously
               covered by impervious surfaces shall require a literature search and strict adherence to CEQA
               Guidelines Section 15064.5 for environmental documentation and mitigation measures.
               THE OPEN SPACE/RECREATION PLAN
               The Open Space/Recreation Plan addresses how the City will provide adequate open space and
               recreation resources to City residents and workers. The Element emphasizes coordination among
               the City, local agencies, and community groups to provide recreation opportunities. Through the
               joining of efforts of these groups, some of the organizational and financial demands are removed
               from the City and a well developed recreational system is secured.
               PARKS
               The Open Space/Recreation Plan contains measures to ensure that adequate recreational
               opportunities are provided for City residents. The City has approximately 82 acres of parks,
               including community, neighborhood, mini, and nature parks.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                     COSR-19

Cypress General Plan
               According to Cypress’ adopted park standards, the City has a shortfall of almost 46 acres of public
               open space. Meeting these standards seems infeasible, if not physically and financially impossible
               for the City. Only a few scattered parcels remain in residential neighborhoods that could become
               park land, and financial resources are limited for acquisition of these sites.
               Park Site Selection Standards
               The State of California Planning and Zoning law and the Subdivision Map Act Code Section 66477
               (The Quimby Act) indicate that the legislative body of a City or County may, by ordinance, require
               the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both for park
               recreational purposes as a condition to the approval for a final tract map or parcel map. In cases
               where such dedications or fees have not been obtained for particular lots through a map, they may
               be imposed at the time that building permits are issued.
               Among other requirements, the following conditions must be met:
                     •    The Ordinance must include definite standards for determining the proportion of a
                          subdivision to be dedicated and the amount of any fee to be paid in lieu thereof; and
                     •    The legislative body has adopted a General Plan containing a Recreation Element, and
                          any proposed park and recreational facilities are in accordance with definite principles and
                          standards contained therein.
               In conformance with this statute, the City of Cypress Conservation/Open Space/Recreation
               Element includes standards determining land requirements for future park sites. Table COSR-5
               lists shortfalls/surpluses in park acreage based on the City's adopted standard.
               Despite the shortage of vacant land, Cypress may obtain parkland though the following methods:
               parkland dedication requirements, specific plans, parkland lease arrangements, assessment
               districts, developer land dedications and exactions, and the urban open space and recreation
               program.
               Parkland Dedication Requirements. The parkland dedication requirements (or fees-in-lieu) in
               the subdivision ordinance should remain at three acres per 1,000 residents. The remaining one
               and one-half acres per 1,000 residents are provided at school sites.
               Funds for park development are limited and financing mechanisms for future facilities must be
               explored. Financing options to investigate include assessment districts and developer land
               dedications and exactions.
               Specific Plans. The specific plan process currently employed to review development on the large
               parcels in the business park area can be used to set aside parkland for future development. Some
               cities require significant public amenities from industrial developers, similar to the requirements
               placed upon residential developers. This concept could be expanded to include the dedication of
               public parkland near employment centers, which could be used by local employees.
               Parkland Lease Arrangements. The City can explore the potential for long-term leases of vacant
               school sites for use as public parks. A long-term lease of at least 20 years is necessary to ensure
               that it is economically feasible to develop the site as a park. This option is becoming less feasible
               as many "closed" school sites are needed to accommodate growing student populations or are
               being utilized for other purposes. However, if vacant school sites occur in the future, parkland lease
               arrangements are an option.
COSR-20                                                            Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                                                                   Cypress General Plan
                                                          Table COSR-5
                                    EXISTING AND FUTURE PARK ACREAGE NEEDS
                                                                     Available Acreage from
                                                                           Existing and
                              Acreage Required                         Proposed Parkland             Surplus/Shortfall
                                                     School
                                  Parks/           Playground        District        School       District       School
             Population      3.0 Acres/1,000     1.5 Acres/1,000      Parks       Playgrounds      Parks      Playgrounds
Building       49,0311          147 acres           73.5 acres     82.03 acres    119.11 acres  64.97 acres   +45.61 acres
Future         51,5242         154.6 acres          77.3 acres     82.03 acres    119.11 acres  72.57 acres   +41.81 acres
Source: City of Cypress Recreation and Park District.
1.   State of California, Department of Finance, January 1, 2000 Estimate.
2.   General Plan Buildout population projection.
                     Assessment Districts. State law provides for the establishment of special assessment districts to
                     provide public facilities. Certain types of these districts (Mello-Roos) can be used to develop and
                     maintain public parks in newly developing areas based upon a vote of current land owners.
                     Developer Land Dedications and Exactions. The City should implement mechanisms to require
                     dedication of land and/or payment of exactions by developers for the purpose of providing and
                     preserving open space and recreational facilities and improvements in developing areas and for
                     the preservation of such facilities and improvements in already developed areas.
                     California Department of Parks and Recreation Local Assistance Grants. The Local Services
                     Section of the State Department of Parks and Recreation administers grant programs that provides
                     funds to local and state agencies and other organizations. Grants are generally for park, recreation
                     and resources related projects.
                     The passage of the “Safe Neighborhood Parks, Clean Water, Clean Air and Coastal Protection
                     Bond of 2000” (Proposition 12) provides funds for local assistance grants, as provided for in
                     Sections 5096.310, 5096.331 through 5096.345 and 5096.348 of the Public Resources Code. The
                     following grant programs to be administered by the California Department of Parks and Recreation
                     include: 1) Grant Program for Improvement to those units of the State Park System administered
                     by Local Agencies; 2) California Heritage Grant Program; 3) Per Capita Grant Program I
                     (Statewide); 4) Per Capita Grant Program II (Small Cities and Districts); 5) Roberti-Z’bert-Harris
                     Grant Program; 6) Riparian and Riverine Habitats Grant Program; 7) Non-motorized Trails Grant
                     Program; 8) Murray-Hayden (Urban Youth Services) Grant Program; 9) Dr. Paul Chaffee
                     Zoological Program; 10) National Marine Sanctuaries Grant Program; 11) Urban Centers and
                     Education Grant Program; and 12) Regional Youth Soccer/Baseball Facilities Grant Program.
                     The City is eligible for funds through the per capita grants, and could compete for other funds such
                     as the Roberti-Z’bert-Harris Grants.
                     Recreational Programs and Services
                     Cypress should continue to expand recreational programs and services to serve the City's growing
                     population. The following recommendations help to continue a high level of recreational service for
                     the Cypress community.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                                      COSR-21

Cypress General Plan
                    •    Develop cooperative arrangements with adjacent park departments and park and
                         recreation districts for providing a coordinated set of recreational programs and a broader
                         range of recreational resources than currently available.
                    •    Continue to employ cooperative use arrangements with the Anaheim Union High School
                         District and the Cypress Elementary School District to provide additional recreational
                         resources. If necessary, these cooperative use arrangements can be formalized into
                         written agreements. Past practice has been to cooperate on a regular, but informal, basis.
                    •    Continue to work with various civic and recreation-oriented private groups (e.g., Boys
                         Club and YMCA) to provide a recreational program that is well coordinated and
                         responsive to changing community needs.
               OPEN SPACE
               The City of Cypress is almost completely urbanized. However, the City contains privately owned
               open space land that is used for recreation or to protect public safety.
               Four open space areas are privately owned: Cypress Golf Club, Navy Golf Course, Los Alamitos
               Race Track and Forest Lawn Cemetery. These resources provide visual relief from the urban
               setting.
               In addition to these open space areas, the Safety Plan identifies areas within Cypress that pose a
               potential threat to the community's health and safety. The implementation of proper planning
               techniques that minimize the threat to the public includes the designation of some of these areas
               for use as open space.
               Cypress' flood control facilities are comprised of the flood control channels, shown in Exhibit
               COSR-2, Flood Control Facilities, and the Nature Park. This latter facility serves not only as a park,
               but also as a flood retention basin that collects storm runoff at its low point and pumps it to the
               nearby Carbon Creek Channel. Due to the adequacy of these flood control facilities, no structures
               in the City are subject to inundation during a 100-year flood.
GOALS AND POLICIES
               The goals and supporting policies contained in this Element focus on ensuring that the City's
               natural resources are preserved, and that adequate park and recreation facilities continue to be
               available to City residents.
               WATER RESOURCES
               COSR-1:        Conserve ground water and imported water resources.
                              COSR-1.1: Pursue agreements with Southern California Water Company and
                                             Orange County Water District to design and implement water
                                             conservation measures.
                              COSR-1.2: Promote the use of native trees in landscaping to conserve water
                                             resources.
COSR-22                                                             Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                     Cypress General Plan
                                           Insert 8½” x 11” Exhibit COSR-2
                                                    “Flood Control Facilities”
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                        COSR-23

Cypress General Plan
                       COSR-1.3: Protect ground water resources from depletion and sources of pollution.
                       COSR-1.4: Conserve imported water by utilizing water conservation techniques,
                                     water conserving appliances, and drought-resistant landscaping.
                       COSR-1.5: Support the expansion of reclaimed water production and use wherever
                                     possible and economically feasible.
               BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
               COSR-2: Preserve the few remaining native plant and animal species, as well as the non-
                       native plants, utilized in landscaping throughout the City.
                       COSR-2.1: Enforce the Landmark Tree Ordinance that prohibits destroying or
                                     pruning landmark trees without a permit.
                       COSR-2.2: Prohibit the construction of any structure within 30 feet of any landmark
                                     tree.
                       COSR-2.3: Provide for the consistent use of street trees along all sidewalks and
                                     property frontages.
                       COSR-2.4: Provide the opportunity to continue using land for agricultural crops as
                                     an interim use prior to further development.
               ENERGY RESOURCES
               COSR-3: Conserve energy resources through the use of available technology and conservation
                       practices.
                       COSR-3.1: Encourage innovative site planning and building designs that minimize
                                     energy consumption by taking advantage of sun/shade patterns,
                                     prevailing winds, landscaping, and building materials.
                       COSR-3.2: Encourage new development and existing structures to install energy
                                     saving features.
               SOLID WASTE REDUCTION
               COSR-4: Reduce solid waste produced in the City.
                       COSR-4.1: Implement the Source Reduction and Recycling Element as required by
                                     State legislation.
                       COSR-4.2: Continue to comply with the requirements mandated by AB 939.
                       COSR-4.3: Maximize public awareness of all source reduction programs, including
                                     opportunities for community feedback and school education.
                       COSR-4.4: Maximize integration of all source reduction programs.
COSR-24                                                      Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element
                                                                                         Cypress General Plan
                          COSR-4.5: Encourage composting as an alternative to disposal for organic wastes.
                          COSR-4.6: Coordinate with the County and surrounding jurisdictions to dispose of
                                       special waste including tires, construction/demolition debris, medical
                                       waste, asbestos, and household hazardous waste.
               CULTURAL RESOURCES
               COSR-5:    Preserve Cypress' archaeologic and paleontologic resources.
                          COSR-5.1: Update records of resource finds and locations when required.
                          COSR-5.2: Prior to development in previously undeveloped areas, require strict
                                       adherence to the CEQA guidelines for environmental documentation
                                       and mitigation measures where development will affect archaeological
                                       or paleontological resources.
               PARK FACILITIES
               COSR-6:    Provide recreation/park facilities and programs for all those who live and work in
                          Cypress.
                          COSR-6.1: Continue to require new developments to provide recreational
                                       opportunities for their residents in accordance with the City's park
                                       standard, three acres of parkland per 1,000 residents.
                          COSR-6.2: Preserve existing recreational and park facilities and develop new park
                                       and recreational facilities (including skating-oriented facilities) and/or
                                       programs as necessary to maintain an adequate level of service and a
                                       wide variety of programs.
                          COSR-6.3: Maximize the recreational opportunities offered by existing open space
                                       and recreation resources so that they serve the greatest portion of the
                                       community.
                          COSR-6.4: Where feasible, community, neighborhood and mini-parks should be
                                       located adjacent to school sites, but the prime locational criterion will be
                                       how well local neighborhoods are served.
                          COSR-6.5: Continually reassess the community's recreational and open space
                                       standards and opportunities in relation to satisfying the needs of the
                                       population.
                          COSR-6.6: Design new and renovated parks for convenient and accessible use by
                                       handicapped, elderly, and otherwise less mobile persons within the
                                       community.
                          COSR-6.7: Evaluate and, where feasible, utilize the opportunities offered by
                                       abandoned road and railroad rights-of-way and similar environmentally
                                       impacted or unused linear open space to construct low maintenance
                                       greenbelts and multi-use trails.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                              COSR-25
Cypress General Plan
                       COSR-6.8: Preserve public and private open space lands for active and passive
                                      recreational opportunities.
                       COSR-6.9: Continue to cooperate with the Anaheim Union High School and
                                      Cypress School Districts for the maximum feasible use of public
                                      facilities to meet recreational needs. In addition, pursue joint-use
                                      agreements with Cypress College.
                       COSR-6.10: Encourage all future public neighborhood and community parks in the
                                      City to be designed as joint-use facilities contiguous with public schools,
                                      sharing playfields, playgrounds, and other amenities wherever possible.
                       COSR-6.11: Encourage and, where appropriate, require the inclusion of recreation
                                      facilities and open space within future residential, industrial and
                                      commercial developments.
                       COSR-6.12: Implement mechanisms to cause developments in Cypress to include
                                      recreation, cultural, and open space facilities and improvements by the
                                      dedication of land or property for such purposes, or the payment of
                                      contributions (exactions) to the City for the provision and preservation of
                                      such amenities.
               COSR-7: Provide a range of informal opportunities and organized recreational, cultural, sports,
                       and life enrichment programs and services that will enable community residents of all
                       ages, interests, and abilities to participate and experience self-satisfaction, personal
                       growth, and fulfillment in leisure activities.
                       COSR-7.1: Continue to work closely with various appointed citizen groups and
                                      service organizations to help assure that the city’s recreation program
                                      meets the community's needs in the breadth and quantity of programs
                                      offered.
                       COSR-7.2: Work closely with other public agencies, including other parks and
                                      recreation departments and school districts, in developing cooperative
                                      park and recreation programs.
                       COSR-7.3: Work closely with private employers to develop and finance the costs of
                                      joint recreational programs and facilities for those working in Cypress.
                       COSR-7.4: Provide as wide a range of recreational opportunities as possible,
                                      including athletics, arts, crafts, and cultural arts programs and facilities
                                      for all ages and interest groups.
                       COSR-7.5: Ensure that parks and recreation facilities are developed with facilities
                                      appropriate to all ages, including athletic fields, active play areas,
                                      passive open space, tot lots and picnic areas.
                       COSR-7.6: Develop long-term agreements with the School District and, as
                                      appropriate, other agencies that will maximize joint-use and
                                      multiple-use of facilities, eliminate program uncertainty, and reduce
                                      overall operations and maintenance costs.
COSR-26                                                        Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element

                                                                                          Cypress General Plan
                          COSR-7.7: Provide appropriate recreation programs and park facilities for those
                                       with specialized needs including senior citizens and the handicapped.
               OPEN SPACE
               COSR-8:    Preserve open space resources to maintain the high quality of life in Cypress.
                          COSR-8.1: Continue to ensure that adequate useable private open space is
                                       provided in residential developments, and that such areas are
                                       maintained as open space in perpetuity.
                          COSR-8.2: Promote visually pleasing landscaped corridors and a sense of
                                       spaciousness throughout the community.
                          COSR-8.3: Reinforce a sense of form and positive civic image by preserving older
                                       trees where possible, by requiring integrated landscaping plans within
                                       areas of newer development, and by providing bicycle trails that link
                                       cultural, educational, civic, and recreational uses.
                          COSR-8.4: Encourage individual school sites to maintain open space areas.
               COSR-9:    Promote the preservation of the Cypress Golf Club, Los Alamitos Race Track, and
                          Forest Lawn Cemetery.
                          COSR-9.l:    Work with the owners of large, privately owned open space resources
                                       that are unique in nature and hard to replace.
               COSR-10:   Protect the public health, safety, and welfare by preserving areas as open space that
                          pose a potential threat to the community.
                          COSR-10.1: Conserve Cypress' flood control facilities as appropriate to protect the
                                       public health, safety, and welfare.
                          COSR-10.2: Preserve Nature Park as a flood control facility.
Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element                                                            COSR-27
                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
V. SAFETY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE SAFETY ELEMENT
               The Safety Element is an official guide for the City Council, government agencies, and individuals
               to identify and understand potential hazards confronting Cypress. The Element examines man-
               made and natural hazards that could endanger the public safety and welfare. These concerns are
               subsequently incorporated into goals, policies, and implementation measures to reduce the
               impacts of hazards.
               PURPOSE
               The Safety Element helps protect the community from natural and man-made hazards. Natural
               hazards include flooding, earthquakes, ground rupture, and landslides. Man-made hazards can
               result from hazardous and toxic materials, fires, crime, and aircraft overflight. Ultimately, the
               Safety Element concentrates on reducing death, injuries, property damage, and economic and
               social dislocation resulting from these hazards.
               The Safety Element follows guidelines in the State Government Code Sections 65302(g) and
               65302.5, as well as Public Resources Code Sections 4102, 4125, 4128.5 and 2699.
               RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
               The Safety Element is one of eight elements contained within the Cypress General Plan. According
               to the General Plan Guidelines, all general plan elements have equal legal status. Oftentimes,
               issues contained within each general plan element partially overlap with another element. The
               relationships between the Safety Element and Land Use, Housing, Circulation, Conservation/Open
               Space/Recreation, Noise, Air Quality, and Growth Management Elements are discussed below.
               The Safety Element is the primary vehicle for relating local safety planning to city land use
               decisions. A city should establish land use planning policies, standards, and designations based on
               the criteria set forth in the safety element.
               The land use designation is just one factor that determines where housing will be proposed within a
               community. The location of housing development is also influenced by the Safety Element which
               identifies potential hazards in relation to the proposed development. While working within the
               limitations established by the Land Use and Safety Elements, the City must provide adequate
               housing opportunities to its residents.
               The Circulation Element strives to create an efficient and safe transportation network. The Safety
               Element includes a discussion of vehicle accidents and other safety/circulation issues.
Safety Element                                                                                           SAF-1
Cypress General Plan
               To ensure the public's safety, the Safety Element, which incorporates the Seismic Hazards
               Mapping Act, may designate land to be preserved as open space. This, oftentimes, occurs as a
               result of special studies conducted by other governmental agencies, such as the Federal Insurance
               Management Agency (FIMA) identifying flood plains along identified earthquake faults. The
               Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element discusses land that is preserved for the public
               health and safety.
               The Noise and Air Quality Elements, like the Safety Element, are concerned with the public
               welfare. The Noise Element identifies contributors to noise pollution such as an airport or busy
               arterial; whereas, the Safety Element addresses flight patterns and the possibility of an accident so
               that evacuation policies can be addressed.
               The Growth Management Element controls the development of a community. Gradual growth gives
               decision makers the opportunity to make informed decisions about a city's development. This
               attempts to prevent growth from occurring in inappropriate places (in areas subject to flooding)
               because of inadequate review.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
               Communities can be affected by both natural and manmade hazards. The following discussion
               explores issues that may confront the City of Cypress, including flooding, seismic, geologic,
               hazardous materials, urban fires, crime, and aircraft overflight hazards.
               NATURAL HAZARDS
               FLOODING
               The City of Cypress contains no natural, permanent water features. A number of man-made lakes
               exist within the Los Alamitos Race Track and the Cypress Golf Course, as well as Willow Park. In
               addition, six storm drain channels traverse the City and transport water on occasion: Moody
               Creek, Coyote Creek, 2A, Carbon Creek, Stanton Creek, and Bolsa Chica Creek. The Orange
               County Safety Element identifies Carbon Creek as a major drainage facility for northern Orange
               County.
               Historically, Orange County has experienced intermittent widespread flooding. Storm drain
               improvements by the Orange County Flood Control District generally provide relief from the
               flooding. According to the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Orange County, the projected 100-year
               flood for Cypress is contained within the Carbon Creek and Bolsa Chica storm drain channels.
               However, like most of Orange County, the projected 500-year flood may result in widespread
               flooding throughout the entire City (refer to Exhibit SAF-1, Flood Zones).
               Outside Orange County, the Los Angeles County Drainage Area's (LACDA) flood control system
               manages storm waters. According to the United States (U.S.) Army Corps of Engineers, it has
               become evident that the system does not have sufficient capacity to provide adequate flood
               protection. In fact, a 100-year flood on the main system would inundate about 82 square miles, and
               existing drainage facilities only provide a 25-year-level protection in the lower basin, where over
               500,000 people reside. According to the Los Angeles County Drainage Area Review, all flood
               waters will be accommodated in the Coyote Creek Channel and Cypress will not be affected.
               Cypress is within the dam inundation area of three dams: Prado, Carbon Canyon and Whittier
               Narrows (refer to Exhibit SAF-2, Dam Inundation Areas). Prado Dam is located approximately 23
SAF-2                                                                                               Safety Element
               Cypress General Plan
                 Insert Exhibit SAF-1
                        “Flood Zones”
Safety Element                 SAF-3

Cypress General Plan
                        Insert Exhibit SAF-2
                     “Dam Inundation Areas”
SAF-4                       Safety Element

                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
               miles northeast of Cypress in Riverside County. The dam was designed in the 1930s, but has
               recently increased its functioning capability due to the Seven Oaks Dam, which was completed in
               November 1999 and is located approximately 40 miles upstream on the Santa Ana River. During a
               flood, Seven Oaks Dam will store water destined for Prado Dam for as long as the reservoir pool at
               Prado Dam is rising. When the flood threat at Prado Dam has passed, Seven Oaks Dam will begin
               to release its stored flood water at a rate that does not exceed the downstream channel capacity.
               Working in tandem, the Prado and Seven Oaks Dams provide increased flood protection to Orange
               County.
               In addition, the Santa Ana River Mainstem project is designed to provide flood protection to
               Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. The proposed improvements cover 75 miles
               from the headwater of the Santa Ana River east of the City of San Bernardino to the mouth of the
               river at the Pacific Ocean between the Cities of Newport Beach and Huntington Beach. The
               Mainstem Project will increase flood protection to more than 3.35 million people within the three
               Counties. The project includes seven independent features: Seven Oaks Dam, Mill Creek Levee,
               San Timoteo Creek, Oak Street Drain, Prado Dam, Santiago Creek and the lower Santa Ana River.
               Carbon Canyon Dam, located in the northeastern portion of the City of Brea, is an earthfill dam that
               was designed to hold 12,000-acre feet of water. If dam waters were to exceed this capacity, the
               portion of Cypress below Orange Avenue could be completely covered.
               The Whittier Narrows Dam is located in Pico Rivera and is also of earthfill construction. The City
               has prepared emergency evacuation plans for the Prado, Carbon Canyon, and Whittier Narrows
               Dams.
               SEISMIC HAZARDS
               The following section describes the presence and characteristics of seismic hazards in Cypress,
               including earthquake faults, surface rupture, ground shaking, liquefaction, hazardous buildings, and
               seismic response.
               Earthquake Faults. The City of Cypress is not located in an Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone.
               While no active or potentially active faults are located within the City of Cypress, the entire
               Southern California region is considered to be seismically active. Table SAF-1, Major Faults
               Considered to be Active in Southern California, presents a listing of active faults in Southern
               California and the maximum credible earthquake for the fault. The most recent seismic events in
               Southern California include the 1994 Northridge Earthquake, the 1992 Landers Earthquake, the
               1989 Newport Beach Earthquake, and the 1987 Whittier Narrows Earthquake.
               Five faults are situated within close proximity to Cypress: Newport-Inglewood, Norwalk, El Modena,
               Whittier-Elsinore, and Elysian Park. The San Andreas and San Jacinto faults are located some
               distance from Cypress, but have the potential to deliver larger magnitude earthquakes than the
               faults previously mentioned (refer to Exhibit SAF-3, Regional Fault Map).
               Newport-Inglewood Fault: The Newport-Inglewood fault zone is a series of echelon
               northwest-trending and vertically-dipping faults extending from the southern edge of the Santa
               Monica Mountains southeastward to the offshore area near Newport Beach. From north to south,
               the fault segments are:
                    •    Charnock Fault                                •    Avalon-Compton Fault
                    •    Overland Avenue Fault                         •    Cherry Hill Fault
                    •    Inglewood Fault                               •    Seal Beach Fault
                    •    Potrero Fault
Safety Element                                                                                               SAF-5

Cypress General Plan
                                                        Table SAF-1
                                   MAJOR FAULTS CONSIDERED TO BE ACTIVE(a)
                                              IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
    Fault (in alphabetical order)            Date of Latest Major Activity              Maximum Credible Earthquake
 Big Pine                                                  1852                                         7.5 (b)
 Cucamonga                                                    (e)                                       6.5 (b)
 Elsinore                                                  1910                                         7.5 (b)
 Elysian Park Structure                                    1989                                         6.75 (c)
 Garlock                                                      (d)                                      7.75 (b)
 Helendale                                                    (e)                                       7.5 (b)
 Malibu Coast                                              1973                                          7.0 (c)
 More Ranch                                                   (d)                                       7.5 (b)
 Newport-Inglewood                                         1933                                         7.0 (b)
 Oak Ridge                                                 1994                                            7.5
 Palos Verdes                                              1982                                            6.6
 Pinto Mountain                                               (e)                                       7.5 (b)
 Raymond                                                      (e)                                        6.6 (c)
 San Andreas Zone                                          1857                                           8.25
 San Cayetano                                                 (e)                                       6.75 (c)
 San Fernando Zone                                         1971                                         6.5 (b)
 San Gabriel                                                  (e)                                        7.5 (c)
 San Jacinto Zone                                          1968                                         7.5 (b)
 White Wolf                                                1952                                           7.75
 Whittier                                                  1987                                          7.1 (c)
 Source:  Law/Crandall And Associates, 1991.
 NOTES: (a)        Historic Movement (1769 To Present).
          (b)      Greensfelder, C.D.M.G. Map Sheet 23, 1974.
          (c)      Mark (1977) Length-Magnitude Relationship.
          (d)      Intermittent Creep.
          (e)      Movement Within The Last 11,000 Years; Zoned By The State Geologist For The Alquist-Priolo Program.
SAF-6                                                                                                            Safety Element
               Cypress General Plan
                 Insert Exhibit SAF-3
                “Regional Fault Map”
Safety Element                 SAF-7

Cypress General Plan
               Numerous shocks of 4.0 magnitude or greater, as well as the historic 6.3 magnitude Long Beach
               Earthquake in March 1933, have been generated within this fault zone and suggest an active
               seismic history. Although there has been no observed ground displacement associated with the
               Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone, there may have been subsurface fault displacement of
               approximately seven inches associated with the October 21, 1941, and June 18, 1944,
               earthquakes. This fault zone could generate a 7.6-plus magnitude maximum credible earthquake.
               Norwalk Fault: The Norwalk Fault is approximately 16 miles long and lies approximately five miles
               to the north of Cypress. Seismic activity has occurred along this fault and the fault may have been
               the cause of a 4.7 magnitude earthquake.
               El Modena Fault: The El Modena Fault is a north trending fault that is located approximately 10
               miles north of Cypress. Evidence suggests that the fault was active at one time; however, the fault
               is now thought to be inactive.
               Whittier Elsinore Fault: The Whittier-Elsinore Fault is approximately 10 to 12 miles north of the
               City. There have been several minor earthquakes along the fault. Seismic history reveals that the
               fault is able to produce a seismic event of magnitude 6.0 or greater.
               Elysian Park Fault: The Elysian Park Fault, situated in the Montebello and Monterey Park areas, is
               15 to 20 miles north of the City. It produced the 1987 Whittier Narrows earthquake, which had a
               magnitude of 5.9.
               San Andreas Fault: The San Andreas Fault extends over 600 miles, encompassing virtually the
               entire length of California. The fault is divided into segments that have somewhat distinctive
               behavior patterns. The southern segment is over 300 miles long and occasionally delivers large
               earthquakes.
               The last great earthquake on this segment was the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake that is believed to
               have caused a rupture extending 200 miles. Several other earthquakes have been attributed to the
               San Andreas Fault; the last one to affect Southern California was a 6.7 magnitude quake in 1899. It
               is estimated by geologists that this fault may have the potential to generate an earthquake of
               magnitude 8.5 on the Richter scale, which is designated as the maximum credible earthquake.
               San Jacinto Fault: The San Jacinto Fault branches from the San Andreas Fault on the north side
               of the San Gabriel Mountains and parallels the San Andreas to the Mexico-California border. The
               San Jacinto fault has been very active, and damaging earthquakes have occurred along its entire
               length. The last earthquake on this fault exceeding 6.0 occurred in 1968. Ten damaging
               earthquakes have been attributed to this fault since the 1800s, ranging from 5.4 to 6.8 on the
               Richter scale.
               Surface Rupture and Ground Shaking. Surface rupture resulting from earthquakes is unlikely to
               occur in Cypress because no faults have been identified within the City boundaries. The nearest
               active faults, the El Modena and Norwalk Faults, lie approximately five to ten miles north of
               Cypress. Other faults located outside the Cypress area include the Newport Inglewood,
               Whittier-Elsinore, Elysian Park, San Jacinto, and San Andreas.
               The future impact of earthquakes on Cypress depends on several factors. The particular fault, fault
               location, distance from the City, and magnitude of the earthquake all determine the degree of
               shaking that will occur in the City. In addition, the soil and geologic structure underlying Cypress
               influences the amount of damage that the City may experience. The soils underlying Cypress
               include alluvium deposits that may become unstable during intense groundshaking.
SAF-8                                                                                               Safety Element
                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
               The Newport-Inglewood Fault is anticipated to generate the most destructive ground shaking in
               Cypress. The El Modena and Norwalk Faults, though closer to the City, are predicted to generate
               smaller magnitude earthquakes. The San Jacinto Fault is very active and has historically produced
               6.0 to 7.0 earthquakes. However, as Cypress lies approximately 40 miles to the south, the
               distance between the City and this fault would alleviate the ground shaking impact.
               Liquefaction Hazards. Liquefaction is a subsidiary hazard associated with intense ground
               shaking. When the earth accelerates, the soil can destabilize and if sufficient water is present in the
               soil, the soil and water can mix. Liquefaction is generally associated with shallow ground water
               conditions and the presence of loose and sandy soils or alluvial deposits. Exhibit SAF-4, Seismic
               Hazards Map, illustrates locations in the City of Cypress subject to liquefaction.
               According to the Cypress Disaster Plan and the Orange County Safety Element, Cypress, like most
               of Orange County, has granular sandy soil with a high water content. Areas with these conditions
               may experience liquefaction during extreme ground shaking.
               Hazardous Buildings. During a seismic event, Cypress may be subjected to high levels of ground
               shaking. As a result, buildings within the community could sustain substantial damage. Some
               structures are particularly susceptible to earthquake damage, including tilt-up structures,
               unreinforced masonry buildings, older buildings, buildings over four stories, and mobile homes.
               Concrete tilt-ups built prior to 1974 may especially suffer damage. The Building Department has
               identified only one unreinforced masonry structure within the City boundaries. There are also two
               mobile home parks in the City, which accommodate 373 mobile homes.
               Other structures in Cypress are vulnerable to earthquake damage. The danger increases with the
               number of individuals that congregate within a specific area. According to the Cypress Disaster
               Plan, many sidewalks in the community are bordered by six-foot high concrete walls, presenting a
               potential hazard to pedestrians were the walls to collapse due to groundshaking. Also, the potential
               for structural failure, capable of injuring large numbers of people in a given area, exists at the Los
               Alamitos Race Track during the racing season.
               Seismic Response. The City of Cypress Disaster Plan serves as the community's Emergency
               Operations Plan (EOP), which outlines the City's actions during emergency situations such as a
               seismic event. The Plan specifies operations during an emergency, organization and assignment of
               responsibilities, coordinating instructions, an explanation of how the plan is to be administered,
               procedures to identify responsible personnel, and methods to request aid/support from other local
               communities. These activities involve a number of agencies including the police department, fire
               department, medical facilities, public health officials, coroner, and care and shelter operations. The
               City’s emergency evacuation routes are shown on Exhibit SAF-5, Emergency Evacuation Routes.
               All emergency evacuation activities are coordinated by the Evacuation Coordinator, who is the
               Police Chief. The Police Chief will issue evacuation orders based on information gathered from
               emergency experts. Evacuation operations will be conducted by law enforcement agencies,
               highway/road/street departments, and public and private transportation providers.
               LANDSLIDES
               The City of Cypress lacks any significant topographical features. According to the Division of Mines
               and Geology, Seismic Evaluation (1998), no landslides have been recorded within the city
               boundaries and none are anticipated based on the area's flat terrain.
Safety Element                                                                                                 SAF-9

Cypress General Plan
                      Insert Exhibit SAF-4
                     Seismic Hazards Map
SAF-10                    Safety Element
                      Cypress General Plan
                         Insert Exhibit SAF-5
               “Emergency Evacuation Routes”
Safety Element                       SAF-11

Cypress General Plan
                    MAN-MADE HAZARDS
                   Some hazards result from man-made facilities or human actions. This section explores hazardous
                   materials, fire, crime, and aircraft overflight.
                   HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS
                   In the past few decades, some chemicals commonly used and widely dispersed have been found
                   to be significantly harmful. Federal, state, and county agencies have generally recognized toxic
                   substances as chemicals or mixtures whose manufacture, processing, distribution, use, or disposal
                   may preset an unreasonable risk of injury to human health or the environment. According to the
                   Orange County Health Care Agency, there are approximately 160 businesses1 that store or utilize
                   hazardous materials above the threshold within Cypress.
                   Transport of Hazardous Materials. Areas located near major transportation routes are more
                   susceptible to spills of hazardous materials than are other parts of the community. Major
                   transportation arterials in Cypress include Katella Avenue, Valley View Street, and Lincoln Avenue.
                   In addition, the community is within the air approach for the Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC)
                   Los Alamitos.
                   Pipelines. A number of underground pipelines cross through the City of Cypress. These lines
                   transport natural gas, crude oil, and oil (refer to Exhibit SAF-6, Oil and Gas Pipelines). The
                   Transportation Research Board of the National Research Council has published a special report (#
                   219) entitled Pipelines and Public Safety that discusses the dangers associated with natural gas,
                   crude oil, and oil. The following excerpt is from this document:
                             "The primary constituent of natural gas, methane, is flammable when mixed with
                             air (Federal Power Commission 1966, 3). Natural gas may leak in relatively small
                             quantities from cracks, flaws, or damaged areas of the pipeline, and not create a
                             serious incident if the operator finds the leak and repairs the line in a timely
                             manner. However, if significant quantities of gas are released into the
                             atmosphere from a rupture of a pipe wall, the gas will burn and can explode if
                             ignited in a confined space (Associated Pullman Kellogg Limited 1981, 7.1).
                             Crude oil and petroleum products are heavier than air. Crude oil may burn with
                             intense heat if ignited and may contaminate the environment. Petroleum fuels
                             such as gasoline and jet fuel, which are transported in their natural liquid state,
                             also pose a fire and pollution hazard."
                   FIRE PROTECTION
                   Fire protection in Cypress is provided by the Orange County Fire Authority (OCFA). The following
                   section describes potential fire hazards in the City and OCFA’s staff and equipment resources
                   available to handle a fire or other emergency.
                   The Orange County Fire Authority provides fire prevention, suppression and emergency services to
                   20 jurisdictions within Orange County. Known as the Orange County Fire Department from 1980 to
                   1995, the OCFA has served the City of Cypress since May 16, 1980. In 1998, the OCFA
         1 Per correspondence from the Orange County Health Care Agency dated May 8, 2000. The number of businesses
were determined in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 6.95.
SAF-12                                                                                                  Safety Element

               Cypress General Plan
                  Insert Exhibit SAF-6
               “Oil and Gas Pipelines”
Safety Element                SAF-13

Cypress General Plan
               responded to 2,092 incidents within Cypress. The OCFA participates in the County Master Mutual
               Aid Agreement.
               Cypress has two fire stations, Station 12 and Station 17, within its jurisdiction. Station 12, located
               at 8953 S. Walker Street, is equipped with one engine and is staffed by 25 reserve firefighters.
               Station 17, located at 4991 Cerritos Avenue, is equipped with one engine, one truck, and one
               medic van. A total of 27 firefighters are assigned to Station 17.
               The Department's goal is to maintain a response time (from the time of dispatch) of eight minutes
               for the first responding company for a fire call and five minutes for a paramedic response, at least
               90 percent of the time.
               Fire Hazard Potential. Building materials and wind speeds can contribute to the spread of urban
               fires. According to the Cypress Disaster Plan, the community does not contain any large housing
               tracts with wood or shake roofs. However, a few apartment complexes in Cypress do have wood
               roofs and are thereby at greater risk of fire. The City is subject to periodic high winds, including
               Santa Ana Winds, which will quicken the spread of fire. However, the separation and setback
               requirements that were in effect when most houses in the City were built assist in minimizing the
               risk of fire spread.
               POLICE PROTECTION
               The City of Cypress operates its own police department, located at 5275 Orange Avenue. The City
               Police force serves Cypress with a staff of 55 sworn employees, 16 civilian employees, and 23
               volunteers. Thirty-nine (39) of the sworn officers are assigned to patrol duty. The Police
               Department is presently divided into two divisions: Operations and Support Services Divisions.
               Between the period of May and October 1999, the City of Cypress Police Department had an
               average response time of 3.5 minutes for priority one calls, seven minutes for priority two calls, and
               16 minutes for priority three calls. Priority one calls include those that require emergency medical
               aid; priority two calls require urgent, but not emergency, response; and priority three calls are
               situations that can be deemed as non-priority.
               The Cypress Police Department takes pride in the level of service provided to the community. Its
               programs and services include: narcotics team, traffic, canine teams, school resource officer,
               DARE program, citizen volunteer program, emergency services, reserve police officer program, jail,
               detective bureau, court liaison, patrol bureau, gang detail, records bureau, citizen police academy,
               and SWAT team.
               Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE). DARE is a collaborative effort by the Cypress
               Police Department, the Cypress Elementary School District, students, parents, and the community
               to offer an educational program in the classroom to prevent or reduce drug abuse and violence
               among children.
               Citizen Volunteer Program. Through the volunteer program, citizen volunteers learn about law
               enforcement and work side by side with the officers as an extra set of eyes and ears in the field.
               After an extensive selection process, volunteers receive a thorough training course. Some of the
               duties they perform are vacation house checks for residents who are out of town and patrol of
               neighborhoods, parks, and schools to help promote a safe environment.
SAF-14                                                                                               Safety Element
                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
               Citizen Police Academy. This program offers citizens an in-depth understanding of police
               strategies, policies and procedures through a ten session curriculum. The purpose of this program
               is to foster better community relations between the Police Department and the public.
               CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN (CPTED)
               A major effort to restore public safety revolves around the concept of “defensible space,” which
               encourages residents to assert a psychological and/or physical span of spatial control to reduce
               the opportunity for unlawful activity. The concept of defensible space is applicable to community
               and site planning, as well as to building design.
               Physical Planning Process. Crime prevention is an important consideration in the physical
               planning process. Conditions for public safety can be enhanced and property loss reduced by
               utilizing land use planning and site design techniques to deter criminal activity. Carefully planned
               development can serve to minimize the opportunity of unlawful activity, and thus lower the actual
               occurrence of crime.
               Crime Prevention Through Physical Planning. The use of physical planning may be one of the
               least costly and most successful means of crime prevention. The key is to establish design criteria
               that will affect community control by members of the community. Improving the observational
               capability of residents to visually survey their residential environment through design
               considerations is aimed at reducing the workload of law enforcement agencies and enhancing
               community orientation.
               Street, Building and Landscaping Design. The design of streets, buildings and landscaping can
               influence the way people regard spatial use. Architectural alteration of entrances can change a
               space once considered public into a semi-private one that is shared by a limited number of people.
               In large apartment complexes with one or two entrances, people are able to enter the building
               without notice or challenge. Apartment buildings designed to provide a separate common entrance
               for six to eight families allow a higher level of surveillance by the occupants. Families soon
               become acquainted with their neighbors’ normal day-to-day activities and are able to recognize
               their most frequent visitors.
               Streets are typically designed and considered as public space allowing free and ready access into
               any neighborhood by anyone. By siting residential structures in relation to their lots and the street,
               a degree of neighborhood control or territoriality may be established. The designed use of
               symbolic or psychological barriers through landscaping can have an apparent differentiation to
               public versus private space. Typical examples of these symbolic barriers are a small hedge, a long
               walkway, or a set of steps between the public sidewalk and the house. These design features tend
               to identify the end of the public space and the beginning of a more selective space use.
               Landscaping features can also facilitate neighborhood control by providing observable “barriers”
               beyond which other residents of the area would take note and potentially challenge. Here
               landscaping can be used to define space use by visually delineating area for their private space
               use from public space use. An attractively landscape front yard can be considered the object of
               the resident’s pride of ownership. In turn, the pride can be transferred to other residents in the
               neighborhood. With neighbors reinforcing this aspect of private domain, they soon develop a
               sense of identity to and responsibility for others’ front yards. Landscaping treatment should be
               used in a manner that enhances an area’s or project’s setting without obstructing the visibility of
               walkways or entrances from the streets or other residences.
Safety Element                                                                                              SAF-15

Cypress General Plan
               Community Identity and Control. The design of physical space can augment community identity
               and control. Visibility alone is not enough; there must be a reason before a person will challenge
               inappropriate behavior. If a person feels he/she has a stake in a neighborhood or community,
               there is ample reason to question the potentially unlawful behavior of others.
               The use of design in the physical planning process can encourage residents to assert a
               psychological identity over their immediate neighborhood; and thus to deter crime by reducing the
               opportunity for unlawful activity. Strongly defined areas of influence, real and psychological
               barriers, and improved opportunities for surveillance can assist a community in exerting a
               meaningful level of crime prevention and control by its residents.
               RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
               A number of plans and programs contain information that relates to the City of Cypress Safety
               Element. A brief synopsis of relevant documents is provided below.
               CYPRESS DISASTER PLAN
               The Cypress Disaster Plan serves as the community's Emergency Operations Plan (EOP), which
               provides guidance during emergency situations associated with natural disasters, technological
               incidents, and nuclear defense operations. The Plan does not address normal day-to-day
               emergencies or the well-established and routine procedures used in coping with such
               emergencies. Rather, this EOP analyzes potential large scale disasters that require a coordinated
               and immediate response.
               Aid during these unique emergency situations is available within the local government structure
               and associated agencies. The EOP identifies key personnel and groups in the Cypress Emergency
               Management Organization that are organized to protect life and property in the community. The
               Plan also identifies sources of outside support that might be provided through mutual aid by other
               jurisdictions, state and federal agencies, and the private sector.
               COUNTY OF ORANGE HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
               Current government responsibilities for hazardous waste management are divided among federal,
               state, and local levels. The Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, adopted in 1989,
               addresses those issues having local responsibilities and involvement. However, both state and
               local policies for controlling emergencies are outlined.
               The County's Plan sets forth a comprehensive local hazardous waste strategy. Several
               components comprise this strategy, including:
                    •     Current and future hazardous generation and management needs in Orange County;
                    •     Framework for the development of facilities to manage hazardous waste; and
                    •     Policy direction toward developing county-wide programs for waste-reduction and
                          household and small quantity business hazardous waste collection.
               AIRPORT ENVIRONS LAND USE PLAN (AELUP)
               The Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) is the agency charged by the State with the
               responsibility of formulating a comprehensive airport land use plan for the anticipated growth of
               each public use airport and its environs. The purpose of the airport land use plan is to safeguard
SAF-16                                                                                           Safety Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
               the general welfare of the inhabitants within the vicinities of airports and to ensure the continued
               operation of the airports.
               The Airport Land Use Commission for Orange County has adopted the Airport Environs Land Use
               Plan (AELUP), amended November 16, 1995, which includes the Joint Forces Training Center
               (JFTC) Los Alamitos.
               City and County General Plans must be consistent with the AELUP unless specific findings can be
               made by the local legislative body. State law grants review powers to the Airport Land Use
               Commission (ALUC) involving the following actions of local agencies within the planning
               boundaries of the ALUC:
                    •    Amendments of a City's General Plan;
                    •    Amendments of a City's Specific Plan;
                    •    Adoption of Zoning Ordinances; and
                    •    Adoption of Building Regulations.
               Prior to amending a General Plan or Specific Plan, the involved locality must submit the proposal to
               the ALUC for review. ALUC review does not, however, include other applications, including, but not
               limited to, conditional use permits, variances, subdivision or parcel maps, and site plan approvals.
               In terms of assessing consistency between local General Plans and the AELUP, the County
               focuses on the following three areas: noise, safety and building height. The updated Cypress Noise
               and Safety Elements address these issues; building height is also examined in the Cypress Zoning
               Ordinance and Specific Plans. The following building criteria are utilized as part of the County's
               AELUP consistency review procedures:
                    •    Does the Agency have a map or other graphic that depicts imaginary surfaces for the
                         airports that impact the City?
                    •    Are there policies in the General Plan which reference FAA studies and clearances?
               Aircraft Overflight
               The Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos is located in western Orange County within
               the City of Los Alamitos. On-site facilities include two runways and associated taxiways, ramp
               space, and hangars. The JFTC is primarily utilized for helicopter training missions. A portion of the
               City of Cypress lies within the prevailing approach path of the Army Airfield located at the JFTC
               Los Alamitos. This portion of Cypress is primarily composed of business park facilities. Specific
               land use regulations regarding FAA notification imaginary surfaces, aircraft noise, and building
               heights have been implemented (refer to Exhibit SAF-7, FAA 100:1 Notification Imaginary
               Surfaces, SAF-8, Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos Impact Zones, and SAF-9,
               Building Height Restrictions, 50 to 1 Clearance Surface).
               SEISMIC HAZARDS MAPPING ACT
               The Seismic Hazards Mapping Act requires the Division of Mines and Geology to delineate areas
               of high potential ground shaking, liquefaction, earthquake-induced landslides, and other ground
               failures.
Safety Element                                                                                              SAF-17

Cypress General Plan
                                             Insert Exhibit SAF-7
                     “FAA 100:1 Notification Imaginary Surfaces”
SAF-18                                           Safety Element

                                Cypress General Plan
                                    Insert Exhibit SAF-8
               “Los Alamitos Army Airfield Impact Zones”
Safety Element                                  SAF-19

Cypress General Plan
                                                           Insert Exhibit SAF-9
                     “Building Height Restrictions, 50 to 1 Clearance Surface”
SAF-20                                                         Safety Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
KEY SAFETY ISSUES
               The issues identified below were developed through analysis of background data for the Safety
               Element. These issues are utilized to formulate the Element's goals and policies and the Safety
               Plan.
               FLOODING
               •   Flood control facilities in Cypress will contain flows resulting from a 100-year flood, according
                   to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Similar to the majority of Orange County,
                   Cypress may, however, experience flooding during a 500-year storm or dam failure. Existing
                   flood control facilities in most of Orange County are inadequate to accommodate a 500-year
                   flood.
               •   Failure of the Prado, Carbon Canyon, or Whittier Narrows dams would result in inundation
                   throughout the City.
               SEISMIC
               •   The Division of Mines and Geology has not identified any active or potentially active faults
                   within the City of Cypress. However, like all of Southern California, the City is situated within a
                   seismically active region. Hazards relating to seismic events, including groundshaking and
                   liquefaction, could endanger structures and people within the area.
               •   Structures without adequate reinforcement, including masonry and concrete tilt-up buildings
                   constructed prior to 1974, are especially prone to earthquake damage.
               HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS
               •   The majority of future development in the City will occur in the Business Park area. Light
                   industrial and research/development uses in the Business Park may utilize, transport, and/or
                   store chemicals, creating a possible fire hazard.
               •   A number of businesses utilize or store hazardous materials within Cypress. The accidental
                   release or combustion of these hazardous materials could endanger individuals within the
                   community.
               •   The transportation of hazardous waste poses special problems. Since there are no freeways
                   within Cypress, accidents involving hazardous waste would most likely occur on the City's
                   major arterials, including Katella Avenue, Valley View Street, and Lincoln Avenue. The City
                   could possibly be subjected to the airborne release of hazardous materials due to its location
                   within the flight pattern of the Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos.
               PIPELINES
               •   There are a number of pipelines traversing the City that transport natural gas, crude oil, and
                   oil. Though pipelines have better safety records than many other transportation methods,
                   explosions resulting from pipeline failure may endanger individuals and structures. Pipeline
                   failure most commonly results from excavation and corrosion.
Safety Element                                                                                               SAF-21

Cypress General Plan
               FIRE PROTECTION
               •    Additional development in the City will place new demands on the Orange County Fire
                    Authority.
               •    Wood roofs are often a contributing factor to the spread of urban fires. Cypress does not have
                    any large residential tracts with wood roofs. However, the City's Disaster Plan does identify the
                    presence of some apartment buildings and single-family homes with wood roofs.
               POLICE PROTECTION
               •    As Cypress' resident and business population continues to grow, the City Police Department
                    will need to service a larger community. Without adequate increases in staffing and
                    equipment, additional demands may limit the ability of the Police Department to maintain its
                    current high level of service.
               AIRCRAFT OVERFLIGHT
               •    A portion of the City of Cypress lies within the prevailing approach path of the JFTC Los
                    Alamitos. Air operation accidents, including equipment failure or the accidental release of
                    materials, may harm individuals within the City.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SAFETY PLAN
               The Public Safety Plan describes the approach to be utilized in implementing the goals and policies
               of the Safety Element. The goals and policies of the Element provide direction for specific actions
               by the City. The way in which Cypress achieves those goals and implements those policies is
               determined by the programs, actions, and cooperative efforts undertaken by the City.
GOALS AND POLICIES
               FLOOD
               SAF-1:        Protect residents, workers, and visitors from flood hazards, including dam inundation.
                             SAF-1.1:       Manage development to ensure that flooding concerns have been
                                            considered prior to development.
                             SAF-1.2:       Minimize flood hazards by working with the Orange County Department
                                            of Public Works to identify and construct needed local and regional
                                            storm drain improvements.
                             SAF-1.3:       Minimize dam        inundation   hazards   through    engineering    and
                                            construction.
                             SAF-1.4:       Review on an annual basis the emergency evacuation plan to ensure its
                                            continued effectiveness.
SAF-22                                                                                              Safety Element

                                                                                         Cypress General Plan
                      SAF-1.5:       Support the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ improvements to Los
                                     Angeles County’s flood control system and to the Santa Ana River
                                     Mainstem project.
               SEISMIC
               SAF-2: Protect life and property in Cypress from seismic events and resulting hazards.
                      SAF-2.1:       Identify and evaluate existing structures for structural safety. Encourage
                                     building owners to undertake seismic retrofit improvements.
                      SAF-2.2:       Implement the Uniform Building Code’s seismic standards for
                                     construction of new buildings and maintain seismic safety of existing
                                     structures.
                      SAF-2.3:       Require the review of soils and geologic conditions, and if necessary
                                     on-site borings, to determine liquefaction susceptibility of a proposed
                                     project site.
                      SAF-2.4:       Study the potential for liquefaction within the City and adopt policies that
                                     minimize the potential damage of structures and injury of citizens.
               HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
               SAF-3: Minimize risks to life and property associated with the handling, transporting, treating,
                      generating, and storing of hazardous materials.
                      SAF-3.1:       Locate new and relocate existing land uses that utilize, produce,
                                     transport, or store hazardous materials a safe distance from other land
                                     uses that may be adversely affected by such activities.
                      SAF-3.2:       Encourage and support the proper disposal of household waste and
                                     waste oil. Monitor dry cleaners, film processors, auto service
                                     establishments, and other businesses generating hazardous waste
                                     materials to ensure compliance with approved disposal procedures.
                      SAF-3.3:       Prosecute unlicensed dumping of toxic or hazardous materials into the
                                     ground or water in Cypress. Increase the fines levied for illegal
                                     dumping. Encourage citizens to report dumping when they observe it.
                      SAF-3.4:       Support efforts to enforce State "right to know" laws, which outline the
                                     public's right to information about local toxics producers.
               PIPELINES
               SAF-4: Minimize property damage and injury to persons from underground pipeline hazards.
                      SAF-4.1:       Ensure that the Orange County Fire Authority and other disaster
                                     response agencies have access to route, depth, and shut-off
                                     information about each pipeline.
Safety Element                                                                                          SAF-23

Cypress General Plan
                      SAF-4.2:      Ensure that the Disaster Response Plan includes procedures to deal
                                    with a pipeline accident.
                      SAF-4.3:      Consult with agencies operating these lines, as well as the Public
                                    Utilities Commission and the Office of Pipeline Safety of the Department
                                    of Transportation, to determine the real potential for explosion or rupture
                                    in case of accident or earthquake.
                      SAF-4.4:      For new development, maximize building setback from existing
                                    pipelines or new/established pipeline routes to a preferred width of 150
                                    feet where physically feasible, but in no event less than 50 feet.
                                    Whenever development is proposed within 150 feet of petroleum
                                    pipelines, site plans must clearly show pipeline locations and all
                                    measures proposed to mitigate all potential safety hazards.
               FIRE PROTECTION
               SAF-5: Protect life and property in Cypress from urban fires. Maintain the Orange County
                      Fire Authority’s high level of service to community businesses and residents.
                      SAF-5.1:      Maintain a response time of eight minutes for the first responder engine
                                    and provide paramedic service within five minutes.
                      SAF-5.2:      Evaluate the effects of new development on the Orange County Fire
                                    Authority’s response time. Ensure through the development review
                                    process that new development will not result in reduced emergency
                                    service levels.
                      SAF-5.3:      Maintain and periodically review procedures for dealing with fire
                                    emergencies in the City's Disaster Plan.
                      SAF-5.4:      Establish evacuation routes for an urban fire.
                      SAF-5.5:      Maintain mutual aid agreements with surrounding jurisdictions for fire
                                    protection.
                      SAF-5.6:      Provide adequate fire equipment access to structures within the
                                    community.
                      SAF-5.7:      Maintain an ongoing fire inspection program to reduce fire hazards
                                    associated with older buildings, critical facilities, public assembly
                                    facilities, and industrial and commercial buildings.
                      SAF-5.8:      Promote the utilization of fire-safe building materials and enforce the
                                    City's fire sprinkler ordinance.
               POLICE PROTECTION
               SAF-6: Maintain the police department's high quality of service to the City.
                      SAF-6.1:      Assess the impacts of incremental increases in development density
                                    and the resulting traffic congestion on emergency response time.
SAF-24                                                                                        Safety Element

                                                                                    Cypress General Plan
                                   Ensure through the development review process that new development
                                   will not result in reduced emergency service levels.
                      SAF-6.2:     Maintain a response time of approximately three minutes for emergency
                                   calls and six minutes for non-emergency calls.
                      SAF-6.3:     Enhance public awareness and participation in crime prevention.
                                   Develop new and expand existing educational programs dealing with
                                   personal safety awareness.
                      SAF-6.4:     Continue to support citizen programs that fight crime and promote
                                   citizen involvement, such as Citizens Emergency Response Team and
                                   DARE.
               SAF-7: Use good design as a means to promote human safety.
                      SAF-7.1      Provide design criteria in the Zoning Ordinance or design guidelines
                                   relating to the prevention of crime prevention through appropriate
                                   physical design solutions.
                      SAF-7.2:     Use good design to promote safety for residents, employees and
                                   visitors to the City.
                      SAF-7.3:     Provide exterior lighting that enhances safety and night use in public
                                   spaces, but minimizes impacts on surrounding land uses.
                      SAF-7.4:     Promote the use of defensible space (e.g., site and building lighting,
                                   visual observation of open spaces, secured areas) in project design to
                                   enhance public safety.
               AIRCRAFT OVERFLIGHT
               SAF-8: Protect Cypress residents from air operation accidents.
                      SAF-8.1:     Limit development height within the flight approach to the Joint Forces
                                   Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos to minimize safety hazards to
                                   aircraft and protect the airfield.
                      SAF-8.2:     Monitor legislation and regulations established by the Joint Forces
                                   Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos.
                      SAF-8.3       Establish an emergency response plan for aircraft incidents.
Safety Element                                                                                     SAF-25
                                                                                           Cypress General Plan
VI. NOISE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE NOISE ELEMENT
              The control of noise is an important part of preserving the quality of a community. The development
              of effective strategies to reduce excessive noise is essential to creating a safe and compatible
              living and working environment. Since 1971, the Noise Element has been one of the seven
              mandatory elements of a general plan.
              PURPOSE
              The Noise Element of a general plan is a comprehensive program for including noise control in the
              planning process. It is a tool for achieving and maintaining environmental noise levels compatible
              with land use. The Noise Element identifies noise-sensitive land uses and noise sources, and
              defines areas of noise impact. This Noise Element establishes goals, policies, and programs to
              ensure that Cypress residents will be protected from excessive noise. The adopted noise element
              serves as a guideline for compliance with the state’s noise insulation standards.
              The Noise Element follows guidelines in the State Government Code Section 65302(f) and Section
              46050.1 of the Health and Safety Code. It quantifies the community noise environment by
              establishing noise exposure contours for both near- and long-term levels of growth and noise-
              generating activity. The information will become a guideline for the development of goals and
              policies to achieve noise compatible land uses. This information also identifies baseline noise
              levels and sources for the identification of local noise ordinance enforcement.
              RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
              The Noise Element's relationship to other elements of the General Plan depends upon the nature
              of the other Elements. In the case of the Land Use Element, the relationship arises from the need
              to locate incompatible uses away from one another when possible. The relationship to the Safety
              Element works to protect residents, workers, and visitors within the City from being exposed to
              harmful noise levels. The relationship to the Circulation Element encourages roadways and other
              transportation systems that efficiently move people and goods, but also transportation systems
              which do not create serious noise impacts to surrounding land uses. The Housing Element and the
              Noise Elements work together to assure a housing stock that is well maintained and meets all
              current noise standards. Finally, the Conservation/Open Space Element and the Noise Element
              work together to assure that the City is a pleasant place to live and work.
Noise Element                                                                                              N-1

Cypress General Plan
               NOISE SCALES
               Decibels (dB) are based on the logarithmic scale. The logarithmic scale compresses the wide
               range in sound pressure levels to a more usable range of numbers in a manner similar to the
               Richter scale used to measure earthquakes. In terms of human response to noise, a sound 10 dB
               higher than another is judged to be twice as loud; and 20 dB higher four times as loud; and so
               forth. Everyday sounds normally range from 30 dBA (very quiet) to 100 dBA (very loud). The A-
               weighted sound pressure level is the sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured on a sound
               level meter using the A-weighted filter network. The A-weighting filter de-emphasizes the very low
               and very high frequency components of the sound, placing greater emphasis on those frequencies
               within the sensitivity range of the human ear. Examples, of various sound levels in different
               environments are shown in Table N-1, Sound Levels and Human Response.
               Many methods have been developed for evaluating community noise to account for, among other
               things:
                    •    The variation of noise levels over time;
                    •    The influence of periodic individual loud events; and
                    •    The community response to changes in the community noise environment.
               Numerous methods have been developed to measure sound over a period of time. These
               methods include: 1) the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL); 2) the Equivalent Sound Level
               (Leq); and 3) the Day/Night Average Sound Level (Ldn). These methods are described below.
               Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) . The predominant community noise rating scale
               used in California for land use compatibility assessment is the Community Noise Equivalent Level
               (CNEL). The CNEL reading represents the average of 24 hourly readings of equivalent levels,
               known as Leq’s, based on an A-weighted decibel with upward adjustments added to account for
               increased noise sensitivity in the evening and night periods. These adjustments are +5 dBA for the
               evening, 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., and +10 dBA for the night, 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. CNEL may be
               indicated by “dBA CNEL” or just “CNEL”.
               Leq. The Leq is the sound level containing the same total energy over a given sample time period.
               The Leq can be thought of as the steady sound level which, in a stated period of time, would
               contain the same acoustic energy as the time-varying sound level during the same period. Leq is
               typically computed over 1, 8 and 24-hour sample periods.
               Day Night Average (Ldn). Another commonly used method is the day/night average level or Ldn.
               The Ldn is a measure of the 24-hour average noise level at a given location. It was adopted by the
               U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for developing criteria for the evaluation of
               community noise exposure. It is based on a measure of the average noise level over a given time
               period called the Leq. The Ldn is calculated by averaging the Leq’s for each hour of the day at a
               given location after penalizing the “sleeping hours” (defined as 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.), by 10 dBA
               to account for the increased sensitivity of people to noises that occur at night. The maximum noise
               level recorded during a noise event is typically expressed as Lmax. The sound level exceeded
               over a specified time frame can be expressed as Ln (i.e., L90, L50, L10, etc.). L50 equals the level
               exceeded 50 percent of the time, L10 ten percent of the time, etc.
N-2                                                                                                  Noise Element

                                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                                                               Table N-1
                                          SOUND LEVELS AND HUMAN RESPONSE
                                                                  dB(A)
                     Noise Source                                 Noise                               Response
                                                                  Level
                                                                   150
                                Carrier Jet Operation              140            Harmfully Loud
                                                                   130            Pain Threshold
                      Jet Takeoff (200 feet; thence.)
                                          Discotheque              120
                               Unmuffled Motorcycle                               Maximum Vocal Effort
                          Auto Horn (3 feet; thence.)              110
                                    Rock'n Roll Band                              Physical Discomfort
                                    Riveting Machine
                                  Loud Power Mower                                Very Annoying
                    Jet Takeoff (2000 feet; thence.)               100            Hearing Damage
                                       Garbage Truck                              (Steady 8-Hour Exposure)
                     Heavy Truck (50 feet; thence.)
                  Pneumatic Drill (50 feet; thence.)                90
                                          Alarm Clock
                     Freight Train (50 feet; thence.)               80            Annoying
                Vacuum Cleaner (10 feet; thence.)
                  Freeway Traffic (50 feet; thence.)                70            Telephone Use Difficult
                                         Dishwashers                              Intrusive
          Air Conditioning Unit (20 feet; thence.)                  60
             Light Auto Traffic (100 feet; thence.)                 50            Quiet
                                          Living Room               40
                                              Bedroom
                                                Library
                     Soft Whisper (15 feet; thence.)                30            Very Quiet
                                 Broadcasting Studio                20
                                                                    10            Just Audible
                                                                     0            Threshold of Hearing
 Source: Melville C. Branch and R. Dale Beland, Outdoor Noise in the Metropolitan Environment, 1970, Page 2.
Noise Element                                                                                                                 N-3
Cypress General Plan
               FEDERAL NOISE STANDARDS
               The United States Noise Control Act of 1972 (NCA) recognized the role of the Federal government
               in dealing with major commercial noise sources in order to provide for uniform treatment of such
               sources. As Congress has the authority to regulate interstate and foreign commerce, regulation of
               noise generated by such commerce also falls under congressional authority. The Federal
               government specifically preempts local control of noise emissions from aircraft, railroad and
               interstate highways.
               The U.S. EPA has identified acceptable noise levels for various land uses, in order to protect public
               welfare, allowing for an adequate margin of safety, in addition to establishing noise emission
               standards for interstate commerce activities.
               STATE NOISE STANDARDS
               The Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services has developed criteria and
               guidelines for local governments to use when setting standards for human exposure to noise and
               preparing noise elements for General Plans. These guidelines include noise exposure levels for
               both exterior and interior environments. In addition, Title 25, Section 1092 of the California Code of
               Regulations sets forth requirements for the insulation of multiple-family residential dwelling units
               from excessive and potentially harmful noise. The State indicates that locating units in areas where
               exterior ambient noise levels exceed 65 dBA is undesirable. Whenever such units are to be located
               in such areas, the developer must incorporate into building design construction features which
               reduce interior noise levels to 45 dBA CNEL. Tables N-2 and N-3, below, summarize standards
               adopted by various State and Federal agencies. Table N-2, Noise and Land Use Compatibility
               Matrix, presents criteria used to assess the compatibility of proposed land uses with the noise
               environment. Table N-3, Interior and Exterior Noise Standards, indicates standards and criteria that
               specify acceptable limits of noise for various land uses throughout Cypress. These standards and
               criteria will be incorporated into the land use planning process to reduce future noise and land use
               incompatibilities. These tables are the primary tools which allow the City to ensure integrated
               planning for compatibility between land uses and outdoor noise.
               CITY NOISE STANDARDS
               The City of Cypress adopted a comprehensive noise ordinance into its City Code which sets
               standards for noise levels citywide and provides the means to enforce the reduction of obnoxious
               or offensive noises (refer to Table N-4, Noise Ordinance Standards). Sections 13-64 through 13-78
               of the City Code establish noise standards and enforcement procedures.
               Noise Ordinance. The City Noise Ordinance is designed to protect people from non-
               transportation noise sources such as music, construction activity, machinery and pumps, and air
               conditioners. Enforcement of the ordinance ensures that adjacent properties are not exposed to
               excessive noise from stationary sources. Enforcing the Noise Ordinance includes requiring
               proposed development projects to show compliance with the ordinance, and requiring construction
               activity to comply with established schedule limits. The ordinance will be reviewed periodically for
               adequacy and amended as needed to address community needs and development patterns.
N-4                                                                                                  Noise Element
                                                                                                                 Cypress General Plan
                                                                   Table N-2
                                        NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY MATRIX
                                                                                   Community Noise Exposure
                                                                                           Ldn or CNEL, dB
                  Land Use Category                                Normally       Conditionally           Normally             Clearly
                                                                  Acceptable       Acceptable          Unacceptable        Unacceptable
Residential-Low Density                                               50-60            60-65                65-75               75-85
Residential-Multiple Family                                           50-60            60-65                65-75               75-85
Transient Lodging-Motel, Hotels                                       50-65            65-70                70-80               80-85
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing
                                                                      50-60            60-65                65-80               80-85
Homes
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                              NA              50-65                  NA                65-85
Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports                                NA              50-70                  NA                70-85
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                       50-70              NA                 70-75               75-85
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation,
                                                                      50-70              NA                 70-80               80-85
Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Business Commercial and
                                                                     50-67.5          67.5-75               75-85                NA
Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture                     50-70            70-75                75-85                NA
Source: Modified from U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Guidelines and State of California Standards.
NOTES: NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
           Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction,
           without any special noise insulation requirements.
           CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
           New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made
           and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and fresh air
           supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
           NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
           New Construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis
           of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
           CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
           New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
            NA: Not Applicable
Noise Element                                                                                                                            N-5
Cypress General Plan
                                                                  Table N-3
                                        INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS
                             Land Use Categories                                                               CNEL
       Categories                                       Uses                                     Interior1                   Exterior2
       Residential              Single family Duplex, Multiple Family                             453 - 55                    50 – 60
                                Mobile Home                                                          45                          654
       Commercial               Hotel, Motel, Transient Lodging                                      45                           --
        Industrial
       Institutional            Commercial Retail, Bank, Restaurant                                  55                           --
                                Office Building, Research and Development,                           50                           --
                                Professional Offices, City Office Building
                                Amphitheater, Concert Hall, Auditorium,
                                Meeting Hall                                                         45                           --
                                Gymnasium (Multipurpose)
                                                                                                     50                           --
                                Sports Club
                                                                                                     55                           --
                                Manufacturing, Warehousing, Wholesale,
                                Utilities                                                            65                           --
                                Movie Theaters
                                                                                                     45                           --
       Institutional            Hospital, Schools’ Classrooms                                        45                          65
                                Church, Library                                                      45                           --
       Open Space               Parks                                                                --                          65
NOTES:
1.  Indoor environmental including:        Bedrooms, living areas, bathrooms, toilets, closets, corridors.
2.  Outdoor environment limited to:        Private yard of single family
                                          Multi-family private patio or balcony which is served by a means of exit from inside the dwelling
                                          Balconies 6 feet deep or less are exempt
                                          Mobile home park
                                          Park’s picnic area
                                          School’s playground
3.       Noise level requirement with closed windows. Mechanical ventilating system or other means of natural ventilation shall be provided
         as of Chapter 12, Section 1205 of UBC.
4.       Exterior noise levels should be such that interior noise levels will not exceed 45 CNEL.
N-6                                                                                                                          Noise Element

                                                                                                    Cypress General Plan
                                                            Table N-4
                                                 NOISE ORDINANCE STANDARDS
              Noise Zone                                 Exterior Standard                      Interior Standard
                                               55dB(A) 7am-10pm                       55dB(A) 7am-10pm
                  1
                                               50dB(A) 10pm-7am                       45dB(A) 10pm-7am
                                               60dB(A) 7am-10pm                       55dB(A) 7am-10pm
                  2
                                               55dB(A) 10am-7pm                       45dB(A) 10am-7pm
Noise Zone 1:      RS-15000 and RS-6000 zoned residential.
Noise Zone 2:      All other residential properties.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                  The sources of noise in Cypress fall into four basic categories. These are:
                         •     Major and minor arterial roadways;
                         •     Aircraft overflights (from the Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos);
                         •     Stationary sources (including industrial and commercial centers); and
                         •     Trains (from the Southern Pacific rail line).
                  Major and Minor Arterial Roadways. Traffic noise on surface streets is a significant source of
                  noise within the community. The major roadways in the City include: Crescent Avenue, Lincoln
                  Avenue, Orange Avenue, Ball Road, Cerritos Avenue, Katella Avenue, Orangewood Avenue,
                  Bloomfield Street, Denni Street, Moody Street, Walker Street, Valley View, Holder Street, and Knott
                  Street.
                  Noise levels along roadways are determined by a number of traffic characteristics. Most important
                  is the average daily traffic (ADT). Additional factors include the percentage of trucks, vehicle
                  speed, the time distribution of this traffic, and gradient of the roadway. In general, most of the land
                  uses along the major roadways are commercial, open space, and light industrial. However, single
                  and multi-family areas, as well as public facilities, are situated along many of the major roadways
                  indicated above.
                  Aircraft Operations. The Joint Forces Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos is situated along the
                  southern boundary of the City and is the only airport within the vicinity of Cypress. The Center is
                  primarily a helicopter training base. Approximately 91 percent of total operations are by helicopters
                  with the remainder being light twin-engine fixed-wing aircraft and occasional operations by
                  transient military and civil support aircraft.
                  Land uses within the Airport Environs Land Use Plan (AELUP) include residential, vacant,
                  agricultural, and business park uses. Exhibit N-2 shows the existing noise contours which form the
                  boundary of AELUP.
                  Stationary Sources. Commercial and industrial land uses located near residential areas currently
                  generate occasional noise impacts. The primary noise sources associated with these facilities is
                  caused by delivery trucks, air compressors, generators, outdoor loudspeakers, and gas venting.
                  Other significant stationary noise sources in the City include noise from construction activity, street
                  sweepers, and gas powered leaf blowers.
Noise Element                                                                                                         N-7

Cypress General Plan
               Train Operations. The City is traversed by one Southern Pacific Rail Road (SPRR) freight train
               line. Train traffic on this rail line which run along the northeastern edge of the City is considered to
               contribute to a relatively minor source of noise within the community due to the low frequency of
               operation (approximately two trains per day unless freight activity requires an increase in frequency
               in which 3 trips per day occurs).
               The railroad lines traverse both commercial and residential property. Any residential developments
               and other sensitive uses located along the two railroad lines will require sound insulation to
               mitigate noise to an acceptable level.
               NOISE SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
               Housing is the most predominant and noise-sensitive land use in Cypress. This land use is
               considered especially noise-sensitive because (1) considerable time is spent by individuals at
               home, (2) significant activities occur outdoors, and (3) sleep disturbance is most likely to occur in a
               residential area. Mixed use developments which include residential uses along major arterials are
               particularly sensitive uses since they are located in areas where higher noise levels are generated.
               Additionally, the City of Cypress has a number of educational facilities, churches, a library, senior
               housing, and park and recreation facilities that are considered noise-sensitive. The location of
               noise sensitive receptors are shown on Exhibit N-1, Noise Sensitive Receptors. Noise levels
               measured at schools, day care centers, churches (with day care centers), the library and
               community centers are reported in Table N-4, Field Noise Measurements.
               COMMUNITY NOISE CONTOURS
               The noise environment for Cypress can be described using noise contours developed for the major
               noise sources within the City. These contours represent lines of equal noise exposure, just as the
               contour lines on a topographic map are lines of equal elevation. The contours shown are the 60
               and 65 dB(A) CNEL (Community Noise Equivalency Level) contours. As previously stated, CNEL is
               a 24-hour time-weighted average noise level where noise which occurs during sensitive time
               periods is weighted more heavily.
               Noise contours for Cypress were developed based on existing and future traffic levels, and other
               sources of noise in the community. Cypress noise contours are presented in Exhibits N-2 and N-3.
               Exhibit N-2 shows the noise environment as estimated in 1999 for existing land uses and traffic on
               major streets in the City. Exhibit N-3 shows the future noise environment as it would exist at full
               implementation of the General Plan.
               The inclusion of an area within a 60 or 65 CNEL contour on Exhibit N-2, Existing Noise Contours
               (1999), or N-3, Future Noise Contours (2020), indicates that noise levels are high enough to be of
               potential concern, but does not imply that excessive noise levels are present uniformly on all sites
               within the area. Buildings, walls, berms, and changes in topography affect noise levels. Some
               locations may be screened from noise impact by the presence of one or more of these features.
N-8                                                                                                     Noise Element
                  Cypress General Plan
                    INSERT EXHIBIT N-1
              “Noise Sensitive Receptors”
Noise Element                        N-9

Cypress General Plan
               This page left intentionally blank.
N-10                                               Noise Element
                        Cypress General Plan
                         INSERT EXHIBIT N-2
              “Existing Noise Contours (1999)”
Noise Element                            N-11

Cypress General Plan
               This page left intentionally blank.
N-12                                               Noise Element
                      Cypress General Plan
                       INSERT EXHIBIT N-3
              “Future Noise Contours (2020)”
Noise Element                          N-13

Cypress General Plan
                     This page left intentionally blank.
N-14                                                     Noise Element
                                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                                                               Table N-5
                                                 FIELD NOISE MEASUREMENTS
                                                                                Leq        Lmax         L10         L50   L90
 Site #                         Sensitive Receptor
                                                                                dBA        dBA          dBA         dBA  dBA
     1      Cypress Montessori School                                           50.6        68.8        49.8        40.0 37.7
     2      King Elementary School                                              51.2        63.4        55.0        48.0 40.9
     3      ABC Development Pre-School (8710 Moody Street.)                     51.3        60.4        54.4        49.7 43.0
     4      Calvary Chapel Christian School                                     50.2        61.9        53.5        47.5 41.0
     5      Cypress Head Start                                                  47.3        54.3        47.7        47.2 46.8
     6      Cypress College                                                     52.0        69.5        54.8        45.8 41.8
     7      Cypress High School                                                 49.2        57.8        53.7        45.5 41.7
     8      ABC Development Pre-School (9952 Graham Street)                     51.8        61.8        55.4        48.9 41.7
     9      Morris Elementary School                                            43.8        61.3        43.2        35.4 32.8
    10      Swain Elementary School                                             36.6        45.9        39.7        34.2 32.5
    11      Children’s World Learning Center                                    37.5        53.9        40.2        32.9 31.2
    12      Cypress Learning Tree                                               50.2        59.7        51.5        46.7 42.2
    13      Cypress Senior Center                                               49.7        66.6        52.7        43.4 36.9
    14      St. Irenaeus Catholic School                                        46.1        60.5        50.4        40.0 34.7
    15      Oxford Academy                                                      48.7        61.9        51.3        45.5 40.0
    16      Cypress Library                                                     47.7        57.3        51.2        46.3 37.8
    17      Cypress Community Center                                            41.3        47.6        44.0        40.5 37.4
    18      Lexington Junior High School                                       45.5.        53.7        49.0        43.8 37.2
    19      Arnold Elementary School                                            46.7        60.4        50.4        43.5 38.2
    20      ABC Development Pre-School (9281 Denni Street)                      38.3        53.4        38.7        36.8 35.2
    21      Landell Elementary                                                  43.8        52.7        47.8        40.8 35.0
    22      A Child’s Adventure (9739 Denni Street)                             43.3        56.1        46.4        41.3 36.5
    23      Cawthon Elementary School                                           42.4        58.5        45.7        35.3 33.3
    24      A Child’s Adventure (4545 Myra Avenue)                              45.2        59.6        49.8        37.9 33.3
    25      Damron Elementary School                                            45.1        63.7        48.0        38.3 35.3
    26      A Child’s Adventure (5400 Myra Avenue)                              37.8        48.0        40.4        36.5 33.7
    27      Vessels Elementary School                                           42.8        56.6        46.5        38.2 36.2
    28      Carousel Pre-School and Day Care                                    42.0        54.3        43.5        41.8 39.3
    29      Cypress Park Community Church and Day Care                          47.2        60.5        49.4        44.7 40.4
    30      Grace Christian School                                              49.3        59.2        53.0        47.3 40.4
    31      Cypress Early Learning Center                                       55.4        69.3        58.7        53.0 47.3
 Source: Noise monitoring survey conducted by Robert Bein, William Frost & Associates on August 26, and August 27, 1999.
 1.    Noise measurements based on 15 minute recording period.
 2.    Measurements recorded adjacent to abutting roadway.
Noise Element                                                                                                                N-15

Cypress General Plan
               Exhibit N-3 shows projected 60 dB contours ranging between approximately 110 feet and 520 feet
               from the roadway centerlines. The 65 dB contour ranges between 51 feet and 240 feet along
               roadways modeled. This impacts existing residential neighborhoods. However, Lincoln Avenue's
               60 dB noise contour impacts land uses within approximately 280 feet and Valley View Street and
               Katella Avenue between 360 feet and 520 feet, respectively. Future residential units constructed
               along Lincoln Avenue will therefore require noise mitigation. Exhibit N-3 also shows the noise
               contours for the Los Alamitos Army Airfield which extend over the Cypress Business Park and a
               residential neighborhood on the City's eastern border.
               60 CNEL. The 60 CNEL contour defines the Noise Study Zone. The noise environment for any
               proposed noise-sensitive land use (for example, single- or multi-family residences, hospitals,
               schools, or churches) within this zone should be evaluated on a project specific basis. The project
               may require mitigation to meet City and/or State (Title 24) standards. A site- and project-specific
               study will be necessary to determine what kinds of mitigation will make the interior building
               environment acceptable for the given type of land use. Some sites may already be sufficiently
               protected by existing walls or berms that no further mitigation measures are required.
               65 CNEL. The 65 CNEL contour defines the Noise Mitigation Zone. Within this contour, new or
               expanded noise-sensitive developments should be permitted only if appropriate mitigation
               measures, such as barriers or additional sound insulation, are included and City and/or State noise
               standards are achieved. In some instances it may be possible to show that existing walls, berms,
               or screening may exist such that required mitigation is already in place.
KEY NOISE ISSUES
               Several factors contribute to create noise issues within the City. These issues are summarized
               below.
               TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
               The City of Cypress contains several transportation-related noise sources, including Joint Forces
               Training Center, major arterials, and collector roadways. These sources are the major contributors
               of noise in Cypress. Cost-effective strategies to reduce their influence on the community noise
               environment are an essential part of the Noise Element.
               NOISE AND LAND USE PLANNING INTEGRATION
               Information relative to the existing and future noise environment within Cypress should be
               integrated into future land use planning decisions. The Element presents the noise environment in
               order that the City may include noise impact considerations in development programs. Noise and
               land use compatibility guidelines are presented, as well as noise standards for new developments.
               COMMUNITY NOISE CONTROL FOR NON-TRANSPORTATION
               NOISE SOURCES
               Residential land uses and areas identified as noise-sensitive must be protected from excessive
               noise from non-transportation sources including commercial and industrial centers. These impacts
               are best controlled through effective land use planning and the application of the City Noise
               Ordinance.
N-16                                                                                                Noise Element
                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
DESCRIPTION OF THE NOISE PLAN
              NOISE CONTROL
              Transportation noise is the most serious noise problem in Cypress. However, local government has
              little direct control of transportation noise at the source. State and federal agencies have the
              responsibility to control vehicle noise emission levels. The most effective method the City has to
              mitigate transportation noise is by reducing noise impact on the community. Mitigation through site
              planning and the design and construction of a noise barrier (generally a wall or berm) are the most
              common ways of alleviating traffic noise impacts in existing urban environments.
              TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
              The most efficient and effective means of controlling noise from transportation systems is to reduce
              noise at the source. However, since the City has little direct control over source noise levels
              because of State and federal preemption (for example, State motor vehicle noise standards and
              federal air regulations), policies should be focused on reducing the impact of the noise on the
              community.
              The following methods can be utilized to assist in the reduction of transportation related noise
              levels:
                    •    Ensure the employment of noise mitigation measures in the design of roadway
                         improvement projects consistent with funding capability. Support efforts by the California
                         Department of Transportation and other agencies to provide for acoustical protection of
                         existing noise-sensitive land uses affected by these projects.
                    •    Require the use of walls and landscape berms in the design of residential and other
                         noise-sensitive land uses that are adjacent to major roads, railroads, Joint Forces Training
                         Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos, commercial uses, or industrial areas.
                    •    Provide for continued evaluation of truck movements and routes in the City to provide
                         effective separation from residential and other noise-sensitive land uses.
                    •    Enforce the State motor vehicle noise standards for cars, trucks, and motorcycles.
              NOISE AND LAND USE PLANNING INTEGRATION
              Information relative to the existing and future noise environments within Cypress should be
              integrated into future land use planning decisions. The Element presents the existing and future
              noise environments so that the City will include noise impact considerations in development
              programs. Noise and land use compatibility guidelines are presented, as well as noise standards
              for new developments. Community noise considerations are to be incorporated into land use
              planning to the maximum extent feasible.
              The following methods are intended to prevent future noise and land use incompatibilities:
                    •    Enforce standards that specify acceptable noise limits for various land uses throughout
                         the City. Table N-1 shows criteria used to assess the compatibility of proposed land uses
                         with the noise environment. These criteria are the basis of specific noise standards.
Noise Element                                                                                                   N-17

Cypress General Plan
                         These standards, presented in Table N-2, define City policy related to land uses and
                         acceptable noise levels.
                   •     Incorporate noise-reduction features during site planning to mitigate anticipated noise
                         impacts on affected noise-sensitive land uses. The noise referral zones identified by 60
                         and 65 decibel CNELs in Exhibits N-2 and N-3 can be used to identify locations of
                         potential conflict. New developments will be permitted only if appropriate mitigation
                         measures are included such that the standards contained in this Element are met in
                         accord with Table N-3.
                   •     Enforce the provisions of the current State of California Uniform Building Code, which
                         specifies that the indoor noise levels for multi-family residential living spaces not exceed
                         45 dB CNEL due to the combined effect of all noise sources. The State requires special
                         construction features to be incorporated within project design to attain this interior noise
                         standard when the outdoor noise levels exceed 65 dB CNEL.
                         The Noise Referral Zones (the 65 dB CNEL contour) can be used to determine when this
                         standard needs to be addressed. The Uniform Building Code requires that “interior”
                         CNEL/Ldn with windows closed, attributable to exterior sources shall not exceed an annual
                         CNEL or Ldn of 45 dB in any habitable room. The code requires that this standard be
                         applied to all new hotels, motels, apartment houses, and dwellings other than detached
                         single-family dwellings. The City will also apply this standard to single-family dwellings.
                   •     Coordinate all land use planning and design efforts in the environs of Joint Forces
                         Training Center (JFTC) Los Alamitos to be consistent with noise levels for the airport.
                         Noise sensitive land uses should be prohibited inside the 65 CNEL contour projected for
                         the airport and all noise sensitive land uses inside the 60 CNEL contour should be
                         designed to mitigate airport noise.
               NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
               People must be protected from excessive noise from non-transportation sources, including
               commercial and industrial centers. These impacts are most effectively controlled through the
               application of the City's Noise Ordinance. Refer to City Noise Standards discussion, above, for
               basic standards of the City’s noise ordinance.
                   •     Enforce the comprehensive City Noise Ordinance. The ordinance will protect people from
                         non-transportation related noise sources such as music, machinery, pumps, and air
                         conditioners.
                   •     Require that any proposed development and building projects demonstrate compliance
                         with the City Noise Element and Ordinance prior to project approval. Notify applicants for
                         building permits that include mechanical equipment that this requirement exists.
                   •     Require construction activity to comply with limits established in the City Noise Ordinance.
                         Ensure adequate noise control measures at all construction sites through provision of
                         mufflers and the physical separation of machinery maintenance areas from adjacent
                         residential uses.
                   •     Continue the noise enforcement efforts of the City.
N-18                                                                                                    Noise Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
                    •    Limit delivery hours for commercial and industrial uses with loading areas or docks
                         fronting, siding, bordering, or gaining access on driveways adjacent to noise-sensitive
                         areas. Exemption from this restriction shall be based solely on attaining full compliance
                         with the nighttime noise limits of the noise ordinance.
              STANDARD NOISE ATTENUATION TECHNIQUES
              Noise reduction can be accomplished by placement of walls, landscaped berms, or a combination
              of the two, between the noise source and the receiver. Generally, effective noise shielding requires
              a solid barrier with a mass of at least four pounds per square foot of surface area which is large
              enough to block the line of sight between source and receiver. Variations may be appropriate in
              individual cases based on distance, nature and orientation of buildings behind the barrier, and a
              number of other factors. Garages or other buildings may be used to shield dwelling units and
              outdoor living areas from traffic noise.
              In addition to site design techniques, noise insulation can be accomplished through proper design
              of buildings. Nearby noise generators should be recognized in determining the location of doors,
              windows and vent openings. Sound-rated windows (extra thick or multi-paned) and wall insulation
              are also effective. None of these measures, however, can realize their full potential unless care is
              taken in actual construction: doors and windows fitted properly; openings sealed; joints caulked;
              plumbing adequately insulated from structural members. And, of course, sound-rated doors and
              windows will have little effect if left open. This may require installation of air conditioning for
              adequate ventilation. The chain of design, construction and operation is only as effective as its
              weakest link.
              Noise impacts can be reduced by insulating noise sensitive uses, such as residences, schools,
              libraries, hospitals, nursing and carehomes and some types of commercial activities. But perhaps a
              more efficient approach involves limiting the level of noise generation at the source. State and
              Federal statutes have largely preempted local control over vehicular noise emissions but
              commercial and industrial operations and certain residential activities provide opportunities for local
              government to assist in noise abatement. Local ordinances may establish maximum levels for
              noise generated on-site. This usually takes the form of limiting the level of noise permitted to leave
              the property where it may impact other uses.
              Although vehicular noise emissions standards are established at the State and Federal levels, local
              agencies can play a significant part in reducing traffic noise by controlling traffic volume and
              congestion. Traffic noise is greatest at intersections due to acceleration, deceleration and gear
              shifting. Measures such as signal synchronization can help to minimize this problem. Likewise,
              reduction of congestion aids in reduction of noise. This can be accomplished through the
              application of traffic engineering techniques such as channelization of turning movements, parking
              restrictions, separation of modes (bus, auto, bicycle, pedestrian) and restrictions on truck traffic.
GOALS AND POLICIES
              TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
              N-1:            Reduce noise impacts from transportation noise sources.
                              N-1.1:        Require construction of barriers to shield noise-sensitive uses from
                                            excessive noise.
Noise Element                                                                                                    N-19

Cypress General Plan
                         N-1.2:       Ensure the inclusion of noise mitigation measures in the design of new
                                      roadway projects in Cypress.
                         N-1.3:       Reduce transportation noise through proper design and coordination of
                                      new or remodeled transportation and circulation facilities.
                         N-1.4:       Enforce City, State, and federal noise standards, especially those for
                                      automobile mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
                         N-1.5:       Ensure that the Zoning Ordinance, Circulation Element, and Land Use
                                      Element fully integrate the policies adopted as part of the Noise
                                      Element.
                         N-1.6:       Monitor noise from buses and other heavy vehicles in residential areas.
                                      If necessary, consider alternate circulation routes for those types of
                                      vehicles.
                         N-1.7:       Discourage through-traffic in residential neighborhoods by use of one-
                                      way streets.
                         N-1.8:       Require that new equipment purchased by the City of Cypress comply
                                      with noise performance standards.
               NOISE AND LAND USE PLANNING INTEGRATION
               NOISE AND LAND USE PLANNING INTEGRATION
               N-2:      Incorporate noise considerations into land use planning decisions.
                         N-2.1:       Establish targeted limits of noise for various land uses throughout the
                                      community, in accordance with Table N-2.
                         N-2.2:       Ensure acceptable noise levels near schools, hospitals, convalescent
                                      homes, churches, and other noise-sensitive areas, in accordance with
                                      Table N-1.
                         N-2.3:       Establish standards for all types of noise not already governed by local
                                      ordinances or preempted by State or federal law.
                         N-2.4:       Require noise-reduction techniques in site planning, architectural
                                      design, and construction where noise reduction is necessary.
                         N-2.5:       Discourage and, if necessary, prohibit the exposure of noise-sensitive
                                      land uses to noisy environments.
               N-3:      Minimize noise spillover from commercial uses into nearby residential neighborhoods.
                         N-3.1:       Enforce the 65 dB(A) State standard for exterior noise levels for all
                                      commercial uses.
                         N-3.2:       Require that a minimum of 15 feet be landscaped as a buffer between a
                                      commercial or mixed use structure and an adjoining residential parcel.
N-20                                                                                             Noise Element
                                                                                    Cypress General Plan
                       N-3.3:      Require that automobile and truck access to commercial properties
                                   located adjacent to residential parcels be located at the maximum
                                   practical distance from the residential parcel.
                       N-3.4:      Truck deliveries within the City to commercial and industrial properties
                                   abutting residential uses shall fully comply with the City’s Noise
                                   Ordinance.
              N-4:     Minimize the noise impacts associated with the development of residential units
                       above ground floor commercial uses in mixed use developments.
                       N-4.1:      Require that commercial uses developed as part of a mixed use project
                                   (with residential uses) not be noise-intensive.
                       N-4.2:      Require that mixed use structures be designed to prevent transfer of
                                   noise and vibration from the commercial to the residential use.
                       N-4.3:      Orient mixed use residential units away from major noise sources.
                       N-4.4:      Locate balconies and openable windows of residential units in mixed
                                   use projects away from the primary street and other major noise
                                   sources.
              NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE CONTROL
              N-5.0:   Develop measures to control non-transportation noise impacts.
                       N-5.1:      Review the City's existing noise ordinance and revise as necessary to
                                   better regulate noise-generating uses.
                       N-5.2:      Continue to enforce the Noise Ordinance and make the public more
                                   aware of its utility.
                       N-5.3:      Where possible, resolve existing and potential conflicts between various
                                   noise sources and other human activities.
                       N-5.4:      Reduce noise generated by building activities by requiring sound
                                   attenuation devices on construction equipment.
                       N-5.5:      Establish and maintain coordination among the agencies involved in
                                   noise abatement.
Noise Element                                                                                         N-21

                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
VII. AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                PURPOSE
                The Air Quality Element is intended to protect the public's health and welfare by implementing
                measures that allow the South Coast Air Basin to attain federal and state air quality standards. To
                achieve this goal, the Element sets forth a number of programs to reduce current pollution
                emissions and to require new development to include measures to comply with air quality
                standards. In addition, this Element contains provisions to address new air quality requirements.
                The Air Quality Element follows guidelines in the State Government Code Sections 65302(d) and
                65303. It identifies and establishes the City’s policies governing the achievement and maintenance
                of acceptable air quality within the City.
                RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
                The eight elements which comprise the Cypress General Plan are required by law to be internally
                consistent. Together, these elements provide the framework for development of those facilities,
                services, and land uses necessary to address the needs and desires of the City's residents. To
                ensure that these needs are clearly addressed throughout the General Plan, the elements must be
                interrelated and interdependent. The relationship between the Air Quality Element and the Land
                Use, Housing, Circulation, Public Safety, Noise, Growth Management and Conservation/Open
                Space/Recreation Elements is described below.
                The Land Use Element includes goals, policies, and programs to minimize the amount of trips
                generated in Cypress. By creating regulations which promote a jobs/housing balance and efficient
                land use patterns, the City of Cypress intends to reduce the number of trips, especially the
                "home-to-work" trip, in the community. Ultimately, these land use measures are anticipated to
                reduce the amount of pollution generated from automobiles.
                The location of housing in a community affects many things, including the transportation system.
                Housing positioned adjacent to employment opportunities, commercial centers, and other
                resources reduces the number of vehicle trips taken, which affects the region's air quality. The
                Housing Element explores these issues and additional topics including housing opportunities and
                needs within a community.
Air Quality Element                                                                                 AQ-1

Cypress General Plan
               The Circulation Element strives to create an efficient transportation network for automobiles, public
               transit, bicycles, and pedestrians. Developing an efficient system depends on encouraging
               alternative transportation modes, which the Air Quality Element also attempts to accomplish
               through its programs.
               The Noise and Public Safety Elements, like the Air Quality Element, are concerned with the health
               and welfare of Cypress residents. Each element contains measures to minimize any hazard (i.e.,
               unsafe noise levels, natural or manmade hazards, or unhealthful air quality conditions) that may
               harm the community.
               The Growth Management Element encourages development to occur at a more gradual rate,
               giving a community the opportunity to provide adequate resources for its new residents. These
               provisions include transit networks and public facilities which, where properly planned for, can
               reduce unnecessary vehicle trips and related air pollutants.
               The Conservation/Open Space/Recreation (COSR) and Air Quality Elements are both concerned
               with conserving Cypress' natural resources. The COSR Element examines all resources, including
               water, biological, energy, land, and historic/cultural. The Air Quality Element focuses on
               maintaining air quality at healthful levels.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
               Air quality conditions in Cypress are influenced by many factors, including the topography, climate,
               and the number and type of pollution producers. This section examines these issues and historical
               pollution levels in the community, as compared to state and federal air quality standards.
               CLIMATE
               Cypress is located within the South Coast Air Basin. This Basin is a 6,600 square mile area that
               includes all of Orange County and the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside and San
               Bernardino counties. The South Coast Air Basin is topographically bounded by the Pacific Ocean
               to the west with the San Gabriel, San Bernardino and San Jacinto mountains to the north and east.
               The Pacific Ocean plays an important role in affecting local temperatures. As a result of the fairly
               narrow spread between the warmest and coldest monthly mean sea surface temperature in
               southern California coastal waters, the climate in Cypress is modified by the relatively warm ocean
               in winter and the cooling sea breezes in summer. These breezes also serve to disperse pollutants
               through the air basin.
               Cypress generally experiences mild summers and short, mild winters with an average July
               maximum temperature of 79 degrees Fahrenheit and an average January maximum daily
               temperature of 64 degrees Fahrenheit. The record high and low temperatures have been 108 and
               28 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively.
               Rainfall data for Cypress has averaged 12 to 13 inches annually with a minimum annual average of
               4.4 inches and a maximum annual average of 22.6 inches.
               The topography and climate of southern California combine to make the Basin an area of air
               pollution potential. During the summer months, a warm air mass frequently descends over the cool,
               moist marine layer produced by the interaction between the ocean's surface and the lowest layer of
               the atmosphere. The warm upper layer forms a cap over the cool marine layer and prevents
               pollutants from dispersing upward and allows pollutants to accumulate within the lower layer. This
AQ-2                                                                                          Air Quality Element
                                                                                                 Cypress General Plan
                  situation is called a temporary inversion. In addition, light winds during the summer further limit
                  ventilation.
                  Because of the low average wind speeds in the summer and a persistent daytime temperature
                  inversion, emissions of hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen have an opportunity to combine with
                  sunlight in a complex series of reactions producing photochemical oxidant (smog). The smog
                  potential is increased in the basin because the South Coast region experiences more days of
                  sunlight than any other major urban area except Phoenix, Arizona.
                  AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
                  Ambient air quality is described in terms of compliance with Federal and State standards. Ambient
                  air quality standards are the levels of air pollutant concentration considered safe to protect the
                  public health and welfare. They are designed to protect people most sensitive to respiratory
                  distress, such as asthmatics, the elderly, very young children, people already weakened by other
                  disease or illness, and persons engaged in strenuous work or exercise. National Ambient Air
                  Quality Standards (NAAQS) were established by the United States Environmental Protection
                  Agency (EPA) in 1971 for six air pollutants. States have the option of adding other pollutants, to
                  require more stringent compliance, or to include different exposure periods.
                  The California Air Resource Board (CARB) is required to designate areas of the State as
                  attainment, non-attainment, or unclassified for any State standard. An “attainment” designation for
                  an area signifies that pollutant concentrations did not violate the standard for that pollutant in that
                  area. A “non-attainment” designation indicates that a pollutant concentration violated the standard
                  at least once, excluding those occasions when a violation was caused by an exceptional event, as
                  defined in the criteria. An “unclassified” designation signifies that data do not support either an
                  attainment or non-attainment status.
                  State and Federal ambient air quality standards have been established for the following pollutants:
                  ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), fine particulate
                  matter (PM10) and lead. For some of these pollutants, notably O3 and PM10, the State standards
                  are more stringent than the Federal standards. The State has also established ambient air quality
                  standards for sulfates, hydrogen sulfide, vinyl chloride and visibility reducing particles. The above-
                  mentioned pollutants are generally known as “criteria pollutants.”
                  In 1997, the U.S. EPA announced new ambient air quality standards for O3 and PM10. The new
                  standards were intended to provide greater protection of public health. The EPA proposed to
                  phase out the 1- hour O3 standard and replace it with an 8-hour standard. There are two new
                  Federal PM2.5 (particulates less than 2.5 microns in diameter) standards: a 24-hour limit set at 65
                  micrograms per cubic meter (mg/m3) of ambient air and an annual average limit set at 15 mg/m3.
                  The current PM10 standards will be retained. Areas will be considered in attainment for the annual
                  PM2.5 standard when the three-year average of the annual arithmetic mean is equal to or less than
                  15 mg/m3. For the new 24-hour standard, attainment will be based on the 98th percentile of PM2.5
                  concentrations for each year, averaged over three years, to help compensate for any high
                  concentrations that may be due to unusual meteorological conditions. Following announcement of
                  the new national standards, the SCAQMD began collecting monitoring data to determine the
                  region’s attainment status with respect to the new standards. Industry groups have challenged the
                  new standards in court.1
       1  Assessing the Air Quality Impacts of Projects and Plans, Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD)
CEQA Guidelines, prepared by BAAQMD, December 1999.
Air Quality Element                                                                                                AQ-3

Cypress General Plan
                   The South Coast Air Basin has the worst air quality problem in the State. Despite implementing
                   many strict controls, the SCAQMD portions of the basin still fails to meet the Federal air quality for
                   three of the six criteria pollutants: ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO) and fine particulate matter
                   (PM10). Because Federal pollution standards have not been achieved, the basin is considered a
                   non-attainment area for Federal standards for these pollutants. For State standards, the Orange
                   County portion of the basin is designated as non-attainment for O3 and PM10.2
                   LOCAL AMBIENT AIR QUALITY
                   The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) operates several air quality
                   monitoring stations within the Air Basin. The City of Cypress is located within Source Receptor
                   Area (SRA) 17. The communities within an SRA are expected to have similar climatology and
                   subsequently, similar ambient air pollutant concentrations. The nearest air monitoring stations to
                   the City within SRA 17 is located in the City of Anaheim. Air Quality Data from 1994 to 1998 for the
                   Anaheim Monitoring Station is provided in Table AQ-1.
                   REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
                   FEDERAL CLEAN AIR ACT
                   The 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) authorized the establishment of the National Ambient Air Quality
                   Standards (NAAQS), and set deadlines for their attainment. The Federal Clean Air Act
                   Amendments of 1990 made major changes in deadlines for attaining NAAQS and in the actions
                   required of areas of the nation that exceeded these standards.
                   CALIFORNIA CLEAN AIR ACT
                   The 1988 California Clean Air Act (CCAA) requires that all air districts in the State endeavor to
                   achieve and maintain CAAQS for ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur oxides (SO2), and
                   nitrogen oxides (NO2) by the earliest practical date. The CCAA specifies that districts focus
                   particular attention on reducing the emissions from transportation and area-wide emission sources.
                   The Act also gives districts new authority to regulate indirect sources. Each district plan is to
                   achieve a five percent annual reduction (averaged over consecutive three-year periods) in district-
                   wide emissions of each non-attainment pollutant or its precursors. Any additional development
                   within the region would impede the “no net” increase prohibition, in that further emissions
                   reductions must be affected from all other airshed sources to fit any project development mobile
                   source emissions increase.
                   A strict interpretation of the “no net” increase prohibition suggest that any general development
                   within the region, no matter how large or small, would have a significant, project-specific air quality
                   impact unless the development-related emissions are offset by concurrent emissions reduction
                   elsewhere within the airshed. Any planning effort for air quality attainment would thus need to
                   consider both State and Federal planning requirements.
         2 Proposed Amendment to the Area Designations for State Ambient Air Quality Standards and Proposed Maps of the
Area Designations for the State and National Air Quality Standards, prepared by the California Environmental Protection Agency,
Air Resource Board, October 1, 1999.
AQ-4                                                                                                   Air Quality Element

                                                                                                        Cypress General Plan
                      SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
                      The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) has prepared multiple Air Quality
                      Management Plans (AQMPs) to accomplish the five percent annual reduction goal. The most
                      recent AQMP was published in 1997. To accomplish its task, the AQMP relies on a multi-level
                      partnership of governmental agencies at the Federal, State, regional and local level. These
                      agencies, which include EPA, CARB, local governments, Southern California Association of
                      Governments (SCAG) and the SCAQMD, are the cornerstones that implement the AQMP
                      programs.
                                                            Table AQ-1
                                                LOCAL AIR QUALITY LEVELS
                                           (As measured at the Anaheim Station)
                                                     Federal                                               Days (Samples)
                            California              Primary                                 Maximum1        State/Federal
     Pollutant                                                              Year
                            Standard               Standard                               Concentration     Std. Exceeded
                                                                            1994               7.9                0/0
                                                                            1995               8.0                0/0
      Carbon                 9.1 ppm                9.5 ppm
                                                                            1996               7.5                0/0
     Monoxide               for 8 hour             for 8 hour
                                                                            1997               5.8                0/0
                                                                            1998               5.3                0/0
                                                                            1994               .21               24/5
                                                                            1995               .13               19/2
                             0.09 ppm               0.12 ppm
      Ozone                                                                 1996               .13                9/1
                            for 1 hour             for 1 hour
                                                                            1997               .10                1/0
                                                                            1998               .14               10/2
                                                                            1994               .19                0/0
                                                                            1995               .18                0/0
     Nitrogen                0.25 ppm              0.053 ppm
                                                                            1996               .15                0/0
     Dioxides               for 1 hour           annual average
                                                                            1997               .13                0/0
                                                                            1998               .13                0/0
                                                                            1994                --                 --
                                            0.14 ppm for 24 hours
                                                                            1995                --                 --
                          0.25 ppm for 1                or
  Sulfur Dioxides                                                           1996                --                 --
                               hour          80 ug/m3 (0.03 ppm)
                                                                            1997                --                 --
                                                 annual average
                                                                            1998                --                 --
                                                                            1994               106               11/0
                                                                            1995               172               14/1
  Fine Particulate           50 ug/m                150 ug/m
                                                                            1996               101                6/0
      Matter               for 24 hours           for 24 hours
                                                                            1997                91               11/0
                                                                            1998                81               12/0
 Sources: Data obtained from the South Coast Air Quality Management District, 1994 to 1998.
 ppm = parts per million
 ug/m3= micrograms per cubic meter
 N/M = not measured
 NOTES:
 1.        Maximum concentration is measured over the same period as the California Standard.
Air Quality Element                                                                                                     AQ-5
Cypress General Plan
               1997 AQMP. A 1997 AQMP was prepared and adopted by the SCAQMD on November 15, 1996.
               The 1997 AQMP was adopted by CARB on January 23, 1997. The 1997 Plan contains two tiers of
               control measures: short- and intermediate-term, and long-term. Short- and intermediate-term
               measures are scheduled to be adopted between 1997 and the year 2005. These measures rely on
               known technologies and other actions to be taken by several agencies that currently have the
               statutory authority to implement the measures. They are designed to satisfy the Federal CAA
               requirement of Reasonably Available Control Technology (RACT) and the CCAA requirement of
               Best Available Retrofit Control Technology (BARCT). There are 37 stationary source and 24
               mobile source control measures in this group.
               To ultimately achieve ambient air quality standards, further development and refinement of known
               low- and zero-emission control technologies, in addition to technological breakthroughs, would be
               necessary. Long-term measures rely on the advancement of technologies and control methods
               that can reasonably be expected to occur between 1994 and 2010.
               The 1997 AQMP continues to include most of the control measures outlined in the previous 1994
               Ozone Plan with minor exceptions, but postpones many marginal measures found to be less cost-
               effective, drops future indirect-source rules that are now deemed infeasible, and focuses the
               SCAQMD’s efforts on about ten major emission-reduction rules. The SCAQMD will focus its efforts
               on seven major rules to reduce volatile organic compounds (VOCs), a key ingredient in smog; and
               the Plan includes new market-based measures giving businesses greater flexibility in meeting
               emission-reduction requirements, such as intercredit trading and additional credits for mobile
               source emission reductions.
               The 1997 AQMP shows that measures outlined in the 1994 Ozone Plan are sufficient to attain the
               Federal health standards for the two most difficult ingredients in smog, PM10 and ground level O3,
               by the years 2006 and 2010, respectively. The region already has met the three other Federal
               health standards for Pb, SO2 and NO2.
               To help reduce PM10 pollution, the 1997 Plan outlines seven control measures for directly emitted
               particulates which will reduce emissions from agricultural areas, livestock waste, wood-working
               operations, construction, and restaurants. The measures will also help control dust from paved
               and unpaved roads, which accounts for two thirds of the directly-emitted particulates.
               1997 AQMP Control Strategies. The 1997 AQMP’s off-road mobile source control measures are
               based on the EPA’s proposed Federal Implementation Plan (FIP) for the SCAB. The FIP’s
               proposed control measures are based on a combination of stringent emission standards, declining
               caps on emission levels and emission/user fees.
               SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
               Sensitive populations are more susceptible to the effects of air pollution than are the general
               population. Sensitive populations (sensitive receptors) who are in proximity to localized sources of
               toxics and carbon monoxide are of particular concern. Land uses considered sensitive receptors
               include residences, schools, playgrounds, child care centers, athletic facilities, long-term health
               care facilities, rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers, and retirement homes.
               TOXIC AIR CONTAMINANTS (TACs)
               SCAQMD implements TAC controls through Federal, State and local programs. Federally, TACs
               are regulated by EPA under Title III of the CAA. At the State level, the CARB has designated all
               243 Federal hazardous air pollutants as TACs, under the authority of AB 1807. The Air Toxic Hot
AQ-6                                                                                           Air Quality Element

                                                                                                Cypress General Plan
                Spots Information and Assessment Act (AB 2588) requires inventories and public notices for
                facilities that emit TACs. Senate Bill 1731 amended AB 2588 to require facilities with “significant
                risks” to prepare a risk reduction plan (reflected in SCAQMD Rule 1402). SCAQMD also regulates
                source-specific TACs.
                The City of Cypress, as a local government, will be primarily responsible for implementing the
                transportation and land use measures included in the AQMP and reducing emissions in the areas
                of energy conservation, dust control, and trip reduction. This may be done, in part, through the
                adoption of this Air Quality Element as part of the City's General Plan.
KEY AIR QUALITY ISSUES
                The following section identifies issues that contribute to air pollution in Cypress and the region and
                specifies regulations which must be implemented to fulfill Air Quality Management Plan
                requirements.
                LAND USE PATTERNS
                Land use regulations influence the distribution of housing, employment centers, and other land
                uses within a community. The widespread distribution of different land use sectors affects
                individuals traveling to various destinations within a community. A substantial amount of air
                pollution can be contributed to automobile trips traveling between these locations.
                          Only those cities and counties (including Cypress) that have adopted a Congestion
                           Management Plan (CMP) and can annually demonstrate an integration and application of
                           CMP requirements into the land use decision-making process will be eligible for State gas
                           tax funding.
                          The Cypress Business Park serves as a major employment center within the City, and
                           has contributed to achieving a relative balance between jobs and housing in the City.
                           Locating jobs and housing within close distance creates the opportunity for individuals to
                           choose alternative transportation modes to work, including walking or bicycling.
                          Commercial centers within Cypress, including development along Lincoln Avenue, and
                           other major arterials, are generally separated from residential uses and require use of the
                           automobile to access. Integrating housing opportunities within and adjacent to commercial
                           developments encourages pedestrian rather than vehicular travel.
                TRANSPORTATION
                The widespread use of automobiles in Southern California contributes to the area's degrading air
                quality. The Air Quality Management Plan focuses on reducing vehicle trips because of the
                emissions created by automobile travel.
                          Extensive use of personal motorized transportation modes contributes to the region's poor
                           air quality. The home to work trip constitutes the majority of these trips taken on an
                           individual basis. Reducing the number of home to work vehicle trips would substantially
                           diminish the amount of pollution generated.
Air Quality Element                                                                                              AQ-7

Cypress General Plan
               REDUCE PARTICULATE EMISSIONS
               Particulates resulting from construction activities and various other sources degrade the area's air
               quality.
                        The Cypress Business Park contains the majority of undeveloped acreage within the City.
                         Construction activities occurring throughout the community and specifically in the
                         Business Park can create particulate emissions. The City has adopted standard
                         conditions of approval for site watering during construction to minimize particulates.
                        Some agricultural land remains in southern Cypress. Dust rising from farming practices
                         and unpaved roads degrades the community's air quality.
               REDUCE ENERGY CONSUMPTION
               The City of Cypress, through conserving its energy resources, will reduce the amount of emissions
               produced. Energy conservation techniques utilized in residential, commercial, and industrial
               developments will lessen the City’s energy consumption, thereby decreasing pollutants generated
               from various energy sources. In addition, the utilization of recycled materials will reduce emissions
               because new products will not have to be produced.
                        Energy conservation measures integrated into residential, commercial, and industrial
                         developments will reduce air pollutants generated during energy production.
                        Recycling efforts mandated by Assembly Bill (AB) 939 require local jurisdictions to reduce
                         the amount of solid waste produced. Utilization of recycled materials will decrease energy
                         consumption resulting in less pollutants being generated.
DESCRIPTION OF THE AIR QUALITY PLAN
               The Plan section describes specific measures employed to implement the goals and policies
               contained within the Cypress Air Quality Element. The Element also provides direction for
               implementing programs which will support regional efforts to improve air quality in the South Coast
               Air Basin.
               Of primary importance in attaining air quality goals is a coordinated regional effort. Cypress will
               cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality Management District and the Southern California
               Association of Governments to implement the goals of this Element and the Air Quality
               Management Plan (AQMP). The City will be primarily responsible for implementing the
               transportation and land use measures included in the AQMP and reducing emissions through
               energy conservation, dust control, and trip reduction.
GOALS AND POLICIES
                Air quality is a regional issue affecting the entire South Coast Air Basin (SCAB) which includes the
               City of Cypress. The SCAB has been in violation with state and federal air quality standards for the
               past several years. In an effort to attain air quality standards, the Cypress Air Quality Element
               identifies goals and policies to reduce the generation of pollutants. Specifically, the Element
               focuses on land use, transportation, and energy planning measures to aid the South Coast Air
               Basin in reducing air pollution.
AQ-8                                                                                           Air Quality Element

                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
                LAND USE PATTERN
                AQ-1: Reduce air pollution through proper land use and transportation planning.
                      AQ-1.1:    Cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality Management District and the
                                 Southern California Association of Governments in their effort to implement
                                 provisions of the region's Air Quality Management Plan, as amended.
                      AQ-1.2:    Design safe and efficient vehicular access to commercial land uses from
                                 arterial streets to ensure efficient vehicular ingress and egress.
                      AQ-1.3:    Locate multiple family developments close to commercial areas to encourage
                                 pedestrian rather than vehicular travel.
                      AQ-1.4:    Develop neighborhood parks near concentrations of residents to encourage
                                 pedestrian travel to the recreation facilities.
                      AQ-1.5:    Encourage the design of commercial areas to foster pedestrian circulation.
                      AQ-1.6:    Create the maximum possible opportunities for bicycles as an alternative
                                 transportation mode and recreational use.
                      AQ-1.7:    Cooperate and participate in regional air quality management plans, programs,
                                 and enforcement measures.
                      AQ-1.8:    Implement the required components of the Congestion Management Plan, and
                                 continue to work with Orange County on annual updates to the CMP.
                TRANSPORTATION
                AQ-2: Improve air quality by reducing the amount of vehicular emissions in Cypress.
                      AQ-2.1:    Utilize incentives, regulations and/or Transportation Demand Management
                                 (TDM) programs in cooperation with other jurisdictions in the South Coast Air
                                 Basin to eliminate vehicle trips which would otherwise be made.
                      AQ-2.2:    Utilize incentives, regulations and/or Transportation Demand Management in
                                 cooperation with other jurisdictions to reduce the vehicle miles traveled for
                                 auto trips which still need to be made.
                      AQ-2.3:    Promote and establish modified work schedules which reduce peak period
                                 auto travel.
                      AQ-2.4:    Participate in efforts to achieve increased designation, construction, and
                                 operation of High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes on local freeways.
                      AQ-2.5:    Cooperate in efforts to expand bus, railroad and other forms of transit serving
                                 the City and the urbanized portions of Orange County.
                      AQ-2.6:    Encourage non-motorized transportation through the provision of bicycle and
                                 pedestrian pathways.
Air Quality Element                                                                                        AQ-9
Cypress General Plan
                     AQ-2.7:  Encourage employer rideshare and transit incentives programs by local
                              businesses.
                     AQ-2.8:  Manage parking supply to discourage auto use, while ensuring that economic
                              development goals will not be sacrificed.
                     AQ-2.9:  Encourage businesses to alter truck delivery routes and local delivery
                              schedules during peak hours, or switch to off-peak delivery hours.
                     AQ-2.10: Implement Citywide traffic flow improvements outlined in the Circulation
                              Element.
                     AQ-2.11: Promote state and federal legislation which would improve vehicle/
                              transportation technology and cleaner fuels.
                     AQ-2.12: Implement land use policy contained in the Land Use Element toward the end
                              of achieving jobs/housing balance goals.
                     AQ-2.13: Integrate air quality planning with the land use and transportation process.
               REDUCE PARTICULATE EMISSIONS
               AQ-3: Reduce particulate emissions to the greatest extent feasible.
                     AQ-3.1:  Adopt incentives, regulations, and/or procedures to minimize particulate
                              emissions from unpaved roads, agricultural uses, and building construction.
               REDUCE ENERGY CONSUMPTION
               AQ-4: Reduce emissions through reduced energy consumption.
                     AQ-4.1:  Promote energy conservation in all sectors of the City including residential,
                              commercial, and industrial.
                     AQ-4.2:  Promote local recycling of wastes and the use of recycled materials.
                     AQ-4.3:  Adopt incentives and regulations to reduce emissions from swimming pool
                              heaters and residential and commercial water heaters.
AQ-10                                                                                    Air Quality Element
                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
VIII. GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
             PURPOSE
             The purpose and intent of the Growth Management Element (GME) is to mandate that growth and
             development be based upon the City’s ability to provide an adequate circulation system and public
             facilities pursuant to the Orange County Division, League of California Cities Countywide Traffic
             Improvement and Growth Management Plan Component.
             On November 6, 1990, Orange County voters approved Measure M, the Revised Traffic
             Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance, which provides funding to Orange County for
             needed transportation improvements over a 20-year period through the imposition of a one-half
             cent retail transaction and use tax. Portions of the monies received from the new sales tax
             revenue will be returned to Orange County jurisdictions for use of local and regional transportation
             improvements, subject to the jurisdiction’s acquisition and retention of an eligible status for
             Measure M revenues.
             To qualify for Measure M funds, the City of Cypress must comply with the Countywide Growth
             Management Program component requirements and have an established policy framework for the
             required Growth Management Program through the adoption of a Growth Management Element.
             The Growth Management Element must: 1) establish policy statements that identify traffic levels of
             service (LOS); 2) commit the City to implement a development mitigation program; and 3) commit
             the City to implement a development phasing and monitoring program. The Growth Management
             Element follows guidelines in the State Government Code Section 65303.
             RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
             A major goal of the Growth Management Element is to ensure that the planning, management and
             implementation of traffic improvements and public facilities are adequate to meet the current and
             projected needs of the City. While this goal is a high priority, it must be achieved while maintaining
             internal consistency among the other elements of the General Plan, as required by State law.
             Therefore, the Growth Management Element does not replace or supercede any of the other
             general plan elements; instead, the Growth Management Element addresses, amplifies and
             supports traffic LOS and public facility standards that are included in the other general plan
             elements and establishes new standards, where necessary. The Growth Management Element
             also serves to augment development mitigation, development phasing and annual monitoring
             discussions in other general plan elements.
Growth Management Element                                                                                   GM-1

Cypress General Plan
               The Growth Management Element is implemented through various coordinated programs
               developed to support and carry out its goals and policies. In addition, this Element has been
               designed to minimize duplication between Measure M and Congestion Management Program
               (CMP) requirements. The Growth Management Element is the most current description of City
               growth management policies. While there is a certain amount of overlap with the other general
               plan elements, the Growth Management Element is the key resource document for growth
               management concerns.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
               RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
               Many federal, state, regional and Orange County plans and laws affect growth management in the
               City of Cypress. Broadly, they include the Orange County Growth Management Plan, the Southern
               California Association of Governments (SCAG) Growth Management Plan, South Coast Air Quality
               Management District (SCAQMD) Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP), State Assembly Bill 471
               (Proposition 111- Congestion Management), and Measure M (Orange County). Of all of these,
               Measure M will have the most direct and significant impact upon the City's Growth Management
               Plan.
KEY GROWTH MANAGEMENT ISSUES
               The Growth Management Element addresses primarily the issues associated with rapid growth,
               traffic congestion, and transportation facilities.
               TRAFFIC CONGESTION
               •     Traffic congestion is a problem on major arterials and regional freeways. In particular, heavy
                     traffic volumes in Cypress exist along Valley View Street, Katella Avenue, Knott Street, and
                     Lincoln Avenue. As employment increases in the Business Park, traffic will increase along
                     arterials in the southern portion of the City, which will in turn impact freeway access to the
                     Garden Grove, San Diego, San Gabriel and Riverside Freeways.
               NEED FOR ADEQUATE TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES
               •     Many of the regional transportation facilities are not adequately sized to accommodate existing
                     and projected growth.
               •     A significant portion of transportation problems in Orange County stems from the inadequate
                     capacity of the freeway system to serve peak period travel demands. This lack of capacity
                     results in poor levels of service characterized by severe congestion and low travel speeds
                     during peak hours.
               •     Arterial highways are intended to handle the bulk of intra-regional traffic and complement the
                     freeway system and local street network. As congestion increases on the freeway, more
                     drivers utilize the arterial system, particularly those that parallel the freeways or those arterials
                     serving the same trip destination as the freeway.
                     Consequently, arterials such as Valley View Street, Katella Avenue, Knott Street, and Lincoln
                     Avenue are becoming increasingly congested and receive heavy traffic volumes, which in
GM-2                                                                                    Growth Management Element

                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
                  limited cases may increase traffic close to the design capacities of the arterials. This situation
                  is of special concern on those arterials that provide access to the freeway system.
             INTER-JURISDICTIONAL COORDINATION/COOPERATION
             •    Traffic congestion in Cypress is both a regional and local problem. Development occurring in
                  neighboring jurisdictions and throughout the County has effects upon the freeways and many
                  of the major arterials that traverse the City of Cypress. Thus, Cypress cannot fully address
                  growth management issues in isolation from other jurisdictions. The impacts of growth in
                  adjacent jurisdictions, in portions of the City, and throughout the County have created the need
                  for a regional approach to transportation growth management.
             JOBS/HOUSING BALANCE
             •    One of the major causes of traffic congestion is land use patterns that hinder the ability of
                  people to live and work in the same area. Long commutes can overburden traffic
                  infrastructure and diminish quality of life. Creating communities where people can both live
                  and work in relative proximity shortens commutes and encourages the use of alternative forms
                  of transportation to and from employment.
DESCRIPTION OF THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
             GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
             The City's Growth Management Plan includes all of the components required for Developed
             Communities by Measure M, the Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance.
             Additional implementation programs independent of this Element will be required in order to
             implement the Growth Management Plan.
             TRAFFIC LEVEL-OF-SERVICE GOALS
             Policy 1.1 of this Element requires that development sponsors make necessary improvements to
             the circulation system, where affected by their development, so as to maintain acceptable LOS
             levels at intersections and on roadway links under City control. Roadway expansions will be
             planned as part of the Capital Improvement Program and phased according to the Comprehensive
             Phasing Program. The LOS goals will be incorporated into conditions of approval and monitored
             annually through the Performance Monitoring Program.
             Achievement of the adopted Levels-of-Service standard and implementation of exacted
             transportation improvements shall take into consideration extraordinary transportation
             circumstances which may impact identified intersections and/or timing of the required
             improvements. An example of an extraordinary circumstance would be when arterial roadways
             serve as substitute freeway access (thus impacting LOS performance) while planning and
             construction of additional freeway improvements are underway.
             DEVELOPMENT MITIGATION PROGRAM
             The City has established a Development Mitigation Program based on Orange County
             Transportation Authority (OCTA) timetables to ensure that all new development pays its share of
             needed transportation improvements to the City's roadway network associated with that
             development.
Growth Management Element                                                                                     GM-3

Cypress General Plan
               Citywide Traffic Fee: The City of Cypress has developed a Citywide Fee to address specific
               traffic improvements needs to the General Plan circulation system. These improvements address
               future traffic conditions assuming buildout of the City. The Citywide Fee was adopted through
               Resolution No. 4276 (date) and Ordinance No. 911 (date). The fee is applied in accordance with
               adopted City procedures.
               Regional Traffic Fee: The City of Cypress has also taken a proactive approach to potential
               regional impacts of new development through the adoption of a Regional Traffic Fee. This fee is in
               addition to the Cypress Citywide Fee and provides proportionate share funding of impacts to the
               regional roadway system.
               Los Alamitos Settlement Agreement Traffic Fee: The City has entered an agreement with the
               City of Los Alamitos to offset impacts around the race track. Development projects in the vicinity of
               the Los Alamitos Race Track are required to pay a fee of $1.00 per square foot in accordance with
               the agreement to the City of Los Alamitos.
               Participation shall be on a pro-rata basis and be required of all development projects except where
               an increased level of participation exceeding these requirements is established through negotiated
               legal mechanisms.
               The City will work to facilitate coordination of this program through inter-jurisdictional forums in
               order to determine minimally acceptable impact fees for application within the Growth Management
               Areas (GMA). The City will receive credit for existing traffic mitigation fee programs with regard to
               the GMA base level fee.
               COMPREHENSIVE PHASING PROGRAM
               The City has prepared a Comprehensive Phasing Program (CPP) based on OCTA timetables. The
               purpose of this program is to ensure to the extent feasible that adequate infrastructure (roadways,
               utilities) is constructed as development occurs by linking the ability of the development to proceed
               to either construction of the improvement(s) by others, construction of the improvement(s) by the
               developer, or by the developer's timely provision of the appropriate funding to the City so that the
               provision of these facilities is in balance with demand.
               While the Comprehensive Phasing Program will provide plans for new facilities, the Performance
               Monitoring Program will provide annual evaluation of compliance with phasing plans in order for
               development to continue. The Comprehensive Phasing Program shall provide reasonable lead
               time (three years from first building permit or five years from first grading permit) to design and
               construct specific transportation improvements.
               PERFORMANCE MONITORING PROGRAM
               The City has prepared a Performance Monitoring Program based on OCTA timetables. The
               Performance Monitoring Program will establish a system for annual evaluation of compliance with
               newly approved development phasing allocations. Under this program, roadway and other
               transportation facility improvements or fundings must actually be provided in order for new
               development to continue.
               The Performance Monitoring program provides an annual evaluation of the maintenance of
               transportation service levels. Annual traffic reports prepared under this Program shall utilize data
               collected within three (3) months of preparation of the report. In the event that the Performance
GM-4                                                                                Growth Management Element
                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
             Monitoring Program identifies one or more service level deficiencies, measures shall be
             implemented to correct identified deficiencies.
             CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS
             The City has prepared a Capital Improvement Program (CIP) for transportation systems
             improvements to effectively manage the system based on OCTA timetables. The purpose of the
             Capital Improvement Programs is to estimate future development over a seven-year period and
             determine the necessary infrastructure and associated costs required for this new development.
             The Capital Improvement Plans will be closely linked with the Comprehensive Phasing Plans.
             The City will determine the capital projects needed to meet and maintain both the City's adopted
             Traffic Level of Service and Performance Standards. Capital financing programming will be based
             on proposed development to be constructed during (at a minimum) the following seven-year
             period. The CIP shall include approved projects and an analysis of the costs of proposed projects
             as well as a financing plan for providing the improvements.
             INTER-JURISDICTIONAL COOPERATION
             The City of Cypress has become involved in inter-jurisdictional coordination for various purposes,
             including:
                  •    Cooperating with the County of Orange, the Orange County Transportation Authority
                       (OCTA), and other local jurisdictions through the Regional Advisory and Planning Council
                       (RAPC), or other appointed bodies, on the implementation of Measure M and the
                       development of future revisions.
                  •    Working with inter-jurisdictional forums (such as the City-County Coordinating Committee)
                       to make sure that the City's fees are consistent with minimally acceptable impact fees for
                       application within the larger Growth Management Area;
                  •    Participating in the Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Forums at the Growth Management Area
                       (GMA) level to discuss implementation of traffic improvements, cooperative land use
                       planning, and appropriate mitigation measures for developments with multi-jurisdictional
                       impacts;
                  •    Working with the inter-jurisdictional forums to develop strategies for bringing about greater
                       jobs/housing balance at the subregional level;
                  •    Cooperating with the County of Orange in implementing the Facility Implementation Plans
                       and collaborating in the Development Monitoring Program;
                  •    Cooperating with State, County, and local governments in planning and implementing the
                       City's Circulation Element, and coordinating efforts to ensure orderly development; and
                  •    Coordinating population, housing, employment and land use projections with the State
                       Department of Finance, SCAG, the County of Orange Development Monitoring Program,
                       school and water districts.
Growth Management Element                                                                                     GM-5

Cypress General Plan
                 COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLANS FOR LARGE PROJECTS
                 As in the past, Cypress will require that any new large developments prepare a Specific Plan and
                 environmental impact analysis. This will allow the City to anticipate the impacts of large projects
                 prior to development of any portion, and permit more time to plan for public services and facilities
                 needed to support the projects.
                 COORDINATION WITH ADJACENT JURISDICTIONS
                 Apart from coordination with subregional or inter-jurisdictional forums (such as the City-County
                 Coordinating Committee), the City will separately work with other cities and agencies in the
                 immediate area to develop mutual agreements for review and possible conditioning of development
                 projects.
GOALS AND POLICIES
                 The following goals and policies are designed to meet all the Growth Management Element
                 requirements for Developed Communities as set forth by Measure M and elaborated by the
                 Countywide Growth Management Program Implementation Manual.
                 GM-1:      Reduce traffic congestion.
                            GM-1.1: Within three years of the issuance of the first building permit for a development
                                      project or within five years of the first grading permit for said development
                                      project, whichever occurs first, ensure that the necessary improvements to
                                      transportation facilities to which the project contributes measurable traffic are
                                      constructed and completed to attain Level-of-Service (LOS) D at the
                                      intersections under the sole control of the City.
                            GM-1.2: Level of Service (LOS) will be measured by the Traffic Level of Service Policy
                                      Implementation Manual established by the Local Transportation Authority.
                            GM-1.3: All development contributing significant impacts to intersections on the Deficient
                                      Intersection List and all projects contributing cumulatively, or individually, 10
                                      percent or more of the traffic using an intersection shall be assessed a mitigation
                                      fee determined by the jurisdictions in the Growth Management Area and locally
                                      administered as part of the City's Capital Improvement Program.
                            GM-1.4: Promote traffic reduction strategies through Transportation                 Demand
                                      Management (TDM) measures adopted by City ordinance.1
                 GM-2: Ensure adequate transportation facilities are provided for existing and future inhabitants of
                            the City.
                            GM-2.1: Require that all new development pay its share of the street improvement costs
                                      associated with the development, including regional traffic mitigation.
        1 Not required for Growth Management Element, but required to meet Measure M and CMP requirements.
GM-6                                                                                     Growth Management Element
                                                                                            Cypress General Plan
                     GM-2.2: New revenues generated from Measure M shall not be used to replace private
                               developer funding which has been committed for any project.
                     GM-2.3: The City shall continue to collect Transportation System Improvement Program
                               (TSIP) fees for improvements within its boundaries and shall work with adjacent
                               jurisdictions to determine acceptable impact fees within the growth management
                               areas. These fees may be assessed as necessary in addition to the City's TSIP
                               fees to cover shortfalls that may not be generated by the established fee
                               program.
                     GM-2.4: A Deficient Intersection Fund shall be established by the City to make
                               improvements on those intersections necessary to achieve the LOS standard
                               established in this Element.
                     GM-2.5: All newly approved development projects shall be required to establish a
                               development phasing program which phases approval of development
                               commensurate with required improvements to roadway capacity.
                     GM-2.6: Development phasing for newly approved development projects shall be a
                               component of the development review and entitlement process and shall be
                               approved prior to issuance of building or grading permits.
                     GM-2.7: The City shall monitor the implementation of the development phasing program
                               of each of the newly approved development projects on an annual basis and
                               prepare a report which indicates the status of development approval and
                               required traffic improvements and relationship between them.
                     GM-2.8: A ten-year Performance Monitoring Program shall be developed to provide an
                               annual evaluation of compliance with development phasing and evaluation of the
                               maintenance of transportation service levels.
                     GM-2.9: A Seven-Year Capital Improvement Program shall be adopted and maintained in
                               conformance with provisions of Measure M for the purpose of maintaining
                               adopted traffic level of service standards established in this Element.
             GM-3:   Cooperate with neighboring jurisdictions and the County to achieve reduction in regional
                     traffic congestion.
                     GM-3.1: The City shall participate in inter-jurisdictional planning forums within its
                               established growth management area as adopted by the Regional Advisory
                               Planning Council and will continue to participate in forums with neighboring or
                               affected jurisdictions to address transportation or other planning issues.
                     GM-3.2: The City will continue to cooperate with the County of Orange in annually
                               updating its Congestion Management Plan pursuant to the requirement of AB
                               471 in order to continue to receive its share of State gasoline sales tax revenues.
             GM-4:   Strive to maintain the good balance between jobs and housing in Cypress.
                     GM-4.1: To the extent feasible, utilize information on the jobs/housing balance in the City
                               and region as a factor in land use decision-making.
Growth Management Element                                                                                   GM-7
                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
IX. HOUSING ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION TO THE HOUSING ELEMENT
               The City of Cypress, incorporated in 1956, is a relatively young suburban community located in
               northwestern Orange County. Soon after incorporation, Cypress began a period of rapid residential
               growth, with numerous single-family housing tracts built in the 1960s and 1970s. With only limited
               vacant land available for additional development, the majority of recent residential growth has
               occurred through the recycling of underutilized properties, and through integration of housing on
               commercial corridors. The most significant residential development in Cypress during the 1990s
               was the completion of 671 single-family homes on the recycled acreage of a 144-acre oil storage
               tank farm site. The City’s Redevelopment Agency has been actively involved in the provision of
               housing, and has assisted in the development of both ownership and rental housing affordable to
               low and moderate income households.
               This Housing Element is intended to guide residential development and preservation in a way that
               coincides with the overall economic and social values of the community. The residential character
               of a city is largely dependent on the type and quality of its dwelling units, their location, and such
               factors as maintenance and neighborhood amenities. The Housing Element is an official municipal
               response to a growing awareness of the need to provide housing for all economic segments of the
               community, as well as legal requirements that housing policy be made a part of the planning
               process. As such, the Element establishes policies that will guide City officials in daily decision
               making and sets forth an action program designed to enable the City to realize its housing goals.
               STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
               The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and a satisfying
               environment for every Californian as the State's major housing goal. Recognizing that local
               planning programs play a significant role in the pursuit of this goal, and to assure that local
               planning effectively implements statewide housing policy, the legislature has mandated that all
               cities and counties include a housing element as part of their adopted local general plans. Section
               65302(c) of the Government Code sets forth the specific components to be contained in a
               community’s housing element.
               The Government Code specifies the intent of the Legislature to ensure that counties and cities
               actively participate in attaining the state housing goal, and sets forth specific components to be
               contained in a housing element. These include the identification and analysis of existing and
               projected housing needs, resources and constraints; a statement of goals, policies, quantified
               objectives, and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement and development of
               housing; identification of adequate sites for housing; and adequate provision for the existing and
               projected needs of all economic segments of the community.
Housing Element                                                                                              HOU-1

Cypress General Plan
               ORGANIZATION OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
               The Housing Element Guidelines require elements to include two basic components:
               1.         An evaluation of the housing problem and an analysis of housing needs, indicating the
                          capacity of the existing housing supply to provide all economic segments of the
                          community with decent housing.
               2.         A housing program consisting of the following:
                          •   A comprehensive problem solving strategy establishing local housing goals, policies,
                              and priorities aimed at alleviating unmet need and remedying the housing problem;
                              and
                          •   A course of action which includes a specific description of the actions the locality is
                              undertaking and intends to undertake to effectuate these goals, policies, and
                              priorities.
               The Cypress Housing Element describes the City's housing needs and sets forth a program of
               action in accordance with State law. This first chapter of the Element defines the intent of the
               Housing Element, describes its relationship to State directives and other General Plan elements,
               and includes a description of the public participation and intergovernmental coordination utilized in
               its preparation.
               The second chapter of the Housing Element provides an overview of the present and projected
               housing needs of the City's households as defined by the Housing Element Technical Data Report,
               which serves as an appendix to the Element. This section also provides an analysis of potential
               constraints to meeting the City's identified housing needs and an evaluation of opportunities that
               will further the development of new housing. The third chapter of the Housing Element establishes
               a comprehensive program strategy to implement the City's housing goals. Finally, the fourth
               chapter sets forth the goals and policies to address Cypress' identified housing needs.
               RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
               Concurrent with this update to the City's Housing Element, the City is embarking upon a
               comprehensive update to the Cypress General Plan. A major purpose of the updated General Plan
               is to achieve internal consistency among all elements. Together these elements will provide the
               framework for development of those facilities, services, and land uses necessary to address the
               needs and desires of City residents.
               Background information and policy direction presented in one element is also reflected within other
               Plan elements. For example, residential development capacities established in the Land Use
               Element and constraints to housing development identified in the Safety Element are incorporated
               within the Housing Element. The Housing Element is thus interrelated with the other General Plan
               elements, and is entirely consistent with the policies and proposals set forth by the Plan.
               RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
               A number of local and regional plans and programs relate to the Housing Element. A brief
               description of these plans follows:
HOU-2                                                                                              Housing Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
               Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA): California’s Housing Element requires that each
               city and county develop local housing programs designed to meet its “fair share” of existing and
               future needs for all income groups, as determined by the jurisdiction’s Council of Governments.
               This “fair share” allocation concept seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction accepts responsibility for
               the housing needs not only of its resident population, but also for those households who might
               reasonably be expected to reside in the jurisdiction.
               The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is responsible for allocating the
               region’s future housing needs (“RHNA”) among subregions and individual jurisdictions. In Orange
               County, the Orange County Council of Governments (OCCOG) was delegated responsibility for
               developing the RHNA coordination with the cities and SCAG. The draft 1998-2005 Regional
               Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) adopted by SCAG and OCCOG has identified the 1998-2005
               future housing need for Cypress as 578 units, including 180 lower income units. These regional
               housing needs are addressed in the Housing Element both through the provision of suitable sites,
               and the provision of programs to support housing for low and moderate income households.
               Redevelopment Implementation Plan: The Cypress Redevelopment Agency is required to adopt
               an Implementation Plan every five years which identifies Agency activities for the elimination of
               blight, and addresses the Agency’s affordable housing responsibilities. More specifically, the
               housing component of the Plan addresses the Agency’s expenditure of low and moderate income
               housing funds over the five year planning period (2000-2004); the Agency’s replacement housing
               requirements; and the Agency’s housing production requirements. The City’s Housing Element is
               required to be consistent with the Agency’s Implementation Plan. The Implementation Plan
               identifies $2.6 million in redevelopment set-aside funds available to implement housing programs
               during the 2000-2004 period.
               PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
               Section 65583(c)(5) of the Government Code states that “local government shall make diligent
               effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the community in the development
               of the housing element, and the program shall describe this effort.”
               During the initial needs gathering phase of the Housing Element Update, a publicly noticed
               community workshop was conducted at the Cypress Community Center to receive input on key
               housing issues. Participants were asked to complete a brief survey to identify what they felt were
               the community’s most pressing housing needs. A publicly noticed workshop was also conducted
               with the Cypress City Council to review the draft Housing Element goals, policies and programs.
               Upon completion of the draft Housing Element, copies were made available for public review
               throughout the community, including City Hall, the County library, the Community Center, and the
               Senior Citizen Center. The Environmental Impact Report (EIR) on the General Plan and Housing
               Element was widely distributed, and identifies locations for review of the draft Element.
               Upon review of the draft Housing Element by the State Department of Housing and Community
               Development (HCD), the City Council conducts hearings on the Element prior to adoption.
               Notification of public hearings on the Element is published in the News Enterprise in advance of the
               hearing, and also posted at the Cypress Community Center, the library, and at City Hall. Public
               hearings are also held annually on the City's participation in the Community Development Block
               Grant program of the County of Orange.
               The goals, policies and programs contained in this Housing Element reflect a revision to those
               previously adopted to incorporate what has been learned from the prior Element and to adequately
Housing Element                                                                                             HOU-3

Cypress General Plan
                  address the community's identified housing needs as identified through public input and from the
                  housing needs assessment.
SUMMARY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                  Assuring the availability of adequate housing for all social and economic segments of Cypress’
                  present and future population is a primary goal of the Housing Element. This section of the
                  Housing Element provides a summary of the community’s key housing needs, and evaluates the
                  City’s ability to fulfill its future share of regional housing growth needs (RHNA).
                  HOUSING NEED
                  The following summarizes key housing needs as identified in the 2000 – 2005 Housing Element
                  Technical Report, which serves as an Appendix to the Element. This summary of existing
                  conditions is organized into four areas: housing availability; housing affordability; housing
                  adequacy; and special needs households. These needs are also summarized in Table HOU-1
                  below.
                                                           Table HOU-1
                                                Cypress Existing Housing Needs
 Housing Availability                                               Housing Affordability
 Overcrowded Households                                      958    Overpaying Households                             4,840
   Renter                                                    576      Renter                                          1,847
   Owner                                                     383      Owner                                           2,993
 Housing Adequacy                                                   Special Needs Households/Persons
 Housing Conditions                                                 Elderly Households                                1,917
  Rehabilitation                                              75    Disabled Persons                                  3,439
  Replacement                                                 21    Large Households                                  2,077
                                                                    Female-Headed Households with Children              990
 Source: 1990 Census; Housing Conditions Survey; SCAG Draft RHNA, November 1999.
                  HOUSING AVAILABILITY
                  In 1999, Cypress had a housing stock of 15,792 units, which consisted primarily of single family
                  homes (77 percent). Multi-family homes comprised about 20 percent of the stock, with mobile
                  homes making up the remaining three percent. According to the 1990 Census, almost 70 percent
                  of Cypress households were owner-occupied. The City experienced and approximately seven
                  percent increase in housing units from 1990 to 1999, due primarily to the completion of the 671-
                  unit Sorrento Homes project at the former oil tank farm, along with development of several
                  Redevelopment Agency assisted housing projects.
                  Cypress has experienced an active housing resale market. A total of 615 homes and
                  condominiums were sold in Cypress from May 1998 to June 1999. About 90 percent of the sales
                  were single-family homes with a median sales price of $188,500. The median price of a
                  condominium was reported at about $130,000.
                  Rental costs in Cypress range from $770 to $940 per month for a two-bedroom apartment, and
                  $925 to $1,040 for a three-bedroom apartment. According to the 1990 Census, approximately 40
                  percent of the rental units in Cypress are single-family homes. While single-family home rentals
                  are typically more expensive than apartments, they do provide larger unit sizes suitable to larger
                  households.
HOU-4                                                                                                      Housing Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
               Overcrowding is another indicator of housing availability. The census defines overcrowding as
               households with greater than 1.01 persons per room, excluding kitchens, bathrooms and porches.
               There were 977 overcrowded households (6.8 percent) in Cypress in 1990. While rental units
               comprise only one-third of the City’s housing stock, approximately 60 percent of the City’s
               overcrowded households are rentals. Forty percent of the City’s overcrowded households were
               identified as severely overcrowded, defined as greater than 1.51 persons per room.
               HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
               Housing overpayment occurs when housing costs increase faster than income. State and Federal
               standards state that a household overpays for its housing if it spends 30 percent or more of its
               gross income on housing. In most urban communities in California, it is not uncommon to overpay
               for housing. However, to the extent that overpayment rates are particularly high among lower
               income populations, it is important for communities to begin to address these needs through their
               housing programs.
               According to SCAG’s 1999 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), one-third (4,840) of
               Cypress’ households were overpaying for housing. Like overcrowding, overpayment is far more
               concentrated among the City’s renter households, with 40 percent overpaying, compared to 28
               percent of owner households. Among lower income renter households earning less than 80
               percent of County median income, nearly 80 percent overpaid for housing costs.
               As a means of assessing the affordability of the current housing market in Cypress, housing sales
               and rental costs can be compared with household incomes. With a 1999 median sales price of
               approximately $188,000 for a single-family home (refer to Housing Element Technical Report), only
               moderate and upper income households can afford to purchase a single-family home in Cypress.
               Low income households may be able to afford a one- or two-bedroom condominium (median price
               $130,000), however, the downpayment and other ownership costs such as insurance may serve as
               a barrier to homeownership.
               In terms of affordability of the City’s rental housing, while low and moderate income households
               can afford the cost of all rental options available in Cypress, very-low income households have few
               rental options within their range of affordability. Market rents for studio and one-bedroom
               apartments are affordable to larger (4+ person) very-low income households, although these units
               are too small and would result in unit overcrowding. Larger apartments and single-family rentals
               are beyond the range of affordability for all very low income households.
               HOUSING ADEQUACY
               In general, when housing reaches 30 years in age, major rehabilitation improvements begin to
               become necessary. Over 55 percent of the City‘s housing units were built before 1970 and will be
               over 30 years old by the year 2000. This represents a significant proportion of the housing stock in
               the City. Continued maintenance of the housing stock will be necessary through independent
               property owner action as well as code enforcement combined with housing rehabilitation
               assistance to prevent deterioration of older housing in the City.
               In 1996, windshield surveys were conducted by the City’s Code Enforcement Officer to evaluate
               the structural conditions of the City’s housing stock. The surveys focused on those areas of the
               City known to have a concentrated amount of deteriorated units. These surveys indicated that
               there were about 75 substandard units that were suitable for rehabilitation, and about 18 that were
               unsuitable for rehabilitation and in need of replacement. While the precise number of substandard
               units has likely changed somewhat since 1996, this housing conditions survey indicates the
               magnitude of substandard housing in the City is limited. In addition, the City has adopted a local
               housing rehabilitation program and participates in the County rehabilitation program to assist in the
               upkeep of housing in the City.
Housing Element                                                                                            HOU-5

Cypress General Plan
               SPECIAL NEEDS
               Certain segments of the population may have more difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing
               due to their special needs. These special needs groups, as defined by State housing element law,
               include the elderly, disabled persons, large households, female-headed households, farmworkers,
               and the homeless.
               Elderly
               Approximately 7.5 percent (3,180) of the City’s population in 1990 was 65 years of age and older.
               Of the total seniors in Cypress in 1990, 3.5 percent were living below the "poverty level." Other
               Census statistics indicate that 13.4 percent of the City's households were headed by an elderly
               person, representing a total of over 1,900 households in 1990. As the City’s population continues
               to age, and a greater number of the elderly become frail, the need for supportive senior housing
               will increase.
               Disabled Persons
               Physical and mental disabilities can hinder access to traditionally designed housing units as well
               as potentially limiting the ability to earn adequate income. The 1990 Census indicates that
               approximately 10 percent of the population in Cypress has some form of work, mobility, or self-care
               limitation. Elderly individuals with mobility or self-care limitations comprise an estimated 30 percent
               of the City's disabled. As the City’s senior population grows, so will the number of persons with
               disabilities in need of supportive housing.
               Large Households
               Cypress has an estimated 2,077 households with five or more members, representing more than
               14 percent of the total households. Large families are identified as a group with special housing
               needs based on the limited availability of adequately sized, affordable housing units. Large
               families are often of lower income, frequently resulting in the overcrowding of smaller dwelling units
               and in turn accelerating unit deterioration.
               Female-Headed Households
               Single-parent households often require special consideration and assistance due to their greater
               need for affordable and accessible day care, health care, and other supportive services. In
               particular, female-headed households with children tend to have lower incomes than other types of
               households, a situation that limits their housing options and access to supportive services.
               Cypress has an estimated 1,687 female-headed family households, accounting for almost 12
               percent of all households in Cypress. Almost 60 percent of these female-headed families had
               dependent children under 18 years of age.
               Farmworkers
               The 1990 Census indicated that less than one percent (146 persons) of the residents of Cypress
               were employed in agriculture, fishing, and forestry. Due to the suburban setting of Cypress and
               nominal rural farmworker population, housing needs for farmworkers can generally be addressed
               by overall programs for housing affordability.
HOU-6                                                                                               Housing Element

                                                                                                  Cypress General Plan
                    Homeless
                    According to the 1990 Census data, no homeless individuals in Cypress resided in emergency
                    shelters or were seen on City streets at the time of the Census count. The Census count of
                    homeless persons, however, may not be considered a complete or adequate indicator of
                    homelessness in the City. Although Cypress has no emergency shelter within its boundaries, most
                    homeless persons migrate to available services, and social service agencies located outside the
                    City serve Cypress.
                    RESIDENTIAL SITES TO ADDRESS REGIONAL HOUSING
                    NEEDS
                    An important component of the Cypress Housing Element is the identification of sites for future
                    housing development, and evaluation of the adequacy of these sites in fulfilling the City’s share of
                    regional housing needs (as determined by SCAG). Table HOU-2 shows Cypress’ residential
                    development potential by General Plan land use category.
                                                          Table HOU-2
                                           RESIDENTIAL SITES INVENTORY
                                                                       Dwelling Unit Potential
          Land Use Category                 Average            Vacant         Vacant     Underutilized
                                                                                                            Unit Totals
                                             Density            Acres          Units         Units
 Residential Low                            1.5 du/ac             1.3             2            --                 2
 Residential Medium                         15 du/ac            3.181            221          190                212
 Residential High                           20 du/ac             4.64            93           120                213
 Lincoln Avenue S.P.                        20 du/ac             3.4             68           735                803
 Totals                                                         12.52           185          1,045              1,230
  Source: Cypress General Plan Land Use Element, 2001.
  1 Includes 2.02 vacant acres and 15 potential units in Orange Avenue Specific Plan.
                    As part of the City’s comprehensive 2000 General Plan update, the City conducted a parcel-
                    specific land use survey to quantify the increase in residential units which could be accommodated
                    on vacant and underutilized parcels, summarized in Table HOU-2. As illustrated in this Table,
                    Cypress can accommodate 1,230 additional units under General Plan buildout. With only five
                    small vacant parcels remaining in Cypress, the vast majority of future residential development will
                    occur through intensification in multi-family neighborhoods, and through residential infill and mixed
                    use along Lincoln Avenue.
                    Exhibit HOU-1 shows locations of underutilized residential neighborhoods in Cypress, located in
                    the City’s “North End” neighborhoods. The City’s General Plan provides for Medium and High
                    Density residential development in these areas, at densities of 15 and 20 units/acre respectively,
                    whereas many of these properties are currently developed with single-family units. Particularly in
                    those neighborhoods north of Lincoln Avenue where the parcels tend to be larger, the City has
                    experienced a significant level of residential intensification as encouraged under the General Plan.
                    For example, in the City’s largest High Density neighborhood (Crescent/Moody), approximately half
                    of the properties are still developed with single-family uses. Typical parcel sizes are 50’ x 200’,
Housing Element                                                                                                    HOU-7

Cypress General Plan
               with parcels frequently combined to accommodate larger projects. Evaluation of underutilized
               parcels in this neighborhood identify six locations where adjacent parcels currently built with older
               single-family homes could be consolidated to achieve a buildable parcel size of between 1.5–2
               acres, the minimum parcel size generally deemed necessary in suburban communities to produce
               units affordable to lower income households.
               Review of tentative tract map applications from 1998-2000 indicate all seven projects being
               developed are on underutilized parcels. Six of these projects had existing single-family residences
               on site, whereas one project is being developed on an office parking lot. In terms of the average
               density of development, of the two projects developed in Residential Medium Density districts, one
               was built at 13 units/acre, and the other at 14.5 units/acre, nearing the 15 unit/acre maximum zone
               density. No projects were built in the Residential High Density district during this time frame. Due
               to the limited land remaining in Cypress and the need to address regional housing growth needs,
               the City will continue to encourage development at the maximum attainable densities, and
               encourage use of density bonuses for inclusion of affordable units.
               In addition to residential infill in the City’s North End residential neighborhoods, the City’s General
               Plan encourages multi-family residential development along Lincoln Avenue as a means of
               stimulating activity on the corridor, also delineated in Exhibit HOU-1. The City adopted a Specific
               Plan for Lincoln Avenue in 1998 to further guide the continued development and redevelopment of
               the Plan area. Both the General Plan and Specific Plan provide for High Density residential uses
               along the corridor, and permit residential both as freestanding developments and integrated within
               mixed use projects. Furthermore, the Plan provides a range of development incentives for
               residential projects, and defines four districts along Lincoln Avenue which encourage residential
               infill and mixed use: Residential Mixed Use, Commercial Mixed Use, Campus Village, and
               Downtown.
               The Specific Plan provides densities of up to 25 units/acre, with bonus densities permitted for
               projects with an affordable housing component. Actual densities in developed projects vary based
               on the product type, and range from 13 units/acre for a detached condominium project, 15–22
               units/acre for attached condominiums, and 55 units/acre for senior apartments. Projects which
               combine parcels are often better able to accommodate higher densities, and as a means of
               encouraging lot consolidation, the Specific Plan includes the following incentives (Section 7.3.1):
                         •    No fee processing
                         •    Reduction of parking and landscaping requirements
                         •    Left-turn ingress/egress
                         •    Redevelopment Agency assistance
                         •    Street furnishing amenities
                         •    Density bonus
                         •    Increased floor area ratio and lot coverage
               Based on past development trends, combined with incentives to combine lots, the General Plan
               assumes one-quarter of the total acreage on Lincoln Avenue will be developed with residential, at
               an average density of 20 units/acre. Given these assumptions, an estimated 803 housing units
               could be anticipated on Lincoln Avenue under buildout of the General Plan, as indicated in Table
               HOU-2.
HOU-8                                                                                               Housing Element

                                                 Cypress General Plan
               Insert Exhibit HOU-1 – 8-1/2 x 11
               Residential Infill Areas
Housing Element                                               HOU-9

Cypress General Plan
                   SHARE OF REGION’S HOUSING NEEDS
                   State law requires jurisdictions to provide for their share of regional housing needs. As part of the
                   Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), the Southern California Association of
                   Governments (SCAG) determines the five year housing growth needs by income category. In
                   Orange County, the Orange County Council of Governments (OCCOG) was delegated
                   responsibility for developing the RHNA in coordination with the cities and SCAG. Future housing
                   needs reflect the number of new units needed in a jurisdiction based on households which are
                   expected to reside within the jurisdiction (future demand), plus an adequate supply of vacant
                   housing to assure mobility and new units to replace losses.
                   The draft Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) adopted by OCCOG and SCAG has
                   identified a 1998-2005 future housing need for Cypress of 578 housing units, including 180 lower
                   income units (refer to Table HOU-3). Housing developed as of January 1998 can be credited
                   towards the City’s future RHNA for the 1998 - 2005 period, providing for a reduction of 84 units in
                   Cypress, and resulting in a remaining housing need of 494 units.
                                                       Table HOU-3
                             REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS BY INCOME GROUP (RHNA)
                                                        1998 – 2005
                                                                                                             Remaining
                                                                           Percent of        Units Since
                  Income Category                      Housing Units                                           Housing
                                                                              Total             1/981
                                                                                                                Need
  Very Low (0-50% County median income)                           107               18%                  0           107
  Low (50-80% County median income)                                73               13%                  0             73
  Moderate (80-120% County median income)                         171               21%                53            118
  Upper (over 120% County median income)                          227               48%                31            196
  Total Housing Units                                             578              100%                84            494
  Source:     SCAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment, November 1999
  1 Includes both approved and completed projects as of December 1999.
                   The residential sites inventory presented in Table HOU-2 identified potential for 1,230 additional
                   units in Cypress under General Plan buildout. The City’s remaining regional housing needs for the
                   1998-2005 period is 494 units, indicating the City has sufficient zoned residential land to address
                   its RHNA. In terms of residential sites to address the City’s need for 301 low and moderate income
                   households, the City’s General Plan provides for 213 High Density Residential units, with potential
                   for an additional 803 High Density units along Lincoln Avenue. The 20+ units/acre densities
                   provided for in these areas allow for the provision of market rate rental housing affordable to low
                   income households, and multi-family ownership housing affordable to moderate income
                   households. Like most urban and suburban communities in southern California, very low income
                   households will require some level of subsidy to afford housing in Cypress.
                   In addition to providing sites to accommodate its regional growth needs, the City will further support
                   the development of affordable housing through programs set forth in the Housing Element,
                   including financial and regulatory incentives, density bonuses, and first-time homebuyer
                   assistance.
HOU-10                                                                                                 Housing Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
               AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES
               The City’s 2000 General Plan and Environmental Impact Report identifies more than adequate total
               infrastructure capacity to accommodate the City’s regional housing needs. As an entirely
               urbanized community, Cypress already has in place the necessary infrastructure to support future
               development. All land currently designated for residential and mixed use development is served by
               water and sewer lines, streets, storm drains, and telephone, electric and gas lines.
               As documented in the Housing Element Technical Report, none of the sites identified for residential
               development are affected by environmental constraints that would impact their development.
DESCRIPTION OF HOUSING PLAN
               Previous sections of the Housing Element establish the housing needs, opportunities and
               constraints in the City of Cypress. The following section first evaluates the accomplishments of the
               last adopted housing element and then presents the City’s housing program strategy for the 2000-
               2005 period.
               EVALUATION OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS UNDER ADOPTED
               HOUSING ELEMENT
               The City’s last Housing Element was adopted in 1990, and sets forth a series of housing programs
               with related objectives for the following issue areas: conserving and improving existing affordable
               housing; provision of adequate housing sites; development of affordable housing; removing
               governmental constraints; and promoting equal housing opportunities. This section reviews the
               appropriateness of these programs, the effectiveness of the Element, and the progress in
               implementation since 1990.
               SINGLE-FAMILY REHABILITATION
               Cypress participates in the Urban County Program of the Federal Community Development Block
               Grant (CDBG) Program. Funds have been used for a variety of projects benefiting low income (up
               to 80% Median Family Income) households. Block grant funds have been utilized in Cypress to
               provide housing rehabilitation assistance to 75 lower income households through loans, grants and
               rebates over the past five years. This County-operated program is limited to designated low and
               moderate income target areas.
               In addition to the housing rehabilitation program implemented through the County, in 1998, the City
               began implementation of its own housing rehabilitation program – the Home Enhancement Loan
               Program (HELP II). Since this program is funded using Agency low and moderate income housing
               funds, rehabilitation assistance can be offered Citywide. A total of 15 households have been
               provided assistance during the program’s first year of operation.
               RENTAL REHABILITATION PROGRAM
               In addition to the CDBG single-family rehabilitation program, the County operates a separately
               funded Rental Rehabilitation Program to encourage rehabilitation of substandard apartment
               buildings in targeted neighborhoods. Block grant monies have been utilized in Cypress to provide
               assistance to rental property owners through loans, grants and rebates, resulting in the upgrading
               of approximately 50 rental units.
Housing Element                                                                                          HOU-11

Cypress General Plan
               HOME WEATHERIZATION IMPROVEMENTS
               As residential energy costs continue to rise, increasing utility costs reduce the affordability of
               housing, thus aggravating the City’s current shortage of affordable units. Southern California
               Edison offers a variety of energy conservation services designed to help low-income households.
               In order to expand utilization of these programs, the City provided informational brochures at the
               public counter and at the Community Center.
               CODE ENFORCEMENT
               The majority of the code violations in Cypress pertain to zoning and property maintenance
               violations, and according to the City’s Code Enforcement Officers, less than ten dwelling units are
               cited annually for substandard conditions. The City has modified its program to include informing
               property owners in violation of City code of available rehabilitation assistance.
               CONSERVATION OF EXISTING SUBSIDIZED HOUSING
               Since the mid-1980s, Cypress has actively been granting density bonuses on projects which
               reserve 20% of the project’s units for lower income households for a ten year period. For rental
               density bonus projects, the project owner typically signs up with the Housing Authority to accept
               Section 8 tenants for the lower income units. A total of 22 low income density bonus units in seven
               rental developments were eligible to lose their affordability controls prior to 1999. While the use
               restrictions under the density bonus agreements with the City have all since expired, according to
               the Housing Authority, most of these projects still have Section 8 tenants and therefore remain
               affordable.
               Land Use Element/Zoning Ordinance
               The City’s share of regional housing needs (RHNA) was identified as 792 units for the five-year
               period of the last 1989 Housing Element. Due to several extensions in the Housing Element cycle,
               the original RHNA for the 1989-1994 period has been extended through 1997. The City updated
               its entire General Plan in 1993, and provided expanded areas for new housing growth, primarily
               along Lincoln Avenue. The residential development capacity under the updated General Plan was
               more than adequate to address the City’s share of regional housing needs by income category.
               While the residential market was relatively slow in much of California, Cypress grew by over 1,000
               units during the period of its last RHNA (1989-1997), surpassing its RHNA allocation of 792 units
               (refer to Table HOU-4).
               The City’s Redevelopment Agency was instrumental in supporting in the production of housing for
               all income levels during the prior Housing Element cycle. The Agency issued bonds for the
               construction of public improvements in support of development of 671 units of single family housing
               on a recycled 144-acre oil storage tank farm site. The Agency also supported in development of
               two senior housing projects: Cypress Pointe Senior (110 units/11 very low income) and Cypress
               Park Senior Community (124 units/13 very low, 18 low income). Finally, the City approved two
               density bonus projects during this time period (Grand Lincoln Village and 8781 Walker Avenue),
               providing 7 low income and 8 very low income units respectively. In addition to the income
               restricted units in these projects, market rate rentals in Cypress rent at levels affordable to low
               income households.
HOU-12                                                                                            Housing Element

                                                                                                      Cypress General Plan
                                                         Table HOU-4
           1989-1997 REGIONAL HOUSING GROWTH NEEDS COMPARED TO UNITS CONSTRUCTED
                                                     Regional Housing                         Number of New Units
           Income Category
                                                       Needs (RHNA)                                Constructed
 Very Low                                                   104                                         321
 Low                                                        127                                        562
 Moderate                                                   178                                       2273
 Upper                                                      383                                        763
 Total                                                      792                                       1,078
  1 Includes income restricted units in Cypress Pointe Senior, Cypress Park Senior, and 8781 Walker Avenue.
  2 Includes income restricted units in Cypress Park and Grand Lincoln Village, and market rate apartment
    units.
  3 Includes market units in Cypress Pointe Senior, Cypress Park Apts., and Grand Lincoln Village.
                   Site Suitability Criteria
                   The City’s prior Housing Element considered the development of a set of “site suitability criteria” by
                   which to judge the merits of potential project sites for low and moderate cost housing. Given the
                   extremely limited availability of residential sites in Cypress, and their location within already
                   established residential areas or on key commercial corridors, it was determined that site suitability
                   criteria more typically applied to developing areas was not of particular benefit to Cypress.
                   Residential Site Inventory
                   Since the City is already developed to a large extent, the availability of sites for residential
                   development may be difficult to identify. The City initiated a program to maintain an inventory of
                   residential sites in Cypress for use by interested parties in identifying development opportunities.
                   Sites For Homeless Shelters and Transitional Housing
                   The City’s 1989 Housing Element identified a program to amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit
                   the development of transitional housing in multi-family residential zones in locations close to
                   services, and to permit emergency shelters in commercial and industrial zones, both subject to a
                   Conditional Use Permit. The City undertook a comprehensive update to its Zoning Ordinance in
                   1998, and included specific provisions to address community care facilities (inclusive of transitional
                   housing and emergency shelters) housing more than six persons. The code now provides for such
                   facilities in RM-15, RM-20 and all commercial zone districts subject to a CUP.
                   Section 8 Rental Assistance (Certificate/Voucher) Program
                   The Section 8 program provides rental subsidies to very low-income households as a means of
                   providing affordable rental housing not otherwise provided by the private market. The City
                   continues to coordinate with the Orange County Housing Authority (OCHA) in implementation of
                   the Section 8 Rental Assistance Program in its jurisdiction. Specifically, the City encourages
                   property owners granted density bonuses to list their projects with the Housing Authority, as well as
                   directing households requesting rental assistance to the appropriate Housing Authority
                   Department.
Housing Element                                                                                                   HOU-13

Cypress General Plan
               Density Bonus Program and Other Incentives
               The City ’s zoning ordinance includes provisions to allow density bonuses in return for guarantees
               of affordable dwelling units in new construction as provided by State law. The City revised its
               ordinance to reflect changes in the State Density Bonus Law, and actively promotes density bonus
               opportunities. Since adoption of the City's Housing Element in 1989, the City has granted over ten
               density bonuses for both rental and ownership projects.
               Mortgage Certificate Program
               The MCC program is designed to help low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers qualify for
               conventional first mortgage loans by increasing their after-tax income. Since the City began
               participating in this County-run program in 1994, a total of 41 MCCs have been issued, 16 of which
               were issued in conjunction with loans from the City’s Homebuyer Assistance Program.
               Mortgage Revenue Bond Financing
               The City of Cypress participates with Orange County in their multi-family and single family bond
               programs. However, during the prior Housing Element cycle, no bond projects were developed in
               the City. The Redevelopment Agency did however issue its own bonds to provide the necessary
               infrastructure in support of development of the 671 unit Sorrento Homes project.
               Non-Profit Construction
               The Agency currently has one affordable project developed by a non-profit – Cypress Sunrise
               Apartments. The Agency has supported several for-profit developers in the production of
               affordable housing, and continues to work with both housing sectors in achieving its housing goals.
               Land Assemblage and Development Incentives
               The intent of this program is to reduce land cost to the point that it becomes economically feasible
               for a private developer to build affordable housing. The Redevelopment Agency purchased the
               six-acre Cypress Elementary School site for expansion of the existing Cypress Senior Citizens
               Multi-Purpose Center located on the site, and for the development of an affordable senior citizen
               housing project. The Agency completed the development of a 124-unit senior housing project using
               redevelopment set-aside funds. The Agency wrote down the cost of the land in exchange for deed
               restrictions on the rent and occupancy of 13 units for very low income households, 12 units for low
               income households and 6 units for moderate income households.
               The Agency will continue to provide land write-down assistance as appropriate in support of
               affordable housing developments.
               Home Sharing
               The shared housing program provides an alternative to Cypress’ elderly residents which allows
               them to remain in their homes. Senior Meals and Services, Inc. administers a shared housing
               program available to Cypress’ residents at their facility in Los Alamitos. The shared housing
               coordinator is available on Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, and indicates many Cypress
               seniors participate in the program.
HOU-14                                                                                           Housing Element

                                                                                              Cypress General Plan
               Reverse Mortgage Program
               Reverse Mortgages are offered through several private lending institutions to allow seniors to draw
               needed income from the equity in their homes. This program is not as popular with senior citizens
               as originally envisioned, and as such, the City is no longer interested in assuming an active role in
               promoting reverse mortgages.
               Shared Equity Program/Downpayment Assistance
               In 1997, the City initiated its Home Equity Loan Program (HELP I). This program provides up to
               $25,000 to eligible first-time homebuyers for help with the downpayment, including a portion of
               non-recurring closing costs. This program has been so successful (49 loans have closed since the
               program’s inception) that the City has had to develop a waiting list for when additional program
               funding becomes available. The HELP I program represents one of the City’s major housing
               programs to help stabilize neighborhoods through increased homeownership, while providing
               affordable housing opportunities to low and moderate income renters.
               Remove Governmental Constraints
               The City has provided for modified development standards, including reduced parking and density
               increases, in support of affordable housing. The City has also waived and/or reduced certain
               development fees for the provision of affordable housing and will continue to provide subsidized
               fees to improve the feasibility of low and moderate income housing projects.
               While the City has not developed a formalized process for priority review of affordable housing
               applications, the level of development activity has been such that no backlog has been
               experienced.
               Equal Housing Opportunity
               One of Cypress’ Housing Element goals is to promote housing opportunities for all persons
               regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin or color. To achieve this
               goal, the City participates with the Orange County Fair Housing Council and has implemented a
               system of referring discrimination complaints to the proper agencies.
               HOUSING PROGRAM STRATEGY
               The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element address identified housing needs for the
               City of Cypress, and are implemented through a series of housing programs offered through the
               City’s Community Development Department and Redevelopment Agency. Housing programs
               define the specific actions the City will undertake to achieve the stated goals and policies.
               According to Section 65583 of the State Government Code, a jurisdiction’s housing programs must
               address the following five major areas:
                    •    Conserving the existing supply of affordable housing;
                    •    Assisting in the provision of housing;
                    •    Providing adequate sites to achieve a variety and diversity of housing;
                    •    Removing governmental constraints as necessary; and
                    •    Promoting equal housing opportunity.
               The housing programs described on the following pages include existing programs as well as
               several new programs which have been added to address the City’s housing needs. The program
Housing Element                                                                                             HOU-15

Cypress General Plan
               summary (Table HOU-5) included at the end of this section specifies for each program the
               following: five-year objective(s), time frame, funding source(s), and agency responsible for program
               implementation. With an estimated $2.6 million available for Housing Fund expenditures from
               2000 to 2004, and a Housing Fund balance of $900,000 as of 7/1/2000, Cypress redevelopment
               housing funds will provide an important source of funding for implementation of the City’s housing
               programs.
               CONSERVING THE EXISTING SUPPLY OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
               Conserving and improving the City’s housing stock is an important goal for Cypress. While most of
               Cypress’ housing stock is in good condition, approximately one-third of the City’s housing stock is
               30 years or older, the age when most homes start to have rehabilitation needs. The proposed
               Neighborhood Clean-Up program is an example of the City’s pro-active efforts to conserve its
               current housing stock. The neighborhoods identified as evidencing physical deterioration are
               specifically targeted for City housing improvement assistance.
               1.        Single Family Rehabilitation Programs
               1a.       Home Enhancement Loan Program (HELP II)
               The Cypress Redevelopment Agency initiated the HELP II program to provide funds to low and
               moderate income single-family homeowners to assist with the provision of interior and exterior
               improvements of their homes. Currently, loans of up to $20,000 are available for help with
               correcting health and safety code violations, exterior improvements, such as new roof and paint,
               and interior improvements, including new plumbing and floor covering. Lower income (80% MFI)
               homeowners may qualify for loans which are completely forgiven after 10 years. The City is
               currently enhancing marketing efforts for the HELP II program to enhance utilization. One program
               modification under examination is the assessment of a nominal “up-front” fee for applicants to
               promote commitment to the program, and decrease the high attrition rate currently experienced.
               1b.       County CDBG Rehabilitation Loans
               Cypress is a cooperating City in the rehabilitation loan program administered through the Orange
               County Department of Housing and Community Development. This program provides low interest
               rehabilitation loans to single-family and mobilehome households of up to $15,000 per unit to lower
               (80% MFI) income homeowners. All health and safety problems must be corrected before any
               other home improvements can be made. Loans are limited to households located within the City’s
               CDBG target areas.
               Five-year Objective: The Redevelopment Agency will continue to provide rehabilitation loans to
               qualified low and moderate income homeowners. The objective is to provide rehabilitation
               assistance to 50 households during the five year planning period. In terms of rehabilitation
               assistance through the County’s CDBG program, the City will assist in advertising the program to
               eligible households, with the goal of assisting 25 households over the five year period.
               2.        Community Rental Rehabilitation Program
               This program proposed by the City’s Redevelopment Agency will provide funds for the upgrading of
               deteriorating and substandard rental properties within the City to assist income qualified tenants
               within the complexes. The comprehensive rehabilitation of larger rental properties can be
               undertaken through the pooling of public funds from various agencies, including the County’s
HOU-16                                                                                           Housing Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
               Rental Rehabilitation Program which the City is eligible to participate in as part of the Urban
               County.
               Five-year Objective: By 2002, the Redevelopment Agency will develop policies and procedures
               for implementation of the Community Rental Rehabilitation Program. The objective is to
               rehabilitate twenty units with Agency assistance over the five year planning period, with additional
               units to be rehabilitated using outside funding sources.
               3.        Code Enforcement Program
               The objective of the City's Code Enforcement Program is to bring substandard housing units into
               compliance with City codes. Cypress' building inspectors work closely with the City code
               enforcement officer to identify units in need of housing assistance. Property owners in violation of
               City codes are provided information on rehabilitation loans or grants they may be eligible for in
               correcting code violations.
               Five-year Objective: The City will continue to operate its code enforcement program to stem
               housing deterioration.
               4.        Neighborhood Clean-up Program
               This program proposed by the City will provide trash receptacles, on a periodic basis, to
               predominately low and moderate income neighborhoods for the purpose of waste disposal and
               neighborhood cleanup. The provision of funds and/or materials for the purpose of performing
               deferred maintenance and repair (including exterior painting and roof repair) to properties will also
               be incorporated into the program. An initial community outreach event is proposed to be
               conducted in each neighborhood to provide information on available housing rehabilitation and
               homeownership programs, followed by a neighborhood clean-up day. The Neighborhood Clean-up
               Program will be administered in conjunction with the provision of proactive code enforcement
               activity.
               Five-year Objective: The City has submitted an application to the County Housing and
               Community Development Department (HCD) for CDBG funds to initiate a Neighborhood Clean-up
               Program. Funding would initially be for the 2001-2003 period, at which time the City will reassess
               the need to continue the program and pursue additional funds as necessary.
               5.        Preservation of Assisted Rental Housing
               Preservation of the City’s existing stock of subsidized housing units is far more cost effective than
               replacing affordable units through new construction. While the City has four subsidized rental
               projects, only one of these projects is at-risk of conversion to market rate during the next ten year
               period. The project – 8781 Walker Avenue – is a 42 unit project which was granted a density
               bonus for setting aside eight (20%) of the project’s units for low income households for a ten year
               period expiring in September, 2001. The project owner accepts Section 8 tenants for the eight
               income restricted units, although Section 8 assistance is tenant based and not tied to the project.
               Because Fair Market Rents (FMRs) under the Section 8 program are higher than actual rents in the
               open market in Cypress, this serves as a strong incentive for the property owner to continue
               participation in the Section 8 program.
               Even though 8781 Walker is at relatively low risk of conversion to market rate, the following are
               strategies the City may undertake as necessary to preserve this project as affordable rental
               housing.
Housing Element                                                                                            HOU-17

Cypress General Plan
               a.          Monitor Units At-Risk: Contact project owner as expiration date on restricted units
                           approach to determine the intent of property owner. Discuss with owner the City's desire
                           to preserve at risk units as affordable to low income households.
               b.          Work with Potential Priority Purchasers: Establish and maintain close contact with
                           public and non-profit agencies, such as the Orange County Community Housing
                           Corporation (OCCHC), interested in purchasing and/or managing units at-risk to inform
                           them of the status of at-risk projects. Solicit technical assistance for additional means of
                           preserving these units at risk from OCCHC and the California Housing Partnership.
               c.          Evaluate Provision of Locally Funded Rent Subsidies: Should market conditions
                           improve in Cypress such that the project owner no longer participates in the Section 8
                           program, or if Section 8 assistance were no longer available from HUD, additional
                           subsidies would be necessary to maintain affordability to very low income households.
                           The City’s Redevelopment Agency could enter into a rent agreement with the project
                           owner of 8781 Walker to provide the necessary rent subsidies, estimated at an annual
                           subsidy amount of about $6,000.
               Five-year Objective: The City will seek to preserve the affordability of the eight lower income units
               at 8781 Walker Avenue.
               6.          Section 8 Rental Assistance Program
               The Section 8 Rental Assistance Program extends rental subsidies to very low-income households
               who spend more than 30 percent of their gross income on housing. Rental assistance not only
               addresses housing affordability, but also overcrowding by allowing families that may be “doubling
               up” to afford their own housing. The County Housing and Community Development Department,
               through the Orange County Housing Authority (OCHA), coordinates Section 8 rental housing on
               behalf of the City of Cypress.
               Five-year Objective: The City’s objective is to continue current levels of Section 8 rental
               assistance, and to direct eligible households to the County program.
               7.          Rental Deposit Guarantee Program
               This program proposed by the City would assist income-qualified renters currently residing in local
               area motels with funds to cover the initial “upfront” costs of securing an apartment. Up to $3,000
               would be allocated per household to cover first and last month’s rent and the security deposit.
               Program participants would be required to satisfactorily complete a financial and “life skills” training
               program before receiving assistance.
               Five-year Objective: The City has submitted an application to the County Housing and
               Community Development Department (HCD) for CDBG funds to establish a Rental Deposit
               Guarantee Program. Funding would be for the 2001-2003 period, and would enable the City to
               assist approximately 20 households over the two year period. Should the City not be awarded
               CDBG funds for this purpose, the City will consider directing redevelopment housing set-aside
               funds to implement this program.
               ASSISTING IN THE PROVISION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
               To enable more households, especially renters, to own homes in Cypress, the City offers programs
               for first-time homebuyer assistance. New construction is a major source of housing for prospective
HOU-18                                                                                               Housing Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
               homeowners and renters but generally requires public sector support for the creation of units
               affordable to lower income households. The following programs attempt to address the overall
               need for the provision of both affordable homeownership and rental housing in Cypress.
               8.        Home Equity Loan Program (HELP I)
               The Cypress Redevelopment Agency initiated the HELP I Program in 1997 to provide funds to low
               and moderate-income homebuyers who wish to purchase a home within the City, including
               households who have not owned a home within the last three years. Loans of up to $25,000 are
               available to program participants for help with the down payment, including a portion of non-
               recurring closing costs. The City reassessed the HELP I Program in 2000, and expanded eligibility
               to permit mobilehome owners to participate in the program. The City has also expanded the level
               of redevelopment set-aside directed to this program given the demand for assistance.
               Five-year Objective: The City’s objective is to provide assistance to 60 first-time homebuyers
               over the five year planning period.
               9.        Mortgage Credit Certificate
               The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program is a federal program that allows qualified first-time
               homebuyers to take an annual credit against federal income taxes of up to 15 percent of the annual
               interest paid on the applicant’s mortgage. This enables homebuyers to have more income
               available to qualify for a mortgage loan and make the monthly mortgage payments. The value of
               the MCC must be taken into consideration by the mortgage lender in underwriting the loan and
               may be used to adjust the borrower’s federal income tax withholding. The MCC program has
               covenant restrictions to ensure the affordability of the participating homes for a period of 15 years.
               MCCs can be used in conjunction with Cypress’ HELP I program.
               Five-year Objective: Through the County, the City will continue to provide MCCs to qualified first-
               time homebuyers. The objective is to provide four (4) MCCs per year.
               10.       Affordable Housing Development
               For-profit and non-profit housing developers can play an important role in providing affordable
               housing in Cypress. The City has granted land write-downs, regulatory incentives, and direct
               financial assistance to a number of developers to provide both ownership and rental housing to
               low- and moderate-income households.
               A major focus of the Lincoln Avenue Specific Plan is to provide for housing at key locations along
               Lincoln Avenue, although current market conditions do not support residential development along
               this corridor without some form of subsidy. The City and Redevelopment Agency could offer
               financial and regulatory incentives for the development of affordable housing within mixed use
               developments along Lincoln Avenue in support of both land use and housing goals.
               Five-year Objective: The City will continue to provide financial and regulatory incentives to private
               developers to increase the supply of affordable housing in Cypress. Consistent with the
               Redevelopment Agency’s Implementation Plan, the City’s five year objective will be to assist in the
               development of 36 affordable units.
Housing Element                                                                                             HOU-19

Cypress General Plan
               11.       Density Bonus
               The City of Cypress has incorporated provisions into its Zoning Code (Section 9, Division 3) to
               allow density bonuses in return for guarantees of affordable dwelling units in new construction as
               provided by State law. Density increases of greater than 25 percent may be granted if a higher
               percentage of units beyond the minimum eligibility requirements are designated for lower income
               households. Prospective developers are provided with a list of standards for density bonus projects
               in the City, including tenant/owner income requirements, rent/mortgage limits, length of
               affordability, and requirements that affordable units be of comparable quality to market rate units in
               the project. The developer shall agree to and the City shall ensure continued affordability of all
               lower income density bonus units for a minimum 30-year period. These standards are enforced
               through a Density Bonus Agreement which serves as a contract between the City and the
               developer.
               Five-year Objective: The City will continue to utilize density bonuses as a means of supporting the
               development of mixed income housing projects.
               PROVIDING ADEQUATE HOUSING SITES
               A major element in meeting the housing needs of all segments of the community is the provision of
               adequate sites of all types, sizes and prices of housing. The City’s General Plan, Zoning
               Ordinance, and specific plans dictate where housing may locate, thereby affecting the supply of
               land available for residential development.
               12.       Land Use Element
               A key element in satisfying the housing needs of all segments of the community is the provision of
               adequate sites for housing of all types, sizes and prices. This is an important function in both
               zoning and General Plan land use designations. A variety of residential types are provided for in
               Cypress, ranging in density from one to 20 dwelling units per acre, with higher densities achievable
               through the City's density bonus provisions. The residential development capacity under the
               Cypress Land Use Plan is adequate to meet the City's share of regional housing needs, which has
               been identified as 578 dwelling units over the next five years. In addition, the Lincoln Avenue
               Specific Plan permits multifamily residential densities above ground floor commercial uses of up to
               25 units per acre.
               Five-year Objective: The City will continue to provide appropriate land use designations, coupled
               with incentives for the development of affordable housing, to address its share of regional housing
               needs.
               13.       Residential Site Inventory
               As an established City with the majority of remaining residential development opportunities to occur
               through infill, an active program for site identification is essential in Cypress. In conjunction with
               update of the General Plan and development of a computerized land use data base, City planning
               staff have initiated a program to maintain an inventory of vacant and redevelopable residential sites
               in Cypress for use by interested parties in identifying development opportunities.
               Five-year Objective: The City will maintain an up-to-date residential sites inventory, and provide
               this inventory to interested developers.
HOU-20                                                                                             Housing Element

                                                                                                Cypress General Plan
               REMOVING GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
               Under current State law, Cypress’ Housing Element must address, and where legally possible,
               remove governmental constraints affecting the maintenance, improvement, and development of
               housing. The following programs are designed to mitigate government constraints on residential
               development and facilitate the development of a variety of housing.
               14.        Regulatory and Financial Assistance
               Cypress has a strong track record in providing regulatory and/or financial incentives to facilitate the
               development of affordable housing. The City can provide the following incentives to for-profit and
               non-profit developers to reduce the costs of providing affordable housing: density bonus, deferral of
               development impact fees, flexible development standards, assistance in applying for public funds
               as well as any other viable means. Where direct Agency assistance is involved, the City would
               typically enter into a Development Agreement which may also provide regulatory relief from
               density, parking, and other multi-family development standards in exchange for affordable housing.
               Five-year Objectives: The City will continue to offer regulatory and/or financial incentives to
               facilitate the provision of affordable housing by private developers. The City will periodically review
               all regulations, ordinances, and residential fees related to housing rehabilitation and/or construction
               to assess their impact on housing costs, and revise as appropriate.
               15.        Efficient Project Processing
               The Cypress Community Development Department has a streamlined review process. Residential
               projects in Cypress generally receive concurrent processing and are governed by one decision-
               making body, thereby shortening review time and minimizing related holding costs. Nonetheless, a
               policy for priority processing of affordable housing project applications can assist in keeping project
               holding costs low.
               Five-year Objective: The City will continue to offer streamline development processing, and will
               offer priority processing for affordable housing developments.
               PROMOTING EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
               To adequately meet the housing needs of all segments of the community, the housing plan must
               include program(s) that promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion,
               sex, family size, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, age, or physical disability.
               16.        Fair Housing Program
               The City uses the services of the Orange County Fair Housing Council for fair housing outreach
               and educational information, fair housing complaints, tenant/landlord dispute resolution, and
               housing information and counseling. The role of the Council is to provide services to jurisdictions,
               agencies, and the general public to further fair housing practices in the sale or rental of housing.
               Cypress advertises the fair housing program through placement of fair housing services brochures
               at the public counter, and through the City’s newsletter.
               Five-year Objective: The City will continue to promote fair housing practices, and provide
               educational information on fair housing to the public. The City will refer fair housing complaints to
               the Orange County Fair Housing Council.
Housing Element                                                                                                 HOU-21

Cypress General Plan
                                                              Table HOU-5
                              HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM SUMMARY
                                                                      Five-Year Objective(s)/        Funding        Responsible
        Housing Program                       Program Goal
                                                                             Time Frame             Source(s)          Agency
 Conserving the Existing Supply of Affordable Housing
 1. Single-Family Rehabilitation  Assist homeowners with the
                                  improvement of their homes.
 1a. Home Enhancement                                                 Provide rehabilitation    Redevelopment      Community
 Loan Program (HELP II)                                               assistance to 50          Set-Aside Funds    Development
                                                                      households.                                  Department
 1b. County CDBG Rehab                                                Assist 25 households      CDBG               Orange County
                                                                                                                   HCD
 2. Community Rental              Upgrade deteriorating and           Establish policies and    Redevelopment      Community
 Rehabilitation Program           substandard rental properties.      procedures by 2002,       Set-Aside Funds;   Development
                                                                      and rehabilitate 20 units HOME; Other        Department;
                                                                      with Agency assistance.   Funds              Orange County
                                                                                                                   HCD
 3. Code Enforcement Program      Bring substandard units into        Continue to operate the   General Fund       Community
                                  compliance with City codes.         Code Enforcement                             Development
                                                                      Program.                                     Department
 4. Neighborhood Cleanup          Provide assistance for              Pursue County CDBG        CDBG               Community
 Program                          neighborhood cleanup projects.      funds in 2000 to                             Development
                                                                      implement                                    Department;
                                                                      neighborhood clean-up                        Orange County
                                                                      program in targeted                          HCD
                                                                      neighborhoods in 2001 -
                                                                      2003.
 5. Preservation of Assisted      Preserve the City’s at-risk         Preserve the              Redevelopment      Community
 Rental Housing                   housing stock.                      affordability of the 8    Set-Aside Funds    Development
                                                                      lower income units at     (as necessary)     Department
                                                                      8781 Walker Avenue.
 6. Section 8 Rental Assistance   Provide rental subsidies to very    Continue current levels   HUD                Orange County
 Program                          low-income households.              of rental assistance and                     Housing
                                                                      direct eligible                              Authority
                                                                      households to the
                                                                      County program.
 7. Rent Deposit Guarantee        Help income-qualified renters       Apply to County HCD       CDBG;              Community
 Program                          residing in motels to cover the     for CDBG funds in         Redevelopment      Development
                                  initial “upfront” costs of securing 2000, and begin           Set-Aside Funds    Department;
                                  an apartment.                       program implementation    (as necessary)     Orange County
                                                                      in 2001. Provide                             HCD
                                                                      assistance to
                                                                      approximately 20
                                                                      households.
 Assisting in the Provision of Housing
 8. Home Equity Loan Program      Expand homeownership                Provide assistance to     Redevelopment      Community
 (HELP I)                         opportunities for lower and         60 first-time             Set-Aside Funds    Development
                                  moderate-income homebuyers.         homebuyers.                                  Department
 9. Mortgage Credit Certificate   Expand homeownership                Provide 4 MCCs            Federal Tax        Orange County
 (MCC)                            opportunities for lower and         annually.                 Credits            Community
                                  moderate-income homebuyers.                                                      Development
                                                                                                                   Commission
HOU-22                                                                                                           Housing Element

                                                                                                                         Cypress General Plan
                                                                             Five-Year Objective(s)/             Funding            Responsible
         Housing Program                     Program Goal
                                                                                    Time Frame                  Source(s)              Agency
 10. Affordable Housing           Facilitate affordable housing              Continue to provide            Redevelopment         Community
 Development                      development by for-profit and              financial and regulatory       Set-Aside Funds       Development
                                  non-profit housing developers/             incentives to private                                Department
                                  corporations.                              developers. Assist in
                                                                             the development of 36
                                                                             affordable units.
 11. Density Bonus                Facilitate the development of              Continue to utilize            Redevelopment         Community
                                  mixed income housing projects.             density bonuses to             Set-Aside Funds       Development
                                                                             support development of         (as necessary)        Department
                                                                             mixed income housing
                                                                             projects.
 Providing Adequate Residential Sites
 12. Land Use Element             Provide adequate sites for future          Provide appropriate            Redevelopment         Community
                                  housing development.                       land use designations,         Set-Aside Funds       Development
                                                                             coupled with incentives        (as necessary)        Department
                                                                             for the development of
                                                                             affordable housing, to
                                                                             address the City’s share
                                                                             of regional housing
                                                                             needs.
 13. Residential Site Inventory   Identify sites for future housing          Beginning in 2000 with         General Fund          Community
                                  development.                               the General Plan                                     Development
                                                                             update, maintain an up-                              Department
                                                                             to-date residential sites
                                                                             inventory, and provide
                                                                             to interested
                                                                             developers.
 Removing Governmental Constraints
 14. Regulatory and Financial     Facilitate the production of               Continue to offer              Redevelopment         Community
 Assistance                       affordable housing through                 incentives for affordable      Set-Aside Funds       Development
                                  provision of regulatory and                housing. Periodically                                Department
                                  financial assistance.                      review all regulations,
                                                                             ordinances, and fees.
 15. Efficient Project Processing Provide efficient development              Continue to offer              General Fund          Community
                                  processing procedures.                     stream-line                                          Development
                                                                             development                                          Department
                                                                             processing. Offer
                                                                             priority processing for
                                                                             affordable housing
                                                                             developments.
 Promoting Equal Housing Opportunities
 16. Fair Housing Program         Further fair housing practices in          Continue to promote fair       CDBG                  Community
                                  the community.                             housing practices.                                   Development
                                                                             Provide educational                                  Department;
                                                                             information on fair                                  Orange County
                                                                             housing to the public.                               Fair Housing
                                                                             Refer fair housing                                   Council
                                                                             complaints to the
                                                                             Orange County Fair
                                                                             Housing Council.
 Five-Year Goals Summary:
 TOTAL UNITS TO BE CONSTRUCTED: 578 (107 Very Low, 73 Low, 171 Moderate, 227 Upper)
 TOTAL UNITS TO BE REHABILITATED: 95 (60 Low, 35 Moderate)
 TOTAL UNITS TO BE CONSERVED:        Maintain current levels of Section 8 rent subsidies for very low income households. Conserve
                                     124 low and moderate income assisted rental units. Preserve two mobile home parks (370 units).
Housing Element                                                                                                                           HOU-23

Cypress General Plan
GOALS AND POLICIES
               The prior chapters of the Housing Element establish the housing needs, opportunities and
               constraints in the City of Cypress, as well as the Housing Plan and programs required to meet the
               City’s long-range housing goals. This section of the Housing Element contains the goals and
               policies the City intends to implement to address a number of important housing-related issues,
               and will serve as a guide to City officials in daily decision-making. The following five issue areas
               are addressed by the goals and policies of this Element:
                    •    Conserving and improving the condition of the existing stock of affordable housing;
                    •    Assisting in the development of affordable housing;
                    •    Providing adequate sites to achieve a diversity of housing;
                    •    Removing governmental constraints, as necessary; and
                    •    Promoting equal housing opportunity.
           CONSERVING AND IMPROVING HOUSING STOCK
           (MAINTENANCE AND PRESERVATION OF HOUSING)
           HOU-1:        Increase the supply of sound housing at prices affordable by all segments of the
                         community through the rehabilitation of substandard housing units.
                         HOU-1.1:       Focus rehabilitation assistance in the City’s rehabilitation target areas in
                                        order to create substantive neighborhood improvement and stimulate
                                        additional improvement efforts.
                         HOU-1.2:       Continue to provide rehabilitation and home improvement assistance to low-
                                        and moderate-income households, seniors, and the disabled.
                         HOU-1.3:       Preserve and improve the quality of affordable rental housing by providing
                                        rehabilitation and refinancing assistance to owners of rental properties.
                         HOU-1.4:       Coordinate with non-profit housing providers in the acquisition and
                                        rehabilitation of older apartment complexes and maintenance as long-term
                                        affordable housing.
           HOU-2:        Maintain and improve the supply of sound, affordable housing in Cypress through the
                         conservation of the currently sound housing stock and residential neighborhoods in the
                         City.
                         HOU-2.1:       Promote increased awareness among property owners and residents of the
                                        importance of property maintenance to long-term housing quality.
                         HOU-2.2:       Conserve existing affordable rental housing through placement of long term
                                        affordability controls on assisted housing, and through provision of rent
                                        subsidies to buy down the cost of market rate units.
                         HOU-2.3:       Encourage vigorous enforcement of existing building, safety, and housing
                                        codes to promote property maintenance, and bring substandard units into
                                        compliance with city codes.
HOU-24                                                                                             Housing Element

                                                                                             Cypress General Plan
           DEVELOPMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING (HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES)
           HOU-3:    Encourage the provision of a wide range of housing by location, type of unit, and price to
                     meet the existing and future needs of Cypress residents. Establish a balanced approach
                     to meeting housing needs of both renter and owner households.
                     HOU-3.1:      Use financial and/or regulatory incentives where feasible to encourage the
                                   development of affordable housing by both the private and public sectors.
                     HOU-3.2:      Provide homeownership assistance to low- and moderate-income
                                   households.
                     HOU-3.3:      Support the provision of affordable housing to accommodate large families.
                     HOU-3.4       Facilitate the development of senior housing with supportive services.
                     HOU-3.5       Provide a variety of residential development opportunities in the City,
                                   ranging from low density to high density, as designated by Land Use policy.
           PROVISION OF ADEQUATE HOUSING SITES
           HOU-4:    Provide adequate housing sites through appropriate land use, zoning, and specific plan
                     designations to accommodate the City’s share of regional housing needs.
                     HOU-4.1:      Encourage residential construction in areas which can be adequately served
                                   by public services and facilities in accordance with local plans and
                                   programs.
                     HOU-4.2:      Facilitate development of a range of housing types in the City’s targeted
                                   areas including redevelopment areas Lincoln Avenue and Civic Center.
                     HOU-4.3:      Identify available in-fill lots for future housing development opportunities
                     HOU-4.4:      Ensure compatibility of new residential development with existing
                                   development to enhance the City’s residential neighborhoods.
           REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
           HOU-5:    Mitigate any potential governmental constraints to housing production and affordability.
                     HOU-5.1:      Offer financial and/or regulatory incentives where feasible to off-set or
                                   reduce the costs of developing affordable housing.
                     HOU-5.2:      Monitor all regulations, ordinances, departmental processing procedures,
                                   and residential fees related to rehabilitation and/or construction to assess
                                   their impact on housing costs, and revise as appropriate, to ensure that they
                                   do not constrain housing development.
                     HOU-5.3:      Maintain the City’s expedited and coordinated permit processing system.
                     HOU-5.4:      Provide priority development review processing for low and moderate
                                   income housing applications.
Housing Element                                                                                           HOU-25

Cypress General Plan
                     HOU-5.5:   Amend the zoning ordinance to permit the development of transitional
                                housing in the City’s multi-family residential zones and emergency shelters
                                in commercial and industrial zones, subject to a CUP.
           EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY (ACCESSIBILITY OF HOUSING)
           HOU-6     Promote equal opportunity for all residents to reside in the housing of their choice.
                     HOU-6.1:   Continue to enforce fair housing laws prohibiting arbitrary discrimination in
                                the sale or rental of housing with regard to race, ethnic background, religion,
                                handicap, income, sex, age and household composition.
                     HOU-6.2:   Promote housing which meets the special needs of elderly persons and the
                                handicapped.
                     HOU-6.3:   Encourage the provision of adequate housing to meet the needs of families
                                of all sizes.
                     HOU-6.4:   Continue active support and participation with the Orange County Fair
                                Housing Council to further fair housing opportunities.
HOU-26                                                                                         Housing Element

