 City of Millbrae
Housing Element
   2015-2023
              Final
      Adopted May 12, 2015
                           -1-
Introduction and Background                                                      Millbrae Housing Element
Table of Contents
I. Introduction and Background ..................................................................................3
     1. Purpose of the Housing Element ..................................................... 3
     2. State Law Requirements/Regional Housing Needs Allocation ................. 4
     3. Process for Preparing the Housing Element ....................................... 8
     4. Overview of Accomplishments ......................................................... 9
     5. Key Population and Housing Job Trends .........................................15
     6. Assisted Rental Housing at Risk of Conversion .................................17
     7. Consistency with the Millbrae General Plan ......................................17
II. Housing Policies, Programs and Goals................................................................ 19
     1. Overview ...................................................................................19
     2. Housing Goals and Strategies .......................................................19
     3. Housing Policies and Implementation Programs ................................. 20
     4, Quantified Objectives .................................................................. 35
III. Available Land Inventory .................................................................................... 39
Appendix
     1. Full Review of Policies and Programs
     2. Demographic, Housing and Job Trends
     3. Potential Constraints
     4. Available Land Inventory - Full Chart
     5. Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Final                                              -                                                            -2-
I. Introduction and Background
1. Purpose of the Housing Element
All California cities and counties are required to have a Housing Element included in their
General Plan that establishes housing objectives, policies and programs in response to
community housing conditions and needs. This Housing Element has been prepared to
respond to current and near-term future housing needs in Millbrae. It contains updated
information and strategic directions (policies and specific actions) that the City is committed
to undertaking to address its housing needs.
Even with the recent recovery in the economy, housing affordability in San Mateo County
and in the Bay Area continues to be a challenge for many residents. Millbrae’s housing
conditions are reflective of many area-wide and even national trends. Over the past thirty
years housing costs have skyrocketed out of proportion to many people’s ability to pay.
Many factors, including government policies, construction costs and high land costs account
for the high cost of housing. This has a number of implications for local communities and
the region as it becomes more difficult for businesses to fill vacant jobs, and commute times
for families increase because they travel longer distances to more affordable housing.
The Housing Element of the City of Millbrae General Plan identifies and addresses housing
needs in the city. State law requires that the Housing Element be updated regularly to
respond to changing conditions and new laws. Also, the Housing Element must ensure there
is space for Millbrae’s fair share of new residents. This number was agreed upon by all the
jurisdictions in San Mateo County along with the Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG). This Housing Element is an update of the City of Millbrae's previous Housing
Element, which was adopted by the City Council in 2013 and certified by the State of
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).
                                                                                            -3-

Introduction and Background                                             Millbrae Housing Element
2. State Law Requirements and Regional Housing Needs Allocation
State Law Requirements
State law requires each city and county to adopt a general plan that contains at least seven
elements including a Housing Element. Regulations governing Housing Elements are found
in the California Government Code Sections 65580-65589. Although the Housing Element
must follow State law, it is a local document. The focus of the Millbrae Housing Element is
on the housing needs, desires and vision of Millbrae residents. Within these parameters, the
intent of the element is also to comply with State law requirements that are listed below.
Unlike the other seven mandatory general plan elements, the Housing Element is required to
be updated regularly and is subject to detailed statutory requirements and mandatory review
by the State of California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).
According to State law, the Housing Element must:
      Provide goals, policies, quantified objectives and scheduled programs to preserve,
        improve and develop housing.
      Identify and analyze existing and projected housing needs for all economic segments
        of the community.
      Identify adequate sites that will be zoned and available (prior to Housing Element
        adoption) within the 8 year housing cycle to meet the city’s fair share of regional
        housing needs at all income levels.
      Be internally consistent with other parts of the General Plan.
      Be submitted to HCD in order to determine the Housing Element is in compliance
        with State law.
State Law establishes detailed content requirements for Housing Elements and requires a
regional fair share approach to distributing housing needs. State Housing Element law
recognizes that in order for the private sector to address housing needs and demand, local
governments must adopt land use plans and implement regulations that provide
opportunities for, and do not unduly constrain, housing development.
Additionally, the Housing Element should provide clear policy and direction for making
decisions pertaining to zoning, subdivision approval, housing allocations, and capital and
infrastructure improvements. The housing action program must also identify adequate
residential sites available for a variety of housing types for all income levels; assist in
developing adequate housing to meet the needs of low and moderate income households;
address governmental constraints to housing maintenance, improvement, and development;
Final                                             -                                         -4-

Introduction and Background                                          Millbrae Housing Element
conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock; and promote
housing opportunities for all persons.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation
Within each Housing Element, the State mandates that local governments plan for their
share of the region’s housing need for all income categories. In the case of the San Francisco
Bay Area, the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) and HCD determine the
number of housing units that should be produced in the region. This determination of need
is primarily based on estimated population and job growth, available land, proximity to
transportation and other factors. ABAG then allocates that need for each jurisdiction.
State law regarding Housing Elements was changed in 2004 to allow cities within a county to
join together to form a sub-region to administer the State mandated RHNA process at the
local level. This law allows the sub-region to receive the sub-regional collective housing
allocation from ABAG and then decide on and implement its own methodology to
apportion the allocation among the member cities and county. In turn, the sub-regional
RHNA process is used to establish the housing need numbers for each jurisdiction’s
Housing Element update.
For the current Housing Element update, the County of San Mateo, in partnership with the
cities in the county, formed a sub-region responsible for completing its own RHNA process.
The San Mateo County sub-region considered several methods for allocating the RHNA to
its member jurisdictions. The San Mateo County sub-region adopted a draft methodology
and submitted it to ABAG in July 2012. This was reviewed by the RHNA Policy Advisory
Committee (PAC) in from July through September of that year. The final methodology was
approved by the RHNA PAC in September and later submitted to ABAG.
Based on the allocation methodology approved in 2012, the San Mateo sub-region then
apportioned the housing need to the individual jurisdictions. The adopted sub-regional
methodology, similar to ABAG’s methodology for the current and previous RHNA
processes, used weighted factors to develop a formula for each jurisdiction’s fair share.
Weighted factors included household growth, employment growth, household/employment
growth near transit, and regional income allocations. These factors were derived using
demographic information, projections, regulations, objectives and policies. The sub-regional
allocations were then distributed using these weighted factors for the individual cities.
On January 22, 2013, the Millbrae City Council adopted Resolution No. 13-02 accepting the
assigned housing share of 663 units for Millbrae for the 2015-2023 planning period. In
Final                                           -                                          -5-

Introduction and Background                                           Millbrae Housing Element
addition to determining each jurisdiction’s overall housing allocation, the units are also
required to be distributed according to income level (e.g., very low, low, and moderate).
The State limits for the very low-, low-, and moderate-income categories are derived from
the income limits updated annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) and the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD). The income limits are based on the median income for the County
and are adjusted for household size. Very low-income is defined as a household earning less
than 50 percent of the median income. Low-income is defined as a household earning 50-80
percent of the median income. Moderate-income is a household earning 80-120 percent of
the median income. For San Mateo County in 2014, the median income for a family of four
was $103,000. Because San Mateo County is considered a high cost area, HUD makes some
adjustments when calculating the income limits, which results in the very low income and
low income limits actually being higher than 50 percent and 80 percent of the median
income, respectively.
These legal income limit definitions are often different from the common usage of the
terms. For example, a fully employed secretary might be very low income and a firefighter
supporting a family might be low income. Specifically, the 2014 income ranges for a family
of four for San Mateo County are as follows:
      Extremely Low Income – Under $33,950
      Very Low Income – $33,951-$56,550
      Low Income - $56,551-$90,500
      Moderate Income – $90,501-$123,600
      Above Moderate – Above $126,601
Below is a summary of the RHNA for Millbrae. Approximately 44 percent of all housing is
required to be affordable to lower-income households.
Millbrae RHNA
                                                                                      Above
                   Extremely Low      Very Low                     Moderate
                                                  Low Income                        Moderate     Total
                       Income          Income                       Income
                                                                                     Income
 Numbers                        96            97            101              112            257    663
 Percentages                14.5%          14.5%           15%              17%             39%   100%
Final                                           -                                            -6-

        Introduction and Background                                    Millbrae Housing Element
        Regional Housing Needs Allocation (2015 – 2023)
                             Extremely               Very
                                   Low               Low         Low      Moderate       Above
                                Income            Income      Income         Income    Moderate
                                  Up to        $31,651-     $52,751-       $84,401-     Income
                               $31,650           $52,750     $84,400       $123,600   $123,601+       Total
Atherton                             17                18          26             29            3        93
Belmont                              58                58          63             67        222         468
Brisbane                             12                13          13              15         30         83
Burlingame                          138               138         144            155        288         863
Colma                                10                10           8               9         22         59
Daly City                          200               200          188            221        541      1,350
East Palo Alto                       32                32          54             83        266         467
Foster City                          74                74          87             76         119        430
Half Moon Bay                        26                26          31             36         121        240
Hillsborough                         16                16          17              21         21         91
Menlo Park                          116               117         129            143        150         655
Millbrae                             96                97         101            112        257         663
Pacifica                             60                61          68             70        154         413
Portola Valley                       10                 11         15              15         13         64
Redwood City                       353               353         429            502       1,152      2,789
San Bruno                           179               179         161           205         431       1,155
San Carlos                           97                98         107             111       183         596
San Mateo                          429               430         469            530       1,242      3,100
South San Francisco                282               283          281            313        705      1,864
Woodside                              11               12          13              15          11        62
Unincorporated                       76                77         103            102        555         913
San Mateo County Total           2,292             2,303       2,507          2,830      6,486      16,418
 Source: Association of Bay Area Governments, Final 2014-2022 Regional Housing Need Allocation by County.
 Yearly Income is based on a family of four.
        Final                                             -                                   -7-

Introduction and Background                                            Millbrae Housing Element
3. Process for Preparing the Housing Element
Updating the Housing Element is a process that involves many stakeholders. Millbrae has
worked closely with community groups, housing providers, developers, and others to ensure
that the Housing Element meets the needs of the community.
As described above, the Housing Element update process started in 2012 with the sub-
regional RHNA process.
The cooperation continued in San Mateo County with 21 Elements, an inter-jurisdictional
housing cooperative effort. 21 Elements saved time and money, and also allowed for better
Housing Elements, because jurisdictions learned best practices from each other.
A local government must “make a diligent effort” to involve all economic segments of its
population in developing its Housing Element. Efforts to involve the general public in this
update of Millbrae’s Housing Element included a community meeting on October 21, 2014.
Community members affirmed that senior housing needs are a growing issue in the
community and expressed general support for the continued implementation of strategies
identified in the housing element.
One issue that came up at the meeting and in a subsequent letter to the City is displacement.
There is concern that rising rents will result in current residents having to move. In response,
the City plans to study this matter in cooperation with nearby jurisdictions facing the same
concern. The intent is that sufficient data can be obtained which can become the basis for
future policies to address the issue. The City also added a program to cooperate with the
Golden Gate Regional Center based on initial feedback.
The city has also reviewed the letter sent by the California Building Industry Association and
San Mateo County Association of Realtors. We believe we are following all of the best
practices that they raise. In particular, the update and ongoing implementation of the
Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan will help facilitate development in an area with
tremendous transportation resources. Answers to relevant specific questions are found in
this Housing Element.
The public was able to participate in a December 1, 2014 meeting of the Planning
Commission. This meeting was publicized on the City’s website, a local newspaper, and
physical bulletin boards at City Hall and the Millbrae Library. The City Council reviewed the
first draft of the Housing Element on January 13, 2015. The following groups were
personally notified of the City Council meeting: Housing Leadership Council, HIP Housing,
Mid-Peninsula Housing, HEART, Bridge Housing, Mental Health Care Association of San
Final                                            -                                          -8-

Introduction and Background                                                   Millbrae Housing Element
Mateo County, Legal Aid Society of San Mateo County, and InnVision Shelter Network. The
document has been available for comment since January, but no additional comments have
been received1. The document is available on the City’s webpage.
Millbrae has also benefited from 21 Elements’ efforts to solicit input from hard to reach
populations. Through 21 Elements, non-profits representing seniors, homeless and low
income households, all were able to offer input on Housing Element priorities. 21 Elements
also brought in experts on mixed-use and other market rate developers to share their insight.
Additional steps will include review by HCD, with changes as necessary, additional public
review by Planning Commission, public review and adoption by City Council, and
certification by HCD.
4. Overview of Accomplishments under Previous Housing Element
Millbrae had many significant accomplishments in the previous planning period which lasted
2007-2014, but development was generally slow because of the nationwide economic
recession and housing market downturn.
Amendments to the Zoning Code
The City has made many of the zoning code changes as described in the previous Housing
Element. In January 2015 the City did the following:
Homeless (Emergency), Transitional, and Supportive Housing
On Feb 10th, 2015, City Council adopted an ordinance to comply with SB 2. Specifically, it
relabels homeless (emergency) shelters from a conditional use to a permitted use in the “C”
(Commercial) Zone while maintaining them as a permitted use in the “I” (Industrial) Zone.
There are over 40 acres of commercially and industrially zoned property within 1/2 of mile
of the Millbrae BART/Caltrain Station. Both zones are appropriate for emergency shelters.
The commercially zoned properties are a mix of small retail, office, and automotive uses.
The industrially zoned properties are mostly warehouses and non-public businesses, like
airline oriented catering, and are almost entirely contained within the Millbrae Station Area
Specific Plan boundaries. Over time, the amount of available industrial land will continue to
decrease as it is redeveloped and rezoned in compliance with the Specific Plan. Allowing
emergency, transitional, and supportive housing as a permitted use in the Commercial zone
will offset the loss of industrial land.
1 In May 2015, letters ware received from the San Mateo County Association of Realtors and a community
member, both of which were evaluated and forwarded to City Council.
Final                                                 -                                                -9-

Introduction and Background                                             Millbrae Housing Element
Reasonable Accommodation for People with Disabilities
The City Council initiated a zoning amendment to provide individuals with disabilities
reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary
to ensure equal access to housing. The ordinance provides a process for individuals with
disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation in regard to relief from the
various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the
City. The requests can be approved by staff.
The City will continue to designate the Building Official to coordinate ADA compliance
activities and address questions, concerns, complaints, and requests regarding accessibility
for people with disabilities.
Definition of Family
The City Council initiated a zoning amendment to create a definition of “family” that is
compliant with federal and state law. Specifically, it states the following:
         “Family” means any individual or group of two or more individuals occupying
         a dwelling unit where all residents share living expenses, chores, and other
         household responsibilities, and/or form social, economic, and psychological
         commitments to each other. A family includes the residents of residential care
         facilities and group homes for people with disabilities. A family does not
         include institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities,
         sororities, monasteries, convents, military barracks, or commercial care
         facilities such as retirement centers, nursing homes, and the like, or commercial
         group living arrangements such as boardinghouses, rooming houses, and the
         like.
All three zoning amendments are anticipated to take effect by March 2015.
Density Bonus
City staff has been preparing an ordinance to implement the Density Bonus law, which will
be presented to Planning Commission in April and Council in June 2015. Millbrae's current
policy to allow the density bonus is codified in Housing Element Policy H 3.7.
Update of the Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan
The City is undertaking a process to update the Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan (MSASP)
and supporting EIR. The MSASP, initially developed and adopted in 1998, will guide future
public improvements and private development in the Plan Area over the next 25 years. The
MSASP will re-establish a vision and framework for new and intensified, transit-oriented,
mixed-use development to bring economic growth in terms of employment, housing, and
Final                                              -                                       - 10 -

Introduction and Background                                            Millbrae Housing Element
commerce, to Millbrae and improve the quality of life of its residents. It is envisioned that
the Plan Area will be developed with a mix of multi-family residential, office, hotel,
restaurant, and retail uses, with complementary public and private open spaces and
amenities.
Approval of the updated MSASP will require amendment of the City’s General Plan to
ensure consistency between the two plans. Buildout of the MSASP would result in
approximately 1,653,000 square feet of office, 275,000 square feet of retail space, 1,750
residential units, and 360 hotel rooms. Consistent with Sections 15168 of the CEQA
Guidelines a program-level EIR will be prepared to analyze the potential impacts of adopting
and implementing the new Plan. Upon completion in 2015, the new MSASP will seek to
accomplish the following objectives for the Plan Area:
         • Update and define the vision
         • Create goals and policies intended to facilitate achievement of the vision
         • Designate land for uses that implement the vision
         • Update development standards for the form and physical design of new
         development
         • Provide recommendations for circulation and physical improvements required to
         support future build out
         • Provide an implementation strategy and conceptual financing plan for achieving the
         goals
The city is currently reviewing the administrative draft of the Plan and related EIRs. The
public draft of both of these documents is expected to be available in the middle of May
2015.It is anticipated that the new MSASP will be reviewed by Council in the fall of 2015.
Grand Boulevard Zone
In 2010, as part of a major overhaul to the City’s Zoning Ordinance, a new zoning district
“Grand Boulevard Planned Development” was added. The purpose of this zone is to
facilitate intensified redevelopment of the El Camino Real corridor through pedestrian-
oriented, transit-oriented, mixed-use projects. It enables the use of regulations that are more
flexible than those prescribed in other zoning districts. When applied to individual sites, this
district grants variability in the size and placement of structures and other site improvements
while protecting public health, safety, welfare, comfort, and convenience. It establishes the
procedures for securing the Grand Boulevard Planned Development zoning classification
and for reviewing development plans for any project proposal for “GBPD” zoning.
Although, to date, no parcels have been rezoned to this classification, the zone is a readily
available tool for use by developers to achieve higher development densities and a greater
Final                                             -                                         - 11 -

Introduction and Background                                           Millbrae Housing Element
variety of land use mixes compared to conventional zoning. As part of submitting a
development project application, property owners would request GBPD zoning to be
applied to their parcel. The project application would be reviewed in the context of the
GBPD zoning and, upon project approval, the zoning would be automatically conferred
upon the property.
The initially low developer interest in the GBPD Zone is likely due to the depressed
economy since 2010, as well as a general lack of awareness. The City has added a program to
raise awareness and promote this zone.
New Units
Many units were built in accordance with the Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan (MSASP),
which was adopted in 1998 and set a vision for redevelopment of the 116 acres in and
around the BART/CalTrain Station. The MSASP automatically confers special Millbrae
Station Area Planned Development (MSAPD) zoning upon land for which qualifying
redevelopment projects are approved. The intent is to achieve high-density housing, retail,
restaurant, office, hotel, and entertainment in a mixed-use, transit-oriented setting. The City
and (formerly the Redevelopment Agency) have facilitated new development within the
MSASP area to create a high quality image at the primary gateway into the city, to implement
the pedestrian and transit orientation of the Plan, and to attract new revenue sources for the
City. Since Millbrae is a small city and almost completely built out, the MSASP area
possesses the greatest potential for the future growth and development of the city.
There have been a number of major developments in the last Housing Element period:
Final                                            -                                         - 12 -
Introduction and Background                                             Millbrae Housing Element
        Pinedera – This 54 unit apartment complex, built to condominium standards, with a
         central courtyard and about 11,000 square
         feet of ground floor commercial space,
         opened in 2014 after beginning
         construction in 2012. The units, all but two
         of which are market rate, are a mix of two
         and three bedrooms.
        88 South Broadway – Construction for this
         project started in 2003 and the project
         opened in 2007. It consists of 105 multi-
         family (condominium) units within three
         separate buildings arranged around a central
         courtyard over a podium that conceals two
         levels of parking. There is also
         approximately 6,500 square feet of ground
         floor commercial space (below the podium level). This project includes 11 below
         market rate units.
                                                Park Broadway – Construction for
                                               this project started in 2006 and it opened in
                                               2009. It consists of 110 multi-family
                                               (condominium) units, including 13 “live-work”
                                               units, arranged around a central courtyard over
                                               a podium that conceals two levels of parking.
                                               The “live-work” units may be occupied as
                                               residential only, commercial only, or both. This
     project included 8 below market rate units.
      Belamor – Construction for this project started in
         2007 and the project opened in 2010. It consists
         of 142 condominium arranged around a central
         courtyard over a podium that conceals two levels
         of parking. There is also approximately 19, 500
         square feet of commercial space (below the
         podium level).
Final                                            -                                          - 13 -

Introduction and Background                                         Millbrae Housing Element
Total Units Built 2007-2014 (Previous Housing Element Period)
                                                                    Above
                     Very Low                       Moderate
 Description                        Low Income                    Moderate          Total
                      Income                         Income
                                                                   Income
 Pinedera                1               1              0             52              54
 88 S.
                         0               1              10            94             105
 Broadway
 Park
                         0               0               8           102             110
 Broadway
 Belamor
                         0               0              0            142             142
 Duplexes
                         0               0              0              6               6
 (total units)
 Single Family
                         0               0              0             11              11
 Houses
 Total                   1               2              18           407            428
Conserved/Preserved/Rehabilitated Units by Income Level
Despite challenges associated with the housing downturn, Millbrae was able to complete the
renovation of the Delores Lia Apartment Complex. The project consists of 6 studio units, 16
one-bedroom units and 5 two-bedroom units with ancillary community space and both
surface and garage parking. The city originally loaned Bridge Housing $5 million to purchase
and renovate the property. The city later added $700,000 of additional funding in a deal that
saw the property transfer to a new developer, Pacific West Properties.
Millbrae achieved more than its target number of Section 8 vouchers. It identified 50 as a
goal and, as of 2014, had 73 households using the vouchers.
The City had set a goal of 40 Conserved/Preserved or Rehabilitated units. No additional
units besides the 27 Delores Lia units were Rehabilitated and Conserved.
Additional Information
See the Appendix for additional information about accomplishments, including an analysis
of all policies and programs identified in the previous Housing Element.
Final                                            -                                        - 14 -
Introduction and Background                                           Millbrae Housing Element
5. Key Population and Housing Job Trends
A housing crisis in the Bay Area has been an evolving phenomenon over the past 30 years as
high demand (and need) has continually exceeded supply and affordability. Most of this
demand, approximately 75 percent of it, comes from natural population growth (births
minus deaths). Specifically, this demand is from all the children who graduate high school or
college and need places to live. A little under a quarter of the demand has come from people
who move to the Bay Area for jobs. And, finally, a small percentage of the demand comes
from household size decreasing — with more people living on their own (like seniors who
are living longer or single parents), even if our population stayed the same, we would still
need new houses. At the same time, ongoing troubles with the economy and the mortgage
market has presented a new category of challenges.
Additionally, there has been a substantial movement in the Bay Area, intensified by concerns
about climate change, to find ways to grow sustainably. That is, to encourage regional
development patterns that are more compact, transit-oriented, pedestrian-oriented,
attractively designed, and highly livable. A central focus of this movement — the very
foundation for achieving a more sustainable and livable Bay Area — is rethinking the way in
which housing is planned, designed, rehabilitated, preserved and managed in conjunction
with transportation systems, jobs and services.
Region Wide Trends
Rise of the Millennials. The Millennial generation (ages 20-34) has a preference for dense,
mixed-use, walk-able and bike-able communities. Many have speculated that Millennials may
be a “generation of renters,” but as the economy improves and as Millennials age, this
conclusion may change.
Growing senior population. Over the next decade and a half, the number of seniors in San
Mateo County will increase by 76 percent. Millbrae currently is home to approximately 2,340
seniors, and has a median age (45) ten years older than California’s median. Advanced
planning will be necessary to ensure the opportunity for seniors to age safely in the
communities where they reside.
Worsening workforce-housing shortage. San Mateo County is projected to see notable
job growth over the next decade, and about 40 percent of these jobs will pay lower income
wages. San Mateo County already has a severe workforce housing shortage in general caused
by years of rapid economic growth and slow housing growth. By 2025, the Department of
Housing projects than the County’s housing supply will only meet 1/3-1/2 of the demand.
Final                                            -                                        - 15 -

Introduction and Background                                         Millbrae Housing Element
ABAG predicts that Millbrae in particular will see rapid job growth: a 33 percent increase
between 2000 and 2025.
Increasing ethnic diversity. According to 2010 U.S. Census data, San Mateo County is a
“majority-minority” county — that is, no one racial group makes up over 50 percent of the
population. The two racial groups growing the most rapidly in San Mateo County are Asians
and Latinos. According to the regional Plan Bay Area, adopted on July 18, 2013, Latinos will
emerge as the largest ethnic group, increasing from 23 percent to 35 percent of the total
population in the Bay Area by 2040.
Millbrae Trends
Aside from the Bay Area trends identified above, there are some local Millbrae specific
trends. Below are key findings of the housing needs analysis that summarize important
trends and considerations for the Housing Element. Many pages of additional analysis and
sources can be found in the Appendix.
As of January 2014, Millbrae had a total population of 22,605. According to census data,
Millbrae’s population grew by four percent from 2000 to 2010. However, the Association of
Bay Area Governments (ABAG) predicts that Millbrae’s growth will pick up over the next
two decades, bringing the population to 25,700 by 2030.
Almost two-thirds of the housing units in Millbrae are single-family detached homes,
and a similar proportion are owner-occupied. Millbrae has a total of 8,562 homes, a six
percent increase since 2000. In addition, Millbrae has very low vacancy rates.
41 percent of Millbrae’s households are lower-income. Millbrae’s median household
income was $92,700 (in 2011), which is comparable to the countywide median of $92,000. A
relatively large percent of Millbrae’s households are lower income. Specifically, 11 percent
are extremely low income.
Rents have increased significantly in the past several years. Rents in Millbrae have been
rising since 2010, and have currently exceeded pre-housing crisis rates.
For-sale housing prices are high, rising, and unaffordable to many households. As of
October 2013, the median sales price for a single-family home in Millbrae was $1.2 million
and the median sale price for a multi-family home was $635,000. According to Zillow, home
prices in Millbrae have increased by more than a quarter over the past year. For-sale homes
in Millbrae are unaffordable for households earning a moderate income or less.
Final                                           -                                         - 16 -

Introduction and Background                                            Millbrae Housing Element
Many households are overpaying for housing. Most households earning less than
$75,000 annually are overpaying for housing in Millbrae. In particular, almost all renters and
more than half the homeowners earning less than $35,000 are overpaying.
6. Assisted Rental Housing at Risk of Conversion
Government Code Section 65583 requires each city and county to conduct an analysis and
identify programs for preserving assisted housing developments. The analysis is required to
identify any low income units that are at risk of losing subsidies over the next 10 years (2015-
2025). The termination of federal mortgage and/or rent subsidies to housing developments
built by the private sector is a potential threat to affordable housing throughout the country.
In 1997, the City of Millbrae acted as issuer for 30-year, tax-exempt bonds for Magnolia of
Millbrae. The bonds were tax-exempt because Magnolia agreed to reserve 32 units for very
low income residents for at least 15 years (if the bonds were prepaid) and up to 30 years (if
the bonds were not prepaid). The minimum 15-year period of affordability began in
approximately April 1999. The owner refinanced his bonds to take advantage of current, low
interest rates. The city approached the owner to discuss options to extend the affordability,
but the owner was not interested. The units will revert to market rate soon.
There are no other at risk units in Millbrae.
7. Consistency with the Millbrae General Plan
The Millbrae General Plan serves as the constitution for development in the City of Millbrae.
It is a long-range planning document that describes goals, policies and programs to guide
land use decision-making. Once the General Plan is adopted, all development-related
decisions in the City must be consistent with the Plan. If a development proposal is not
consistent with the Plan, it must be revised or the Plan itself must be amended. State law
requires a community’s General Plan to be internally consistent. This means that the
Housing Element, although subject to special requirements and a different schedule of
updates, must function as an integral part of the overall General Plan, with consistency
between it and the other General Plan elements.
The Housing Element addresses all State requirements. It contains information on housing
constraints and actions to deal with those constraints. The most recent update of the
Housing Element occurred in 2013 and utilized 2010 Census data on population, housing,
employment, and income. This new update of the Housing Element utilizes 2012 American
Community Survey Data (US Census), supplemented with later data as available.
Final                                             -                                        - 17 -

Introduction and Background                                            Millbrae Housing Element
The Housing Element includes information on the number of units required to meet
Millbrae’s housing need and its share of the regional need. Sites with development potential
in accordance with the City’s housing needs are evaluated. The entire General Plan, including
this revised Housing Element, reaffirms the following goals of the City by:
     (1) Acting as a guide for municipal decisions that affect the quality and quantity of
         housing.
     (2) Maintaining housing growth within limits of available services.
     (3) Maintaining Millbrae’s present quality of life by balancing the availability of housing
         with other environmental considerations.
The adoption of the updated Millbrae Housing Element will be processed as an amendment
to the Millbrae General Plan. Because the General Plan must be internally consistent, it is
important that the policies in the other elements, including Land Use, Circulation, Open
Space, Conservation, Safety, and Noise are compatible with the goals, policies, and programs
developed in the Housing Element. As part of the Housing Element update, the City has
reviewed the other elements of the General Plan to assess the need for housing-related
policy changes. No changes were found to be necessary.
Final                                           -                                            - 18 -

II. Housing Policies, Programs and Goals
1. Overview
The Housing Element’s intent with respect to housing needs in Millbrae is expressed in two
ways. The first is in the form of a vision, goals and objectives sought by the community. A
goal is the ideal we strive for –– or the desired state of things. Objectives are defined steps
toward a goal, which measure progress and should be expressed in quantified terms or
targets. State law requires that the City’s housing objectives establish targets for the number
of housing units that can be constructed, rehabilitated or conserved between 2015 and 2023.
The second and more specific aspects of the Housing Element are policy statements and
implementation programs. These describe the way citizens, local government, and other
involved agencies or organizations can achieve objectives, and move closer to the City’s
goals. Policies establish a recognized community position on a particular subject. Programs
are more detailed actions that the City, or other specific entities, intends to implement to
ensure the attainment of the Housing Element’s goal and objectives. The discussion below
provides summary information on key trends and issues facing the City of Millbrae as they
relate to the Housing Element.
2. Housing Goals and Strategies
The City’s housing goal is to promote the social and economic diversity of the City by
encouraging safe and affordable housing for all social and economic segments of the
community. Sub-goals are to:
Goal H1        Reinforce the City's Commitment to Meeting Housing Needs
Goal H2        Protect and Enhance Existing Housing, Community Character and Resources
Goal H3        Provide New Housing and Address Affordable Housing and Other Special Needs
                                                                                             - 19 -

Policies and Programs                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
3. Housing Policies and Implementation Programs
Goal H1 –– Reinforce the City's Commitment to Meeting Housing Needs
Policies
H1.1 City Leadership. Provide an active leadership role in helping to attain the objectives
of the City's Housing Element by following through on the actions prescribed in the
Housing Element in a timely manner and monitoring progress annually to review housing
goals and target achievements.
H1.2 Public Participation. Encourage and support public participation in the
formulation and review of the City's housing policy, including encouraging neighborhood
level planning and working with community groups and the building and real estate industry
to advocate programs which will increase affordable housing supply and opportunities.
H1.3 Cooperation with Other Public Agencies and Non-Profits. Continue
participation in countywide housing assistance programs and coordinate with other public
agencies and non-profit housing sponsors in the use of available programs to provide lower-
cost housing in Millbrae. As appropriate, cooperate in countywide collaborative projects,
such as 21 Elements.
H1.4 Development Opportunities. Identify opportunities to promote appropriate
development without Redevelopment Agencies.
H1.5 Equal Housing Opportunity. Promote equal housing opportunities for all Millbrae
residents and ensure provision of housing opportunities for all people. The City will take
appropriate actions when necessary to ensure that the sale, rental, or financing of housing is
not denied to any individual on the basis of race, sex, national origin, religion, age or other
arbitrary factors.
Final                                          -                                             - 20 -

Policies and Programs                                                    Millbrae Housing Element
Implementing Programs
HIP-1 Future Housing Element Updates. The City will update its Housing Element
consistent with State Law requirements.
         Timeline: Next update by 2023.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-2 Coordination with Non-Profits. The City will meet with affordable housing
providers and representatives as needed. The City will actively partner with these groups to
ensure affordable housing can be built in Millbrae. The City will listen to the suggestions of
these groups and if possible and appropriate will accommodate their needs. The Community
Development Director will act as a liaison role to housing groups.
         Timeline: Annual.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-3 Annual Housing Element Reporting. The City will complete the annual Housing
Element Progress Report. It will provide a statistical summary of residential building activity
tied to various types of housing, household need, income and Housing Element program
targets.
         Timeline: Annually.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-4 Community Outreach. The City will improve citizen awareness of rehabilitation
and disaster assistance loan subsidy programs, code enforcement, energy conservation
programs, fair housing laws and affordable housing programs by: (a) providing information
pamphlets on the programs at City Hall and the library and with water bill inserts; (b)
contacting neighborhood groups and associations; (c) providing special presentations to
community groups periodically; and (d) providing public information through articles in the
local newspaper and with cable TV public service announcements.
         Timeline: Completed by 2016, then ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-5 Non-Discrimination. Increase public awareness through handouts of anti-
discrimination laws and policies and of recourse available in case of violation. To ensure that
the sale, rental, or financing of housing is not denied to any individual on the basis of race,
sex, national origin, religion, age, or other arbitrary factors, Millbrae will help ensure that
State and federal laws are adhered to regarding fair housing. The City, through its
Community Development Department, will refer discrimination complaints to the
appropriate legal service, County, or State agency. The City will assist local non-profit
Final                                             -                                           - 21 -
Policies and Programs                                                Millbrae Housing Element
organizations, as appropriate, to provide public information and education services. See HIP
– 4 for information dissemination methods.
         Timeline: Ensure handouts are available by 2018, then ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
Goal H2 –– Protect and Enhance Existing Housing, Community Character and Resources
Policies
H2.1 Regulation of Conversions. The City will conserve rental housing stock by
minimizing condominium conversions in order to avoid depleting the already inadequate
number of rental units.
H2.2 Maintenance and Rehabilitation of Existing Housing. Promote maintenance
and rehabilitation of structures in poor condition and upgrade units lacking adequate kitchen
and plumbing facilities. Encourage property maintenance measures designed to maintain the
existing housing stock in its overall good condition and encourage rehabilitation to the
extent possible and when necessary for low and moderate income homeowners and rental
property owners with lower income tenants.
H2.3 Energy Conservation in Existing Housing. Encourage energy conservation
measures in rehabilitation projects. Encourage owners of existing residences to adopt energy
conservation measures and promote energy conservation programs that provide assistance
for energy conservation improvements.
H2.4 Energy Conservation in New Housing. Promote the use of energy conservation
in residential construction by incorporating energy conservation in all new residential
development. New homes shall meet State standards for energy conservation.
H2.5 Rental Assistance Programs. Continue to publicize and participate in federal rental
assistance programs such as Section 8 and the Housing Voucher programs.
H2.6 Protection of the Rental Housing Stock. Promote the retention of rental units
and encourage rental subsidy programs that can be applied to existing housing.
H2.7 Community Preservation. Assure the retention of the single-family character of
older residential areas. Protect residents and maintain the housing stock by enforcing the
housing and other codes for all types of residential units. As neighborhoods age, the City
should provide all possible assistance for housing rehabilitation and maintenance measures
through aggressive code enforcement and community preservation.
Final                                           -                                        - 22 -

Policies and Programs                                                    Millbrae Housing Element
H2.8 Home Sharing. Encourage and facilitate house sharing in appropriate locations
where it would provide housing for low and moderate income residents and not significantly
impact the neighborhood (parking, access, etc.).
H2.9 Housing Design. Protect the character of existing residential neighborhoods and
provide stable, safe and attractive neighborhoods by ensuring excellence in project design
consistent with existing community character (architecture, site planning, amenities, etc.).
H2.10 Application of Existing Regulations and Guidelines. Provide and apply
regulations and guidelines to promote the maintenance and protection of existing residential
areas.
Implementing Programs
HIP-6 Continue to Improve Code Enforcement. Continue the City’s existing code
enforcement program and consider expansion of the program to assure compliance with
basic health and safety building standards and appropriate permits, potentially including: (1)
resale inspections of single family homes; and (2) public outreach and education. In addition,
continue the mandatory fire code inspection program.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and Fire Marshall.
HIP-7 Encourage Rehabilitation Loans. The City will encourage energy conservation,
rehabilitation loan and disaster assistance programs to the extent possible given program
funding criteria and local need. The city will facilitate greater participation in the program by
advertising on the city website, in City mailings and by providing information at the Building
Department counter.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: San Mateo County Housing Authority, San Mateo County
Department of Housing, and the Community Development Department.
HIP-8 Contact Property Owners of Substandard Units. Within current staffing limits,
establish a program of contacting owners of structures that appear to be in declining or
substandard condition, offer inspection services, advertise and promote programs that will
assist in funding needed work.
          Timeline: Ongoing.
         Objective: Improvement of four very low/extremely low, four low and twelve
moderate income units to current health and safety standards (average five units per year) by
2022.
Final                                            -                                           - 23 -

Policies and Programs                                                   Millbrae Housing Element
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-9 Energy Conservation Assistance. Publicize energy conservation programs and
weatherization services that are available to provide subsidized or inspection and
improvement. The City can help publicize programs such as those offered by PG&E.
         Timeline: Annually.
         Objective: Weatherization of ten very low/extremely low and ten low income units
by 2023.
         Responsible Agency: PG&E, North Peninsula Neighborhood Service Center, San
Mateo County Department of Housing, and Community Development Department.
HIP-10 Increased Energy Conservation. Apply Title 24 energy conservation
requirements, and, where possible, require structural design to make use of natural heating
and cooling and require landscape design to be drought tolerant.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-11 Rental Housing Assistance. Encourage landlords, tenants and developers to
participate in the Housing Authority Section 8 Rent Subsidy Program. Maintain descriptions
of current programs and contacts at City Hall to provide to interested persons.
         Timeline: Develop by 2018 and then Ongoing.
         Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department and San Mateo
County Housing Authority.
HIP-12 Condominium Conversion Regulation. Continue the existing controls on
conversions of rental units to condominium.
         Timeline : Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-13 Neighborhood Conservation. Continue the maintenance and enhancement of
public facilities, such as streets, water supply, and drainage, in residential neighborhoods by
allocations from the general fund, gas tax revenues, Block Grant funds and, where
appropriate, through assessment districts, or as conditions of development.
         Timeline: Ongoing
         Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department and Public Works
Department.
HIP-14 Home-sharing. Continue to support HIP Housing Home Sharing Program as part
of a collection of policies, programs and practices for addressing the housing needs of those
Final                                              -                                        - 24 -
Policies and Programs                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
at the lowest income levels including seniors, those living with disabilities, those at risk of
homelessness and female head of households.
         Timeline: Ongoing
         Objective: Ten very low income, five low income and one moderate income
households (16 households per year).
         Responsible Agency: Human Investment Project.
Goal H3 –– Provide New Housing and Address Affordable Housing and Other Special Needs
Policies
H3.1 Housing for New Employees and their Families. Given the increase in
commercial and retail development expected through build-out of the city, encourage an
adequate supply and variety of rental and ownership housing that meets the needs of new
employees and their families.
H3.2 Planned Development Process. Encourage the use of the planned development
process to achieve a diversity of housing types and tenure and to provide greater choice for
residents and workers in Millbrae.
H3.3 Mixed-Use Development. Encourage mixed residential/commercial uses on those
parcels where a mix is feasible and appropriate, consistent with the General Plan, through
the following and other means: (1) increased densities; (2) reduced unit sizes; and (3)
allowances for required ground-floor retail.
H3.4 Second Units. Develop a second unit ordinance to allow auxiliary housing units
where appropriate.
H3.5 Affordable Housing. Improve the balance of housing type, tenure and affordability
by encouraging development of housing at appropriate sites/locations to serve various
income levels, and utilize available programs to achieve affordable housing.
H3.6 Incentives for Affordable Housing. Continue to approve housing at higher
densities when affordable units are provided, consistent with environmental constraints,
surrounding development patterns and design excellence (architecture, site planning,
amenities, etc.). To the extent they are feasible and workable at a given location, the City will
offer a density bonus and other incentives, such as reduced fees, cost-saving site design
techniques, reduced parking requirements, smaller unit sizes, fast-track project review, and
other methods of reducing the total cost of internal roads and utilities serving the
development.
Final                                            -                                            - 25 -

Policies and Programs                                                  Millbrae Housing Element
H3.7 Density Bonuses for Affordable Housing Projects Consistent with State
Density Bonus Law. The City will offer density bonuses of at least 25 percent and at least
one other incentive, consistent with the State Density Bonus Law (Government Code
Section 65915), for projects which include at least: (a) 20 percent of the units for lower-
income households; or (b) 10 percent of the units for very low income households; or (c) 50
percent of the units for senior citizens. When in the interest of the city, offer larger density
bonuses. Until the city adopts a density bonus law, continue to follow state law by offering
the incentives outlined in state law.
H3.8 Resale Controls on Owner-Occupied BMR Units. Require resale controls on
owner-occupied BMR units to ensure that affordable units provided through public
assistance or public action are retained for 45 years as affordable housing stock, with the 45
year period resetting at each resale.
H3.9 Rent and Income Restrictions on Rental BMR Units. Require rent and income
restrictions on rental BMR units to ensure that affordable units provided through public
assistance or public action are retained for at least 55 years as affordable housing stock.
H3.10 BMR Eligibility Priorities. In order to meet a portion of the City’s local housing
need, consistent with Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) Housing Need
Determinations, and as a traffic mitigation measure, the City will, to the extent consistent
with applicable law, consider offering a portion of the BMR units in a project for City
employees, school district employees, and other people working in the City of Millbrae.
H3.11 Innovative Housing Approaches. Encourage innovative housing approaches in
financing and design of units to increase the availability of low and moderate income
housing, including encouraging cooperative and joint ventures between owners, developers
and non-profit groups in the provision of BMR housing.
H3.12 New Housing Eligible for Subsidy. Encourage new projects to pursue subsidies
to reduce the cost of the units, such as Section 8, home-sharing, first time homebuyer, or
similar programs which provide very low, low and moderate income housing.
H3.13 Housing Opportunity Areas. Given the diminishing availability of developable
land, the City has identified housing opportunity areas where a special effort will be made to
provide affordable housing consistent with other General Plan policies. Housing
Opportunity Areas are identified as the Grand Boulevard Planned Development District,
Downtown and the Millbrae Station Area. Housing Opportunity Areas have the following
characteristics:
Final                                            -                                           - 26 -

Policies and Programs                                                  Millbrae Housing Element
    a) The area has the potential to deliver sales or rental units at low or below market rate
         prices or rents.
    b) The area has the potential to meet special housing needs for local workers, single
         parents, seniors, small families or large families.
    c) The area has been subject to a planning study and found appropriate to facilitate
         provision of housing units to meet the City’s housing objectives.
    d) The following criteria for selection of Housing Opportunity Areas is applicable:
             1. Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access.
             2. Convenient access to transit (or the project must be able to provide transit to
                 meet the needs of the project's prospective residents).
             3. Convenient access to neighborhood services and facilities as needed by the
                 prospective residents.
             4. Convenient access to neighborhood recreation facilities, or designed to
                 provide adequate recreation facilities on site.
             5. Cost effective mitigation of physical site constraints (including geologic
                 hazards, flooding, drainage, soils constraints, wetland limitations, etc.).
             6. Cost effective provision of adequate services and utilities to the site.
             7. Ability to meet applicable noise requirements.
             8. Adequate site size to provide adequate parking; parking requirements should
                 be flexible based on the needs of the project's prospective residents.
             9. Finding that development of a specific project on the site will not result in
                 significant adverse cumulative effects, unless the City adopts a statement of
                 overriding considerations.
When new housing is proposed on sites in Housing Opportunity Areas, to the extent
consistent with applicable law, require at least 15 percent of the units to be affordable.
Utilize the land use entitlement process such as; through discretionary permits, rezoning or
development agreement.
H3.14 Adaptable Units for the Physically Disabled. The City will ensure that new
housing includes units that can be adapted for use by disabled residents.
H3.15 Density Bonuses for Handicapped Access Features. The City may allow up to a
one-for-one density bonus, up to 25 percent of the number of units otherwise allowed, in
projects where handicapped accessible features and fixtures are incorporated in dwelling
units.
H3.16 Special Needs. Encourage affordable housing designed for elderly persons and
encourage a mix of housing units throughout the city including those for families with
children, single parents, young families, lower income seniors and the disabled.
Final                                             -                                          - 27 -

Policies and Programs                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
H3.17 Neighborhood Mix of Residential Care Facilities and Emergency Shelters.
The City of Millbrae recognizes the need for and desirability of residential care facilities. The
City shall encourage a dispersion of facilities, and avoid an over-concentration of residential
care facilities and shelters for the homeless in any one geographic area. The City of Millbrae
believes that an over-concentration of such facilities may negatively impact the
neighborhood in which they are located and interfere with the "normalization process" for
clients residing in such facilities. Over-concentration cannot be numerically defined because
of legal constraints, but placement must be considered by staff, decision-making bodies and
applicants in light of the above.
H3.18 Neighborhood Relations Involving Emergency Shelters and Residential Care
Facilities. The City of Millbrae shall encourage positive relations between neighborhoods
and providers of emergency shelters and residential care facilities. Providers or sponsors of
emergency shelters, transitional housing programs and community care facilities shall be
encouraged to establish outreach programs within their neighborhoods. It is recommended
that a staff person from the provider agency be designated as a contact person with the
community to review questions or comments from the neighborhood. Outreach programs
may also designate a member of the local neighborhood to their Board of Directors.
Neighbors of emergency shelters, transitional housing programs and community care
facilities shall be encouraged to provide a neighborly and hospitable environment for such
facilities and their residents.
H3.19 Housing for the Homeless. The City of Millbrae recognizes the need for and
desirability of emergency shelter housing for the homeless and will allow emergency shelters
based on the following considerations: a) development standards for emergency shelters for
the homeless located in Millbrae shall be consistent with State law; and b) emergency shelters
will be a permitted use in the industrial zone, and will not be subject to a conditional use or
other discretionary use permit. Treat transitional and supportive housing as a residential use,
only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in
the same zone.
H3.20 Reasonable Accommodations for the Disabled. To ensure equal access to
housing, provide reasonable accommodation for people with disabilities in the City’s rules,
policies, practices, and procedures related to zoning, permit processing, and building codes.
H3.21. Airport development restrictions. Ensure that new development is consistent with
all airport/land use compatibility criteria under the Comprehensive Land Use Plan for San
Francisco International Airport.
Final                                             -                                          - 28 -

Policies and Programs                                                             Millbrae Housing Element
Implementing Programs
HIP-15 Continue to Implement the Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan. The City will
continue to implement the specific plan for the Millbrae BART/Caltrain Station Area, which
identifies potential housing sites. In the Station Area, there are three sites that are particularly
well-suited for housing and have a strong potential of developing housing soon, Sites 1, 5, 6,
11 and 12. The City will encourage developers to submit applications that meet the
objectives and development policies of the Specific Plan. As development applications are
received, the City will continue to apply development standards and incentives as described
in the Specific Plan.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
         Objective: Achieve entitlement of at least 600 new dwelling units by 2023 with 15
percent of those affordable.
HIP-16 Complete Update to Specific Plan. The City is currently updating the Specific
Plan, with completion expected in 2015.
         Timeline: 2015
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-17 Adopt Requirements for Second Units. Consistent with State legislation for
second units (AB 1866), the City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow second units
under controlled conditions, such as maximum floor area and/or lot coverage, sufficient
parking, owner-occupancy of one unit, and neighborhood compatibility.
         Timeframe: 2015.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning Commission,
and City Council.
         Objective: 10 units per year (20 ext. low income, 20 very low income, 16 low income,
16 moderate income, and 8 above moderate income.) 2
HIP-18 Housing Opportunity Areas. Encourage housing development, including a below-
market allocation that maximizes production of very low income units.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
2 Homeowners can use the second units as they see fit. While most would likely be used for housing, some
might use them a home office. The affordability levels listed are an estimate of what rents are likely to be.
Based on patterns in the region, many of these units would be made available to family members at free or at
reduced rent, which is why many of the units are listed as affordable to extremely low income.
Final                                                   -                                                     - 29 -
Policies and Programs                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
HIP-19 Home Ownership Mortgage Subsidy Programs. San Mateo County offers
below market rate home mortgages to qualified first time home buyers for purchasing units
built by developers who participate in the program. Millbrae will encourage developers to
participate in this program and will then publicize these projects and the Mortgage Subsidy
Program through the City’s communication channels, including handouts, the City
newsletter, and the City website. By coordinating with San Mateo County, Millbrae may be
able to facilitate the development of low and moderate income housing. There are currently
two major programs: Opening Doors, run by HEART and the Mortgage Credit Certificate
Program, run by CalHFA. The MCC Tax Credit is a federal credit which can reduce
potential federal income tax liability, creating additional net spendable income which
borrowers may use toward their monthly mortgage payment.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development, San Mateo County Department of
Housing and Community Development, HEART.
HIP-20 BMR Resale and Rental Controls. Implement resale and rental regulations for
low and moderate income units and assure that these units remain at an affordable price
level.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and City Council.
HIP-21 BMR Eligibility Guidelines. Consider targeting affordable housing to current City
employees, school district employees, and other people working in the City of Millbrae.
Ensure that preferences are consistent with fair housing law.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-22 Homelessness assistance. Participate and allocate funds, as appropriate and as
funding is available, for County and non-profit programs providing homeless shelter (i.e.
emergency housing) and related counseling services. Review proposals for emergency shelter
uses based on the policies in the General Plan and other City development standards and
requirements. Continue to permit homeless shelters in the Industrial Zone and continue to
treat transitional and supportive housing as a residential use subject to only those restrictions
that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. Continue to
allow houses of worship to operate small emergency shelter facilities as an ancillary use, for
limited periods.
         Timeline: Ongoing, with annual participation, if feasible.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and City Council.
Final                                             -                                         - 30 -

Policies and Programs                                                  Millbrae Housing Element
HIP-23 Adaptable Units for the Disabled. The City will encourage universal design and
ensure that new housing includes units that can be adapted for use by disabled residents.
Ensure that relevant laws are followed, including the California Fair Employment and
Housing Act.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Objective: Full compliance of all new buildings.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-24 Maintain an ADA Coordinator and Provide Information on Reasonable
Accommodation. Continue to have the Building Official as the City’s ADA Coordinator to
coordinate and carry out the City’s compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements of
Title IIA of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Direct questions, concerns,
complaints, and requests regarding accessibility for people with disabilities to the City’s ADA
Coordinator. Provide information to the public regarding reasonable accommodations
related to zoning, permit processing and building codes on the City’s website and in City
handouts.
         Timeline: 2015 and ongoing, with updates based on changes in legal requirements.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-25 Raise awareness of recently adopted Grand Boulevard Planned Development
Zone. Raise awareness about and encourage implementation of this zoning district to
achieve higher density mixed-use redevelopment along the City’s El Camino Real corridor by
highlighting it on the City’s website, creating an informational flier for distribution at City
Hall, and promoting it in conjunction with the City’s efforts to prepare and adopt a plan for
the corridor as a Priority Development Area (PDA).
         Timeline: 2015, then ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development, Planning Commission, and City
         Council.
HIP-26 Encourage Innovative Housing Approaches. Encourage cooperative and joint
ventures between owners, developers, and non-profit groups in the development of below
market rate housing. Assist in identifying financing sources for housing projects.
         Timeline: Ongoing.
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-27 Housing Developer Outreach. Distribute informational materials on housing
programs to local non-profit and private developers. Provide information on: a) newly
adopted development standards for mixed-use and planned development districts; b)
incentives for the development of deed-restricted and market rate affordable housing; and c)
appropriate areas for high density housing.
Final                                            -                                           - 31 -

Policies and Programs                                                  Millbrae Housing Element
        Timeline: Annual.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP-28 Encourage Special Needs Housing. Encourage non-profit developers to target
housing projects for identified special needs groups in Millbrae, including seniors, families
with children, single parents, young families, lower income households including extremely
low income, and the disabled. Encourage housing developers to design units that meet the
requirements of these special needs groups, such as rental units, accessibility features for the
disabled and the elderly, additional bedrooms for large families, and playgrounds and on-site
day care facilities for families with children.
        Timeline: Ongoing. Review annually.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning Commission,
and City Council.
HIP-29 Inclusionary Housing and/or Impact Fee Requirements. To the extent
consistent with applicable law, adopt an inclusionary housing ordinance and/or affordable
housing impact fee ordinance that requires developers to provide below market rate (BMR)
housing or pay a fee. For units produced by developers, the City will require units to remain
affordable for at least 55 years. Alternatively, the city may adopt an impact fee ordinance to
mitigate the effects of new development by requiring developers contribute to an affordable
housing trust fund.
        Timeline: 2016.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning Commission,
and City Council.
HIP-30 Lot Consolidation within the Millbrae Station Area. Consistent with the goals
and policies of the Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan, the City will encourage lot
consolidation among property owners of lots within Sites 1, 4, 11 and 12 of the Millbrae
Station Area Specific Plan. The City will identify owners and distribute information to them
regarding development potential, development standards, affordable housing incentives and
density bonuses, and the development review and approval process.
        Timeline: Ongoing.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning Commission,
and City Council.
HIP-31 Parking Requirements in Downtown Area. Payment of an in-lieu parking fee will
continue to be an option for developers. In-lieu parking fees will be used to build a parking
garage or will be spent on other measures to manage the parking need.
        Timeline: Ongoing.
Final                                             -                                         - 32 -
Policies and Programs                                                Millbrae Housing Element
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning Commission
and City Council.
HIP-32 Affordable Housing Development on City-Owned and Other Agency-Owned
Land. The City will investigate opportunities for affordable housing on City-owned and
other agency-owned land in Millbrae, including the following actions to promote the
development of affordable housing on two City-owned parking lots on Magnolia Avenue
and El Camino Real:
    a) Utilize flexible zoning standards that facilitate the development of the maximum
        number of affordable units. Require no more than one uncovered, off-street parking
        space per unit and consider off-site parking in fulfillment of the parking requirement.
    b) Seek partnerships with non-profit organizations to develop and maintain the units.
    c) Provide financing from funds raised through the City’s in-lieu affordable housing
        fees.
    d) Seek additional funding through state and federal programs, community foundations,
        and local housing trust funds.
    e) Maintain the units as affordable rental housing for moderate, low and very
        low/extremely low income households, utilizing income eligibility requirements and
        affordability standards as published annually by HCD. Encourage affordability
        requirements that will enable the City to meet its regional housing needs.
        Timeline: Ongoing; review annually.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
HIP 33 Commercial Linkage Fee Study. Study the possibility of adopting a commercial
linkage fee to help fund affordable housing. The fee should be set low enough to not
discourage new development.
        Timeline: 2015
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
HIP 34 Definition of Family. Continue to use a definition of family for the zoning code
that does not discriminate. A definition of family was added to the zoning code in 2014.
        Timeline: Ongoing
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Final                                           -                                         - 33 -

Policies and Programs                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
HIP 35 Reasonable Accommodations for People with Disabilities. Implement the
newly adopted Reasonable Accommodation policy. Ensure that planners and the general
public know about the policy.
         Timeline: Education in 2015 and then ongoing
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
HIP 36. Density Bonus. Adopt a local ordinance, consistent with state law, offering a
greater density bonus than allowed by the default state standards. Continue applying the state
density bonus standards until a local law is passed.
         Timeline: 2015
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
HIP 37. Anti-displacement measures. Evaluate potential displacement of existing lower
income residents and adopt measures, as appropriate, to address the risk of displacement of
existing residents. Coordinate with other jurisdictions if possible. Displacement might be
direct, caused by the redevelopment of sites with existing residential properties, or indirect,
caused by increased market rents as an area becomes more desirable. The city will implement
programs as appropriate to address displacement. The city will monitor such programs
annually for effectiveness and make adjustments as necessary.
         Timeline: 2015 for evaluation and 2016 for implementation if appropriate
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
HIP 38. Airport development restrictions. Coordinate with C/CAG’s Airport Land Use
Commission to ensure that all zoning changes comply with the Comprehensive Airport
Land Use Compatibility Plan for the Environs of San Francisco International Airport.
         Timeline: Ongoing, as new zoning changes are proposed
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
HIP 39. Outreach to people with developmental disabilities. Work with the Golden
Gate regional center to implement an outreach program that informs families within the City
on housing and services available for persons with developmental disabilities. The program
could include the development of an informational brochure, including information on
services on the City’s website, and providing housing-related training for individuals/families
through workshops.
         Time frame for implementation: Development of Outreach Program by 2016
         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
HIP 40. Employee Housing. Ensure that the City is in compliance with State Health and
Safety Code Sections 17021.5, which concerns employee housing that serves six or fewer
employees.
Final                                           -                                          - 34 -

Policies and Programs                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
           Time frame for implementation: 2018
           Responsible Agency: Planning Department
4. Quantified Objectives
State law requires the Housing Element to include quantified objectives for the maximum
number of units that can be constructed, rehabilitated, or conserved. Policies and programs
establish the strategies to achieve these objectives. The City’s quantified objectives are
described under each program, and represent the City’s best effort in implementing each of
the programs. Assumptions are based on past program performance and funding availability,
construction trends, land availability, and future programs that will enhance program
effectiveness and achieve full implementation of the City’s housing goals.
The new construction objectives shown in the table are based on ABAG Projections, the
City’s RHNA for the 2015-2023 planning period for very low, low, and moderate income
housing, historic trends, and expectations for new second units. Rehabilitation and
conservation objectives are based on specific program targets, including such programs as
use of Section 8 rental housing vouchers.
The table below summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for housing during the 2015-
2023 planning period.
Final                                            -                                         - 35 -

Policies and Programs                                           Millbrae Housing Element
 Program                                   Timeline              Objective
 HIP-1 Future Housing Element Updates.     2023
 HIP-2 Coordination with Non-Profits.      Annual
 HIP-3 Annual Housing Element Reporting.   Annual
 HIP-4 Community Outreach.                 2016, then ongoing
 HIP-5 Non-Discrimination.                 2018, then ongoing
 HIP-6 Continue to Improve Code            Ongoing
 Enforcement.
 HIP-7 Encourage Rehabilitation Loans.     Ongoing
 HIP-8 Contact Property Owners of          Ongoing               4 very low/extremely low, 4
 Substandard Units.                                              low and 12 moderate
                                                                 income units to current
                                                                 health and safety standards
                                                                 (average 5 units per year)
 HIP-9     Energy Conservation Assistance. Annually              Weatherization of ten very
                                                                 low/extremely low and ten
                                                                 low income units by 2023.
 HIP-10 Increased Energy Conservation.     Ongoing
 HIP-11 Rental Housing Assistance.         2018 then Ongoing.
 HIP-12 Condominium Conversion             Ongoing.
 Regulation.
 HIP-13 Neighborhood Conservation          Ongoing
 HIP-14 Home-sharing.                      Ongoing               Ten very low income, five
                                                                 low income and one
                                                                 moderate income households
                                                                 (16 households per year).
 HIP-15 Continue to Implement the Millbrae Ongoing.              600 units by 2023 with
 Station Area Specific Plan.                                     15% affordable
 HIP-16 Complete Update to Specific Plan.  2015
 HIP-17 Adopt Requirements for Second      2015                  10 units per year.
 Units.
 HIP-18 Housing Opportunity Sites.         Ongoing.
 HIP-19 Home Ownership Mortgage Subsidy    Ongoing.
 Programs.
 HIP-20 BMR Resale and Rental Controls.    Ongoing.
 HIP-21 BMR Eligibility Guidelines.        Ongoing.
 HIP-22 Homelessness assistance.           Ongoing, with annual
                                           participation, if
                                           feasible
 HIP-23 Adaptable Units for the Disabled.  Ongoing               Full compliance of all new
                                                                 buildings.
 HIP-24 Maintain an ADA Coordinator and    2015 and ongoing,
 Provide Information on Reasonable         with updates based
 Accommodation.                            on changes in legal
                                           requirements.
Final                                       -                                        - 36 -
Policies and Programs                                          Millbrae Housing Element
 HIP-25 Raise awareness of recently        2015, then ongoing.
 adopted Grand Boulevard Planned
 Development Zone.
 HIP-26 Encourage Innovative Housing       Ongoing.
 Approaches.
 HIP-27 Housing Developer Outreach.        Annual
 HIP-28 Encourage Special Needs Housing.   Ongoing, Review
                                           Annually
 HIP-29 Inclusionary/Impact Fee Housing    2016
 Requirements.
 HIP-30 Lot Consolidation within the       Ongoing
 Millbrae Station Area.
 HIP-31 Parking Requirements in Downtown   Ongoing
 Area.
 HIP-32 Affordable Housing Development on  Ongoing, Review
 City-Owned/ Other Agency Owned Land       annually
 HIP 33 Commercial Linkage Fee Study       2015
 HIP 34 Definition of Family.              Ongoing
 HIP 35 Reasonable Accommodations for      Education in 2015
 People with Disabilities.                 and then ongoing
 HIP 36. Density Bonus.                    2015
 HIP 37. Anti-displacement measures.       2015 evaluation and
                                           2016 implementation
                                           if appropriate
 HIP 38. Airport development restrictions. Ongoing
 HIP 39. Outreach to people with           2016
 developmental disabilities.
 HIP 40. Employee housing.                 2018
Final                                       -                                     - 37 -
Policies and Programs                                                Millbrae Housing Element
Millbrae Quantified Objectives Summary
                                                           Conservation
                         New
  Income Category                         Rehabilitation   and
                         Construction
                                                           Preservation
  Extremely Low
                                       20                5                 0
  Income
  Very Low Income                      36                5                10
  Low Income                           47                0                 5
  Moderate Income                      61                0                 1
  Above Moderate
                                      518                0                 0
  Income
                                                10 (energy      16 (Home
  Total                              682
                                              rehab loans)         sharing)
These quantified objectives show Millbrae fully meeting its need for above moderate
housing. Because of limited funding opportunities, Millbrae does not expect to meet the full
RHNA need for lower income housing. (The RHNA number is met by identifying sites that
are available for housing or have the potential to redevelop. The quantified objectives
section identifies what is likely to happen.) One very low and low income unit correspond
to the Pinedera development. Second units are estimated at 10 units per year or 80 over the
eight year cycle (20 ext. low income, 20 very low income, 16 low income, 16 moderate
income, and 8 above moderate income). The remainder of the units are based on a 15
percent affordability target for the MSASP (15 very low, 30 low and 45 moderate). The
specific plan numbers are added as a placeholder until the specific plan process identifies the
actual targets.
Final                                            -                                        - 38 -
III. Available Land Inventory
One of the primary features of the Housing Element is the identification of lands suitable
for residential development. This identification should include review of vacant sites and
sites that potentially could be reused for a different or more intense residential use. Also to
be reviewed are the relationships of the sites to zoning, public facilities and services. State
law requires that local governments zone sufficient vacant land for residential use at
standards and densities appropriate to meet housing needs of all economic segments, as
identified in the general plan.
Specifically, this analysis covers the following:
      Homes that have already been built in this planning period
      Underutilized land that is likely to be redeveloped for residential purposes
      Vacant land that is available for new housing
      Affordable units that were substantially rehabilitated
1. Homes Already Built
Millbrae has an impressive track record of facilitating development in the Millbrae Station
Area, downtown, and the El Camino Corridor, but construction slowed because of the
economic recession. With the improving economy, it is improving.
        Pinedera – Construction for this project began in 2012 and was completed in 2014.
         It consists of 54 multi-family (condominium) units, arranged around a central
         courtyard over a podium that conceals two levels of parking. There is also
         approximately 11,000 square feet of at-grade commercial space.
Other construction is as follows:
                                                                                             - 39 -

Available Land Inventory                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
Homes Recently Completed or Approved
                                                             Units Affordable
                         Date          Units Affordable to
   Name                                                      to Above             Notes
                         Completed     Lower Income
                                                             Moderate
   Pinedera              2014          1 very low income,    52
                                       1 low income
                                                                                  4-unit apartment
   1005 Hemlock          2014          0                     4
                                                                                  building
   single-family homes   2014          0                     3
                                                                                  single-family
   duplexes              2014          0                     1                    expanded to
                                                                                  duplex
   Total                               2                     60
2. Underutilized Land
Overview
The City has been exceptionally proactive in the redevelopment of Millbrae. In 1993, in
anticipation of the BART/Caltrain station, the City began a lengthy, exhaustive, and highly
public planning process for the redevelopment of the 116-acre area surrounding the
proposed station. The Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan was developed and adopted in
1998, and is currently being updated. It is a comprehensive plan for the redevelopment of
specific sites, comprising a total of 82 parcels, for the entire plan area. The guiding land use
goal of the plan has been to transform the area from an underutilized, low-intensity,
commercial and service area to a pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use district that capitalizes on its
proximity to multi-modal mass transit.
Station Area
When plans were announced for a new BART station in Millbrae that would offer a cross-
platform transfer with Caltrain, Millbrae began planning for the redevelopment of the area.
The Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan was adopted in 1998, and the Millbrae Zoning Code
was amended in 1999 to include a Millbrae Station Area Planned Development (MSAPD)
District that codified the development regulations set forth in the Specific Plan. The BART
station opened in 2003.
The station planning area is comprised of approximately 116 acres of land at the southern
Final                                              -                                            - 40 -
Available Land Inventory                                              Millbrae Housing Element
edge of the city and is generally bounded by the Burlingame city limits to the south; U.S. 101
to the east; Broadway to the west; and, Victoria Avenue and the Highline Canal to the north.
Higher intensity office uses are concentrated in the immediate vicinity of the station, while
residential and mixed-use are encouraged in the area to the west of the station, primarily due
to the proximity to the downtown and adjoining residential areas and the lower noise levels.
The Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan forms an integrated approach to the redevelopment
of the area and provides for adequate housing opportunities to meet a significant portion of
Millbrae’s regional housing needs. Mixed-use development is emphasized, with densities of
up to 60 units per acre; additional density is possible provided there is sufficient traffic
capacity.
The maps below show the various sites in the station area as well as the maximum permitted
heights. The stated height limits are subject to change, pending the update of the MSASP.
Final                                            -                                           - 41 -

Available Land Inventory                                              Millbrae Housing Element
Downtown
Outside of the Millbrae Station Area, there is additional mixed-use development potential in
the downtown area. This three-block area along Broadway and the west side of El Camino
Real is characterized by a mix of one, two, and three-story buildings, some with upper floor
apartments. Approximately 77 apartments currently exist in the area, and the downtown is
considered to be a viable area for additional similar housing. Historically, market rate rental
units are typically affordable to low and moderate income households, but in recent years
this has become less true. The Downtown encompasses approximately eight acres. The 55
lots in the Downtown average about 5,000 square feet. City estimates are that 40 percent of
the Downtown area sites, or 22 lots, could be reasonably developed with up to four units on
second and/or third stories, for a total development capacity of 168 units.
Areas Likely to Redevelop
The City has identified a few keys sites as most likely to develop, based on their location,
ownership, surrounding land use patterns, and current uses. The City does not know which
sites will develop when and there are no specific proposals regarding any of these sites,
except where noted.
Final                                           -                                          - 42 -
Available Land Inventory                                               Millbrae Housing Element
Station Area
In the Station Area, there are three sites that have a strong potential of developing housing
during the planning period. All three are zoned MSAPD which allows 60 units per acre of
mixed-use multi-family housing. Nearby development at 88 S. Broadway (“88 South
Broadway”) and 151 El Camino Real (“Belamor”) will likely spur development in these three
sites.
Site 1
This is a 5.5 acre site that currently has one story commercial uses (restaurants, retail, etc.). It
is bordered by El Camino Real, Victoria Avenue, Millbrae Avenue, and the train tracks.
There is a capacity of up to 300 units.
Site 11
This is a 4.4 acre site bordered by El Camino Real, E. Millbrae Avenue, Murchinson Road,
and the train tracks. Current uses range between one and three stories of office, lodging, and
restaurant uses. There is a capacity of up to 170 units and a 54-unit project (“Pinedera”) has
recently been built, leaving a remaining capacity of 116.
Site 12
This is a 1.3 acre site that is bordered by Broadway, Chadbourne Avenue, El Camino Real,
and E. Millbrae Avenue. It has a small, outdated commercial building as well as a gas station.
It also contains the former site of the Millbrae Theater; that structure still stands and has
been renovated into an office building. While the gas station is not expected to redevelop,
the other parcels have significant potential. There is a capacity of up to 60 units.
Downtown
There are a number of downtown sites that have strong potential for redevelopment with
housing, such as the 200-490 blocks of Broadway. The City is monitoring this area closely
and will work with any developers wishing to introduce more housing. There is a capacity of
at least 50 units.
Other sites along El Camino Real, such as 1350-1370, 1395, and 1701-1799 are also
underutilized, but are less likely to redevelop in the planning period based on the factors
identified above.
One additional site that is likely to redevelop is 1401 Millbrae, a 0.4 acre former gas station
site surrounded by residential properties. Interested developers have approached the City
about the potential for building medium-density, multi-family residential on this site after the
remediation of contaminated soil is complete. The property is currently zoned commercial,
which allows housing with a conditional use permit. (Alternatively, the site could be rezoned
Final                                             -                                           - 43 -

Available Land Inventory                                                 Millbrae Housing Element
to multi-family.) Currently it is surrounded by multifamily residential and is not an
appropriate or viable area for commercial. Additionally, because the owners have expressed
an interest in residential, this is the most likely use. There is a potential for 20 units on this
site.
Encouraging Housing and Addressing Constraints
Millbrae has been encouraging residential redevelopment since adopting the Millbrae Station
Area Specific Plan in 1998. Based on the results, it is clear that Millbrae has been successful.
Even in the depressed housing market, Millbrae continued to field inquiries and proposals
from developers. With the economy turnaround, the interest is even stronger.
The land in the Station Area has consistently been redeveloped as residential mixed, and this
is expected to continue. Currently, the market is favorable to multi-family residential rental.
Most developers that approach the City are interested in residential and there is not a current
market demand for large amounts of commercial development. In fact, every proposal in the
station area for the past ten years has included residential development.
Many of these proposals have been on small lots, under one acre. Because of the desirability
of the location, small lots have not proved to be a significant constraint. The Pinedera
development is on a 0.8 acre lot and the 1401 Millbrae location is 0.4 acres.
One of the great assets that Millbrae has in redeveloping land is the flexibility of the Planned
Development (PD) zone. The PD zone allows the City to tailor requirements based on
individual property needs. Building setbacks and heights, parking requirements, landscaping,
and amenities are all customizable based upon individual site characteristics and project
requirements.
Efforts to implement the Station Area plan continue; specific steps include the following:
      Development fees for all development have been kept low in order to encourage
        new construction.
      In 2010, a new zoning district, Grand Boulevard Planned Development, was adopted
        to encourage and facilitate mixed-use development throughout the El Camino Real
        Corridor. This complements the two other planned development zoning districts in
        the city (“MSAPD” and “PD”).
      Program HIP-18 further stipulates that there will be flexibility in applying parking
        standards for smaller units and HIP 33 allows developers to pay in lieu fee instead of
        providing parking.
Final                                              -                                           - 44 -

Available Land Inventory                                               Millbrae Housing Element
Potential New Units (2015-2023)
 Potential (Theoretical)
                                    Land zoned more than 30 dua
 Development
 Site 1                             300
 Site 11                            116
 Site 12                            60
 200-490 Broadway                   50
 1401 Millbrae                      20
 Total                              546
3. Vacant land that is available for housing
There are currently a number of important vacant sites available for housing in the Millbrae
Station area and downtown and a few additional lots elsewhere in the city. These are listed in
the table below with corresponding APN numbers appearing in the appendix. Because these
sites do not currently have buildings on them, we do not need to estimate the likelihood
development in the planning period. Based on recent developments, it is likely that the sites
will develop at or beyond the maximum densities allowed. For example, the Pinedera
development is on .83 acres and has 56 units (67.5 units per acre after density bonus). The
Belamor was developed at 83.5 units per acre and the Park Broadway was developed at 72
units per acre. We assume the undeveloped sites will develop at their permitted densities.
701 Magnolia Avenue
This is a privately owned parcel approximately 0.88 acres in size. It is a corner parcel next to
existing single-family and multi-family development with commercial development across
the street. The site is currently a paved and striped parking lot, which receives very little use.
It is a good candidate site for multi-family development.
801 Magnolia Avenue
This is a privately owned parcel approximately 3.08 acres in size. It has three street frontages
and is next to existing multi-family development with commercial development and Millbrae
City Hall across the street. It is currently a paved and striped parking lot which receives
heavy use as supplemental parking for the adjacent commercial development as well as City
Hall. It is a good candidate site for multi-family development in a mixed-use setting.
Final                                             -                                          - 45 -
Available Land Inventory                                               Millbrae Housing Element
300 Magnolia Avenue
This is a City-owned parking lot approximately 0.83 acres in size. It has three street frontages
and is next to existing Downtown commercial development with single-family across the
street. It is currently a paved and striped parking lot which receives heavy use as
supplemental parking for the Downtown. It is a good candidate site for multi-family
housing. In light of the parking this parcel currently provides, any proposal for development
on this site must be coupled with the implementation of adequate parking facilities to serve
the downtown area.
Caltrain Parking Lot
The Caltrain Parking Lot is a City owned parcel at 100 E. Millbrae Ave. which is within the
Station Area. It is approximately 0.7 acres in size and is used as supplemental parking for the
BART/Caltrain Station. Its small size and street frontages on three sides are potential
constraints to it as a stand-alone redevelopment site; however, if assembled with adjacent
properties its development potential increases significantly given its close proximity to the
station.
BART Station Parking Lots
The BART Station parking lots are BART property and total about 10 acres (sites 5 and 6 in
the Station Area Plan). BART has selected a developer for the site who is in active
discussions with the City about what will be built. If the entire property were redeveloped as
housing, it could contain over 500 units, but based on initial discussions it will likely be a mix
of hotel, office and residential. Specifically, the most recent proposal called for 263 housing
units, and this is what we assume in this Housing Element.
Final                                              -                                         - 46 -
Available Land Inventory                                            Millbrae Housing Element
Vacant Land
                                                           Housing         Housing
                                                           Capacity        Capacity
 Millbrae Station Area                           Zoning    zoned at 30     Zoned at
                       Acres       Zoning                                            Constraints
 Plan                                            Density   units or        under 30
                                                           more per        units per
                                                           acre            acre
 801 Magnolia Ave.     3.08        PD            45        137             0         None
 701 Magnolia          .88         PD            45        40              0         None
 300 Magnolia                      Downtown
 City-owned parking    .84         Improvement   60        50              0         None
 lot                               Area
 2 Single Family                                 1 per
                       <1 acre     Residential             0               2         None
 Lots                                            lot
                                                                                     Small size
                                                                                     and
 CalTrain Parking Lot  0.73        Commercial    60        43              0
                                                                                     proximity
                                                                                     to station
 BART Parking Lot 1
                       4.7         MSAPD           60                                None
 – Site 5
                                                           263
 BART Parking Lot 2
                       5.3         MSAPD         60                                  None
 – Site 6
 Total                                                     533             2
See analysis above regarding likelihood of housing developing in the MSADP, PD and
Downtown Improvement Area above.
Final                                          -                                        - 47 -

Available Land Inventory                                              Millbrae Housing Element
4. Conclusion
Because of the groundwork laid by the Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan, the City is able to
dramatically exceed its RHNA allocation.
RHNA Summary Table
                     30 units or more per acre                           Under 30
                                                                         units per
                                                                         acre
                     Ext Low      Very Low                   Mod         Above       Total
                                               Low
                     Income       Income                     Income      Mod
                                               Incmoe
                                                                         Income
 Homes Built This
                               0            1             1          0           60           62
 Planning Period
 Underutilized Land          136          136           137        137             0         546
 Vacant Land                 133          133           133        134             2         535
 Total                       269          270           271        271           62        1,143
 RHNA                         96           97           101        112          257          663
                                                                              -195
 Excess Land                                                              (need met
                             173      173               170        159                       480
 Capacity                                                                        by
                                                                         carryover)
(Land zoned at 30 units or more per acre is split equally between extremely low, very low,
low and moderate-income categories.)
The conclusions of this analysis are that the City has adequate sites to meet ABAG’s 2015-
2023 Residential Housing Needs Allocation, including sufficient sites zoned at higher
densities and with adequate services and utilities to allow higher density, more affordable
housing to be developed.
Final                                           -                                           - 48 -

          CITY OF MILLBRAE
  Amendment to the Circulation Element of the General Plan
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN TRANSPORTATION
                          PLAN
                       August 2009
                       Prepared by
                     City of Millbrae
        Community Development Department
                    Planning Division
4.7 Bikeways and Trails System
Purpose
Bicycling has long been a popular recreational activity for its ease of participation, as a
form of exercise, and as an organized sport. More recently, it has emerged in the United
States as an alternate means of transportation to work and for other types of trips. Ever-
increasing transportation costs, traffic congestion, and lack of parking make bicycling
an even more attractive form of transportation now and in the future, especially when
used in conjunction with public transit. Millbrae’s prime north Peninsula location,
pleasant climate, its BART/CalTrain Station and close proximity to major
transportation corridors and recreational bike trails, and favorable overall development
pattern position Millbrae as a potential regional bikeways hub. The purpose of this
plan is to identify and utilize the natural and manmade logistical advantages that
Millbrae has to create a safe and convenient bikeway and pedestrian trail network with
linkages to other cities and other regional recreational assets.
Setting
The relatively flat terrain of the most heavily populated portion of San Mateo County
gives bicycling growing importance as a significant mode of transportation. Major
population centers of the County are concentrated in the level Bay Plain, where the
majority of people live within two miles of the El Camino Real (State 82) Corridor.
Statistics compiled by San Mateo County indicate that within this corridor there exist:
        (1) Virtually all of the major employment centers in the County;
        (2) All of the central business districts of cities with populations greater than
            25,000 (with the exception of Foster City and Pacifica);
        (3) Nearly all of the senior citizen housing and meeting centers in the County;
        (4) Virtually all of the occupied housing units without on-site automobile
            parking; and
        (5) Nearly all of the major non-work trip attractors (transportation facilities,
            shopping centers, public service buildings, and health facilities) in the
            County.
These factors supported the adoption of the San Mateo County Comprehensive Bicycle
Plan in 2000 and the Metropolitan Transportation Commission’s Regional Bicycle Plan
for the San Francisco Bay Area in 2001. Millbrae’s plan builds upon those efforts.
Opportunities and Constraints
Millbrae is virtually built-out and has no possibilities for annexing additional lands.
Therefore, almost all planned bikeways are limited to streets and other pathways
                                               2

 already existing within the current city limits or on parcels of open space suited for trail
 use.
 A northwest-southeast landform that doubles as a City bike/pedestrian path known as
 the Spur Trail, essentially splits Millbrae into two topographic areas where the easterly
 two-thirds are mostly flat and the westerly one-third contains steep hills and canyons.
 The development pattern in each area also differs with more of a grid pattern of narrow
 streets in the east and wider, more curvilinear local streets to the west. The city’s
 schools, parks, and neighborhoods are distributed proportionately across both areas,
 while commercial districts and major employers are almost exclusively located within
 the flat eastern portion. The current terminus of the Bay Trail at the city’s waterfront
 edge and the Sawyer Camp Trail and the San Andreas Trail in the San Andreas
 Reservoir parallel to Interstate 280 give Millbrae two major recreational amenities.
 Finally, the Millbrae BART/Caltrain Station anchors the main gateway into the city
 along East Millbrae Avenue. The goal is to create a system of bikeways that
 interconnects these areas, land uses, and amenities but avoids steep grades and busy
 intersections as much as possible.
 The Bay Trail and the Sawyer Camp Trail, which double as biking and walking trails,
 are “destination” amenities used mainly as a source of recreation. The Spur Trail is also
 a recreational amenity, but can serve to connect destinations as well. Similarly, the
 Downtown (Broadway and El Camino Real between Millbrae Ave. and Meadow Glen
 Ave.) is a prime pedestrian area. Within it are numerous restaurants, shops, beauty
 salons, banks, and other services, as well as City Hall, the Millbrae Library, and the Post
 Office; around it are neighborhoods, schools, and churches. All these areas and uses are
 within walking distance of one another and offer a many opportunities for combining
 errands with exercise and socializing.
 Background and Data Collection
 Recreational use of bicycles is difficult to quantify. However, recent Census data
 provide some background on the extent to which bicycles are used as a means of
 transportation. The following table shows bicycle use and walking as means of
 commuting to work as reported in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses and as estimated in the
 2006 American Community Survey:
 1990, 2000, & 2006 Comparison of the Number of Bicycle, Walking, & Total Trips to Work
                  Bicycle                  Walking                 Total
                  1990      2000   2006    1990    2000    2006    1990       2000       2006
Millbrae          12        45     50*     250     188     270*    9,968      9,448      9,900*
S. M. County      2,605     2,896  2,898   8,858   7,609   9,309   346,559    354,096    343,294
S. F. Bay Area 32,473       36,003 37,868  111,968 106,063 112,908 3,085,634  3,306,051  3,311,807
California        130,706 120,567  128,960 469,867 414,581 440,072 13,940,250 14,525,322 16,327,670
 * City of Millbrae estimate.
                                                 3

 1990, 2000, & 2006 Comparison of Bicycle & Walking Trips as Percentage of Total Work Trips
                  Bicycle                     Walking                     Total
                  1990        2000   2006     1990    2000     2006       1990      2000 2006
Millbrae          .12%        .48%   .51%*    2.51%   1.99%    2.73%*     100%      100% 100%
S. M. County      .75%        .82%   .84%     2.56%   2.15%    2.71%      100%      100% 100%
S. F. Bay Area 1.05%          1.09%  1.14%    3.63%   3.21%    3.41%      100%      100% 100%
California        .94%        .83%   .79%     3.37%   2.85%    2.70%      100%      100% 100%
 * City of Millbrae estimate.
 The above tables indicate that within San Mateo County, throughout the Bay Area, and
 across the state, about 1% of workers bicycle to work and roughly 3% walk to work.
 These percentages have remained fairly stable since 1990. However, bicycle travel and,
 to a lesser extent, walking are significantly underrepresented in Millbrae. Less than 5
 out of 1,000 (0.5%) workers bike to work in Millbrae; that is half the County average and
 a third of the average for the Bay Area. Only about 25 out of 1,000 (2.5%) workers walk
 to work in Millbrae; that approximates the County average, but is only 70% of the
 average for the Bay Area. The reasons for this are unclear, but the 2006 estimates do not
 include the likely positive effect that the BART/Caltrain Station has and will continue
 to have on both bicycling and walking as at least part of people’s journey to work. In
 any case, an improved bikeway system will surely increase bicycle use.
 Existing Bikeways
 The San Mateo County bike plan includes the following bike routes in Millbrae:
          (1) San Mateo County North-South Commuter Route:
          Magnolia Avenue, Meadow Glenn, Broadway to Center
          (2) Colma-Millbrae Bikeway Project:
          San Francisco Muni and CalTrain right-of-way, adjacent to the Southern Pacific
          Rail Road tracks.
 In addition to these County routes, Millbrae’s system includes a bike path on the
 Millbrae Spur property, for recreational use as well as an important link to Skyline
 Boulevard/Sawyer Camp Trail, the El Camino Real corridor/BART Station, and Old
 Bayshore/Bay Trail routes.
 Millbrae’s Bayfront Park provides an important segment of the Bay Trail. The Bay Trail
 Plan proposes development of a regional hiking and bicycling trail—a 500-mile
 continuous recreational “ring around the Bay” (perimeter of San Francisco and San
 Pablo Bays) through 47 cities in 9 counties. Approximately 290 miles of the trail has
 been completed, either as hiking-only paths, hiking and bicycling paths, or as on-street
 bicycle lanes. The Plan was prepared by the Association of Bay Area Governments to:
          (1)     Provide connections to existing park and recreation facilities,
          (2)     Create links to existing and proposed transportation facilities, and
                                                 4

       (3)      Avoid adverse effects on environmentally sensitive areas.
An appropriate alignment between Millbrae and South San Francisco will need to be
determined. Development of the Bay Trail system is comprised of three components:
       (1)      Spine trails, encircling the Bay and creating a continuous recreational
                corridor which links all nine Bay Area counties;
       (2)      Spur trails, providing access from the spine trail to points of natural,
                historic, and cultural interest along the Bay shoreline; and
       (3)      Connector trails, providing restricted access to interpretive trails in
                environmentally-sensitive areas along the shoreline and connections to
                recreational opportunities as well as residential and employment centers
                inland from the Bay.
Other than the Spur Trail and Central Park (and isolated pathways within other City
parks or school sites), there are no separate bike paths or marked bikeways in Millbrae.
However, there are many possible street routes that have likely been used by bicyclists
over the years. The most appropriate of these informal routes are incorporated into this
plan.
Bikeway Design
A bicycle network should be designed so that cyclists can safely reach their destination
with a minimum expenditure of time and energy. Most cyclists will not travel on routes
that take them out of their way or that have too many stops or steep grades. The design
of bicycle routes through aesthetically-pleasing surroundings seems to be most
desirable in influencing this choice of mode for the typical bicycle rider. The desire of
the cyclist to avoid streets that are heavily traveled by motor vehicles is also an
important consideration.
Safe auto travel results from the system of traffic codes, travel lane striping, signs, and
signals that are designed to produce a relatively predictable pattern of traffic
movement. The behavior of cyclists is often unpredictable due to a lack of standardized
bicycle facilities and uniform enforcement of laws. Mixing a generally predictable and
orderly pattern of automobile movement with potentially unpredictable bicycle traffic
can be expensive because it involves the construction of either a separate path or
physical barrier between cars and bicycles.
There are three basic types of bikeways (see Table 4-6):
       Bike Path (Class I Bikeway): A Bike Path is a special pathway for the exclusive
       use of bicycles and is either spatially or physically separated from the motor
       vehicle facility. This is the safest and most pollution-free type of bikeway, but it
                                                 5

        is also the most expensive because it involves the construction of either a
        separate path or physical barrier between cars and bicycles.
        Bike Lane (Class II Bikeway): A Bike Lane is a lane located on the edge of the
        paved area of an existing road or street. It is identified by signs, painted lines
        and pavement markings. Bicycles enjoy the exclusive use of lanes for
        longitudinal travel, but must share them with vehicular and pedestrian cross
        traffic.
        Bike Route (Class III Bikeway): A Bike Route is a street designated as a joint
        motor vehicle/bicycle facility and is identified by signs. There are no special
        markings and the only thing that differentiates the route from a regular street is
        the existence of bicycle route signs. This is the least expensive type of bikeway,
        but it is also the least desirable from a safety perspective.
Connection to Transit
If the bicycle is to be used as a significant alternative to the auto, connections with major
public transit lines must exist. Therefore, it is important to tie into transit services
provided by BART, Caltrain and SamTrans.
Implementation
Implementation of the Bikeway Plan would therefore be made with the use of grant
funds from various sources. A primary requirement for obtaining these grant funds is a
Bikeway Plan consistent with the County Plan.
Proposed Bikeways
The Draft Map of Bicycle and Trail Routes (Figure X) shows existing and proposed
bikeways color-coded by class. Routes labeled “existing” refer to facilities (such as bike
paths, including the North-South Commuter Bike Route and the Colma-Millbrae
Bikeway Project) currently available for use as a bike route within the designated class,
while routes labeled “proposed” refer to facilities (such as streets) which exist but are
not currently signed or otherwise officially marked as a designated bike route.
The purpose of this draft bike plan is to connect and/or extend existing facilities in
order to provide bicycle access to the majority of City parks and schools, the
Downtown, and the BART Station, as well as to nearby recreational amenities outside
the city. The topography of the City, as well as the existing destination have been taken
into account in the preparation of the Draft Map.
                                                7

Class I (bike paths)
Class I bikeways exist within two segments of the Spur Trail between Richmond Dr.
and Hillcrest Blvd. (at Taylor Middle School) and between South Ashton Ave. (at Mosta
Grove Park) and Magnolia Ave. (near the Skate Park and Mills High School), within
Central Park (at the Recreation Center), within Monterey Park, and along Old Bayshore
Hwy. (a segment of the Bay Trail System). Bike path extensions are proposed in three
of these four areas (a bike route is proposed to access the Central Park bike path).
Two connections within the Spur Trail are proposed: between Hillcrest Blvd. and South
Ashton Ave. (through Josephine Waugh Park and Rotary Park), and between Larkspur
Dr. and the northern city limits (near Lomita Ave.). These connections (coupled with
the Class III bikeways listed below) will enable more productive use of the Spur Trail
within the citywide bike system and provide a bike path link to San Bruno.
Additional bike paths are proposed between Aviador Ave. (along the east side of the
Southern Pacific Rail Road tracks) and the northern city limits (at San Juan Ave.).
Included within this route is the existing bike path through Monterey Park. These
connections will provide access to Lomita Elementary School and will also provide
another bike path link to San Bruno.
An additional bike path is also proposed as an upgrade to the existing U.S. 101
overpass. This would connect the BART Station with Bayfront Park and the Bay Trail.
Outside the city are two segments of the Sawyer Camp Trail that also contain bike
paths. These facilities are included on the City’s bike plan map because of the
recreational value which is the rationale for the proposed bicycle/pedestrian linkage
between them and to the city-wide bike system.
Class II (dedicated bike lanes)
No Class II bikeways are proposed for the following reasons: 1) existing right-of-way
widths of all local and some collector streets are too narrow to accommodate the 6 to 8-
foot wide area needed for a bike lane in conjunction with the on-street parking that is
typical along both sides of those streets; 2) although the existing right-of-way widths of
other collector streets and all arterial roadways may be wide enough for bike lanes,
their high traffic volumes and vehicle speeds make them unsuitable for most riders; and
3) there are no prospects for the City to annex additional lands (within which new
streets with rights-of-ways wide enough to accommodate bike lanes could be
constructed). Should conditions become more favorable over time, the provision of
Class II bike lanes will be re-evaluated for possible inclusion in a future bike plan.
Class III (bike routes)
Class III bikeways are the majority of the new bike trails being proposed and they are as
follows:
                                              8

        1)  Hillcrest Blvd. between the Sawyer Camp Trail and the Spur Trail;
        2)  Larkspur Dr. between the Sawyer Camp Trail and the Spur Trail;
        3)  Helen Dr. between Larkspur Dr. and the northern dead-end of Helen Dr.
        4)  Richmond Dr. between Magnolia Ave. and Tioga Dr. (at Lion’s Park);
        5)  Helen Dr./Evergreen Way between Tioga Dr. and Larkspur Dr.;
        6)  Lincoln Circle (at the Recreation Center)/Lansdale Ave. (at Central
            Park)/Library Lane (at the Millbrae Library) between Richmond Dr. and
            Magnolia Ave. (at City Hall);
        7) Magnolia Ave. (past Green Hills Park and St. Dunstan’s School) between
            Millwood Dr. (at Capuchino High School) and Murchison Dr. (near Mills
            High School);
        8) Hillcrest Blvd./Aviador Ave. between Magnolia Ave. and East Millbrae Ave.;
        9) Murchison Dr./California Dr. between East Millbrae Ave. and the southern
            city limits (at Frontera Way);
        10) Millbrae Ave. between Magnolia Ave. and Aviador Ave.; and
        11) Rollins Rd. between East Millbrae Ave. and the southern city limits.
Cumulatively, and by interfacing with the Class 1 bikeways, these connections will
provide bicycle access to most of the major recreational, educational, employment, and
shopping destinations in and around Millbrae.
Bicycle Parking
One of the most important requirements of a successful bicycle system is the provision
of bicycle parking facilities at appropriate locations. Because theft is especially a
problem with bicycles, the lack of safe and secure bike racks or lockers is a significant
deterrent to bicycling. Except for schools, most playgrounds, and some libraries, bike
racks are almost non-existent at apartments, stores, offices, restaurants, etc. The current
practice of chaining bikes to lamp posts, power poles, and parking meters is inadequate.
The City’s zoning ordinance contains minimum requirements for the provision of
bicycle parking. Application of these requirements is a function of the design review
process. In assessing the adequacy of bicycle parking facilities at a particular
development, the following criteria shall be considered:
        1) The quantity of parking shall be in keeping with the nature of the land use, its
            proximity to existing and planned bike routes, and other factors that may
            affect bicycle parking;
        2) The location of bicycle parking on the project site shall promote its use (for
            example, bike racks should be visible and placed as close as possible to the
            main entrance/doorway);
        3) The path of travel to the parking facilities shall minimize potential circulation
            conflicts with motor vehicles;
                                             9

       4) If bicycle racks are provided, they should be designed for compatibility with
            the most common locking devices;
       5) Night illumination should be provided for bicycle parking in the downtown
            areas and at the civic buildings;
       6) Bicycle parking should be sheltered whenever possible;
       7) Bicycle parking should be at least as convenient as motor vehicle parking;
            and
       8) For large developments, more locations of smaller amounts of parking are
            preferable to fewer locations of larger amounts of parking.
In addition to requiring bicycle parking/storage for new development, the City should
provide bike racks at all City parking lots and facilities, and should also find ways to
require bike racks at existing commercial locations, such as when substantial site or
building renovation is performed or when an incoming tenant warrants it.
Bikeways Maintenance
Bike lanes tend to collect debris swept off the roadway by cars, as well as rocks and dirt
washed from grade cuts and other areas which drain onto the road surface. This debris
is a danger and an inconvenience to cyclists and causes many to ride almost entirely
outside of bike lanes. Bike lanes should be swept regularly. Maintenance should be
insured for any new lanes.
Pedestrian Trails
Currently, the City’s Class I bike trails also serve as pedestrian trails. More study of potential
pedestrian trails is required.
Public Participation
This plan was prepared by City staff for review by the City’s Parks and Recreation
Commission and the Millbrae Planning Commission prior to adoption by the City
Council. A total of (9) public meetings were held over a (15)-month period.
                                                 10




























Parks, Open Space and Conservation
Element
6.1 Introduction
This Element of the General Plan addresses issues related to the use, preservation,
management and sustainability of land-based resources in Millbrae, whether that land is
dedicated to active recreation use, passive use, or the protection of natural resources and
environmental quality. Because of the important differences in these uses and issues, the
Element is presented in three sections:
     Parks and Recreation, concerning land which has been improved to provide
     opportunities for outdoor recreation and physical exercise for Millbrae’s residents,
     work force, and visitors. These properties are typically landscaped and may contain
     recreational equipment (such as play equipment or basketball courts) and/or
     recreational buildings or structures.
     Open Space, concerning vacant land in the city which is primarily maintained in its
     natural condition. In some cases this land includes landscaped areas which are
     maintained but which are not actively used for recreational purposes.
     Conservation, which concerns the preservation of natural resources such as water,
     air and energy. Conservation of natural resources is necessary to insure their
     availability to future generations. The conservation issues cover sustainability of the
     environment, including: Plant Habitats; wildlife habitats; rare and endangered
     species; soils; water resources; air quality; energy; and recycling.
Table 6-1: Summary of Key Parks, Open Space and Conservation Element Issues
The Parks, Open Space, and Conservation Element reflects current conditions, needs, and relevant State
laws. The element focuses on providing specific direction as to how to implement stated goals and policies,
and greater recognition of limited City funds for development and maintenance of recreational facilities and
open space areas.
Provide Sufficient Parkland
The updated General Plan continues the City policy of providing a minimum of 2.0 acres of parkland per
1,000 population. Recommendations for improvements of parks and recreational facilities are considered
long-term goals to be carried out as funds are available.
Maintain a Clean and Safe Environment
Policies are included to satisfy state laws and require adequate mitigation to maintain air and water quality,
conserve energy, and minimize impacts of development in hazardous or environmentally sensitive habitat
areas.
Provide Diverse Recreation Facilities and Programs
Policies to provide recreational opportunities for persons of all ages and abilities are included. Numerous
capital projects have been deferred and demographic projections indicate growth in the school-age youth
and senior populations. This will require substantial investments in senior and teen centers, athletic fields,
gymnasiums and park renovation funding. This is critical to the sustainable community expectation for high
quality services.

Beautify the City
A desire to cooperate with private parties in beautification of the City. To facilitate these partnerships,
community awareness and free educational programs are offered through the Park and Recreation
Department and directed through City Commissions and the City Council.
6.2 Parks, Open Space and Conservation Element Requirements
This Element of the Millbrae General Plan combines two of the seven elements required
by State law (California Government Code, Section 65300 et. seq.): Open Space and
Conservation. The Open Space Element establishes programs to maintain, expand and
improve Millbrae’s open space and recreation areas, while the Conservation Element
institutes programs to conserve natural resources. Under State law, parks are
encompassed within the mandate of the Open Space Element. However, because of the
importance placed on Parks and Recreation by Millbrae residents, this aspect of the
Open Space Element has been devoted a separate section in this Plan.
Following is a brief overview of the State requirements for the Open Space and
Conservation elements.
Open Space Element Requirements
An Open Space Element has been required as part of local General Plans since 1970. In
enacting this requirement, it was the intent of the State Legislature to assure that cities
recognize that open space land is a limited and valuable resource and to assure that
every city and county will prepare and carry out an open space plan.
Section 65560 and 65561 of the Government Code specifies the contents of an Open
Space Element. State policy with regard to open space is described in Section 65561 as
follows:
    "(1) That the preservation of open-space land . . . is necessary not only for the maintenance
    of the economy of the state, but also for the assurance of the continued availability of land
    for the production of food and fiber, for the enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation, and
    for the use of natural resources.
    (2) That discouraging premature and unnecessary conversion of open-space land to urban
    uses is a matter of public interest and will be of benefit to urban dwellers because it will
    discourage non-contiguous development patterns which unnecessarily increase the costs of
    community services to community residents.
    (3) That the anticipated increase in the population of the state demands that cities,
    counties, and the state at the earliest possible date make definite plans for the preservation
    of valuable open-space land and take positive action to carry out such plans by the adoption
    and strict administration of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as authorized by this
    chapter or by other appropriate methods.
    (4) That in order to assure that the interests of all its people are met in the orderly growth
    and development of the state and the preservation and conservation of its resources, it is

     necessary to provide for the development by the state, regional agencies, counties and cities,
     including charter cities, of statewide coordinated plans for the conservation and
     preservation of open-space lands.
     (5) That for these reasons this article is necessary for the promotion of the general welfare
     and for the protection of the public interest in open-space land."
Conservation Element Requirements
A Conservation Element has been required as part of local general plans since 1970. The
Conservation Element overlaps those categories of the Open Space Element that deal
with “open space for the preservation of natural resources” and “open space for the
managed production of resources”. Conservation should prevent the wasteful
destruction and neglect of Millbrae’s natural resources, particularly scarce resources.
This philosophy is consistent with the intent of the California Environment Quality Act
(CEQA) and National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA).
6.3 Clarification of Terminology
In general, the difference between parks and open space is that parks generally have
landscaping improvements such as grass and trees, and recreational equipment for play
and/or sports fields. Open space lands are likely to be unimproved and vacant of
structures of any kind.
The advantage of unimproved open space lands is the historical view such lands offer of
the original condition of the area before any development occurred. The value of open
space lands increases when the property is located adjacent to a scenic resource, such as
a lake or stream, because these resources attract people to the site.
The difference between open space and conservation areas is that open space lands might
be preserved for recreational or scenic purposes, while conservation areas might be
preserved solely because of the presence of a specific resource within the area, not
necessarily the land itself. In some cases open space lands can also be conservation areas
but with a different emphasis. For example, open space land may be preserved for its
waterfront scenic qualities while a conservation area may be so designated because of
the presence of an endangered animal or plant species found near the waterfront, such
as areas where the red-legged frog, an endangered species, is located on bayfront lands.
Table 6-2: Definitions of Terms
Following are definitions to help differentiate between the character and purpose of a park, open space area,
and conservation area.
(1) Park: An improved, primarily unobstructed area with landscaping and recreational equipment such as
     play apparatuses and/or basketball courts. In some cases this definition includes property with
     recreation buildings or structures. The purpose of parks is to provide opportunities for outdoor
     recreation and physical exercise near to residential and employement areas.
(2) Open Space: An open area which is vacant of any structures and is primarily maintained in its natural
     condition. In some cases this definition includes pathways, landscaping, and other improvements which
     are maintained. The provision of open space is intended to offer residents and visitors opportunities for

    quiet introspection in a location that provides visual relief from buildings, concrete, and noise associated
    with urban life.
(3) Conservation: The preservation and maintenance of a resource for the enjoyment of future generations
    such as water, air and energy systems. The preservation of these resources is concerned with the
    quality and quantity of the resource. Conservation areas sustain a rare species and/or natural resource
    that cannot be restored or replaced. The purpose of conservation areas is to provide a protected
    location where the properties of a natural resource may be observed and enjoyed without risk of
    endangering the resource.
6.4 Parks and Recreation Background
Millbrae residents enjoy a variety of recreational opportunities provided by the parks
and recreation facilities located in the City. These facilities play an important role in
reinforcing Millbrae’s residential character and enhancing the quality of life for Millbrae
residents.
Millbrae’s parks range from Mini-Parks (parks generally less than one acre in size) to
Neighborhood Parks (generally one to five acres in size) to the City’s Central Park, an
eight-acre Community Park with a Community Center facility. Residents also enjoy the
recreational opportunities provided by the 93-acre County-owned Junipero Serra Park,
part of which is located within the City’s limits, and by several significant privately
owned recreational facilities in the City, including the 103-acre Green Hills Country
Club golf course.
Park Standards
A “park standard” establishes a general measure of supply in relation to demand for
parks and recreation facilities. The measure relates acres of land dedicated and
improved for park and recreation purposes to the population, and is typically expressed
in “acres per thousand residents.”
There is no agreed upon national or state-wide standard for parks. The National
Recreational and Parks Association recommends a standard of ten acres per 1000
persons, with one-quarter of a mile maximum service distance for neighborhood
playgrounds. However, the National Recreation Association’s general standard is five
acres per 1000, and many cities in California have standards ranging from one to five
acres per 1000 persons.
Each city must establish its own park acreage standards in relation to what is
realistically available and what is necessary to satisfy the needs, desires, and general
health and welfare of its residents. In Millbrae, there are 12 parks totalling
approximately 44 acres. With a population of 21,447 people (as of January, 1997), that
translates into approximately 2.0 acres of park land per 1000 residents. When additional
resources such as Junipero Serra County Park (15 acres located in Millbrae) and local
school grounds (65 acres) are included in the measure, Millbrae’s park standard stands
at 5.5 acres per thousand. Add in recreation potential of the 40 acre Spur Property, and it
is possible that Millbrae may be able to provide 8.1 acres of parks and recreation
facilities per 1000 residents. Obtaining this standard in reality, however, requires that
outdoor recreation facilities at schools be made available to the public during non-school

hours, and that the City undertake improvements to the Spur Property both in terms of
access and on-site amenities.
To ensure that significant new residential developments provide adequate park and
recreation opportunities for their residents, Millbrae’s Municipal Code requires the
dedication of land at the rate of 2 acres per fifty lots. Where less than fifty lots are
involved, the developer can opt instead to pay in-lieu fees based upon the assessed
value at a ratio of 4.5 acres per 1,000 population. These measures are permitted under
State law (Public Resources Code Section 66477).
Existing Parks and Recreation Facilities
Following is a brief overview of the Millbrae’s park and recreation facilities.
    City Parks: There are 12 parks in Millbrae, nine of which are located on City land.
    The three parks which are not on City-owned land are Bayside Manor Park, Marino
    Vista Park and Bayfront Park (all three are on land leased from the Airport for
    $1/year). Combined, these parks provide 44 acres of developed park space and 40
    acres of undeveloped land for Millbrae residents (see Table 6.3). Additionally, there
    is landscaped park space on the Civic Center grounds (Constitution Square).
    All of Millbrae’s parks are either fully improved or are budgeted for full
    improvement.
    Central Park and the Millbrae Community Center: The largest of the City parks, at 8.1
    acres, is the Central Park located just west of the Civic Center. It serves both the
    surrounding neighborhood and the community as a whole since it is the site of the
    Millbrae Community Center. The Community Center, constructed in 1969, is a
    complete 2,500 sq. ft. multipurpose facility including auditorium, meeting rooms,
    senior wing, and provisions for food service.
    The Spur Property: The 52 acre Spur site is a unique recreational resource which
    Millbrae is fortunate to possess. It is intended that the property be used by the entire
    community for passive outdoor recreation. Although, at present, only portions of the
    Spur are improved with a pedestrian and bicycling trail. It should also be noted that
    mapped and inferred traces of the Serra Fault are found along the Spur.
    Junipero Serra County Park: Approximately 15 acres of the 93-acre San Mateo County
    Junipero Serra Park are located in the northwest corner of Millbrae. This is a natural
    area, characterized by steep terrain, which is suited for hiking and wildlife
    observation. Access to the park is in San Bruno.
    School Playgrounds and Playfields: As in most cities, Millbrae’s school grounds are
    important recreational resources. The City of Millbrae has Joint Powers Agreements
    (JPA) with both the Millbrae Elementary School District and the San Mateo Union
    High School District. The two high schools (including Mills High School and
    Capuchino High School, which is in the San Bruno city limits but surrounded by

    Millbrae), one intermediate school, and eight elementary schools within the City
    provide 65.5 acres of playgrounds and playfields.
    These school facilities are very popular, especially with young people, for active
    outdoor recreation such as team sports. The two high schools and one intermediate
    school serve both their neighborhoods and the community at large, while the
    elementary schools are primarily neighborhood resources.
    Additionally, the local school districts have been very cooperative in allowing their
    facilities to be used by the Millbrae Parks and Recreation Department. Mills High
    School, especially, has proved an invaluable supplement to the facilities of the
    Community Center.
    Private Recreation Facilities: In addition to the public areas and facilities listed above,
    Millbrae is home to several prominent privately owned recreation facilities which
    serve many Millbrae residents. These facilities include:
    –– Green Hills Country Club, featuring an 18 hole golf course extending over 103
        acres of land and representing the largest reservoir of privately owned open
        space in Millbrae. The facility is considered financially successful and is expected
        to remain at its present size and location indefinitely.
    –– Millbrae Meadows Swimming Club, located at the northerly end of Helen Drive, is a
        3.6 acre private facility with a pool constructed and operated by the membership.
    –– Millbrae Tennis Club, at Monterey Avenue and Santa Paula Avenue on the
        easterly side of the railroad tracks, is a private club maintaining several tennis
        courts on land leased from PG&E.
Evaluation of Existing Facilities
Based on current population projections and the development policies contained in this
General Plan, the present amount of park land will be adequate to maintain the City’s
current ratio of park acres per capita. In fact, with the addition of the Spur property as a
usable park and recreation facility, Millbrae residents will enjoy a higher park standard
than currently exists.
However, while park acquisition is not a pressing issue, all parks are currently in need
of some improvements to comply with federal mandates as well as replacement of
antiquated play equipment with state of the art modular play structures. Increased
maintenance and community expectations are the most pressing issues at the forefront
of these needs.
The challenge in the coming 20-year planning period will be to find more effective and
innovative ways to fund improvements to existing parks and to meet ongoing
maintenance expenses. The economic trends of the last decade have necessitated all
available resources be allocated to essential services. The deferring of adequate
maintenance staffing levels and capital projects have created an unmet need of $8.0
million. Also, the City will need to continue considering and addressing the park and
recreation needs of specific neighborhoods, ages, and interest groups.

6.5 Open Space Background
Millbrae has a variety of open space resources serving a wide range of recreational and
conservation purposes. These resources include land held by the City, County, and other
public agencies, as well as privately held land that is undevelopable due to site
characteristics, particularly in the western third of the City where sharply rising hills
require that large areas be left undeveloped and heavily vegetated.
Inventory of Open Space Resources
Following is an overview and brief assessment of the significant open space resources
located in the City. Acreage quotations are approximate.
    The Spur Property: The most significant city-owned space in Millbrae, in terms of
    physical area, location, and public use potential, is the Spur property. Beginning at
    Millbrae Avenue and Magnolia Avenue, and winding almost the entire length of the
    City, the Spur varies in width from 100 to 400 feet and occupies approximately 52
    acres. The Spur property has remained in its natural state along most of its length,
    being restricted to convenient access by the general public, yet offering unique
    opportunities for passive recreational uses once access is gained. The City has
    programmed development of the Spur based on recommendations of the Spur Study
    Committee and Park and Recreation Commission. Portions of the Spur property
    which are currently developed include Rotary Park, Josephine Waugh Park and a
    multi-purpose trail and deteriorated par course along Millbrae Avenue.
    San Francisco Water Department Lands: Within Millbrae City limits, the City and
    County of San Francisco owns three sizeable parcels of land which are presently
    utilized by the San Francisco Water Department, all of which are only marginally
    developed. The Water Department parcel on El Camino Real occupies 15.4 acres, and
    borders the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way to the east. The land is presently
    being used as the Peninsula Division Headquarters.
    Centrally located on the west side of the City, the Water Department owns a parcel
    16.6 acres in size. The terrain of this property is quite steep and very heavily
    vegetated. Earth slides have rendered only a part of this property developable. This
    site offers potential for a City water storage facility for either just Millbrae or as part
    of a regional water improvement project.
    Another significant Water Department parcel containing the filtration plant lies just
    outside the northwest boundary of the City bordering I-280 with access from Helen
    Drive in Millbrae. Part of this 56-acre property is also quite steep. The land remains
    in its natural state, heavily vegetated with live oak trees. The site contains 11 million
    gallons of water storage in two tanks.
    County Lands: Adjacent to the Water Department’s filtration plant property lies San
    Mateo County’s Junipero Serra Park, approximately 15 acres of which are in
    Millbrae. The steep slopes in this park exhibit many slide areas which remain
    susceptible to further soil erosion. As permanent open space, however, these
    potential hazards are not significant.

    San Francisco International Airport Lands: The San Francisco Airport owns
    approximately 90 acres of undeveloped land along the west side of the Bayshore
    Freeway, between Millbrae Avenue and the northern City boundary. Within this
    area land for two neighborhood parks (Marino Vista and Bayside Manor Park) has
    been leased by the City and developed.
    The Airport also owns the only waterfront land within the City of Millbrae. This 8.5-
    acre property is located adjacent to the Old Bayshore Highway and was created with
    fill material, which would have to be considered in connection with development of
    any structures. Residents of Millbrae and surrounding communities have
    traditionally used this land for airplane watching and other passive recreational
    pursuits. About 2.8 acres are improved as a park (Bayfront Park) and a portion of the
    regional Bay Trail.
    Bay Trail: The Bay Trail is a 400-mile trail which will eventually ring the Bay. The
    Bay Trail preferred alignment has been proposed by the ABAG Technical Advisory
    Committee. An appropriate alignment will need to be determined between South
    San Francisco and Millbrae due to San Francisco International Airport restrictions.
    Residential Interior Lots and Deep Backyards: Steep topography and unstable soils in
    some of the hill areas of Millbrae have resulted in only partial utilization of many
    very large residential lots. Homes have been constructed along streets, leaving deep
    rear lots and backyards largely or entirely unimproved, often extending down into
    creek beds. On a block scale, this has produced open interior areas which provide
    significant areas of open space and vegetation in the these residential
    neighborhoods.
6.6 Conservation Background
This section of the Parks, Open Space and Conservation Element concerns the
preservation of natural resources such as clean air and water, energy, and plant and
wildlife habitats. Conservation of these resources is necessary to protect our health and
well-being, and to ensure their availability to future generations. The conservation
issues addressed within the Element include plant and wildlife habitats, rare and
endangered species, soils, water resources, air quality, energy and recycling.
Plant Habitats
The two primary natural plant communities in Millbrae are the Chaparral and the
Broadleaf/Riparian Woodland. These plant communities represent remainders of the
original Millbrae natural environment and are of unique educational value in
understanding the City’s natural history as well as its present natural systems and inter-
relationships.
Chaparral areas are characterized by heavily branched shrubs such as Scrub Oak and
Chamise, and low-branched shrubs such as Coyotebush and Poison Oak. Chaparral
areas are located on the dry south- and east-facing slopes of the western hills.

Broadleaf/Riparian Woodland environments are forested areas containing California
Buckeye, Laurel and other deciduous plants. They are found primarily in canyons and
along water courses (riparian vegetation). In general, wildlife nesting and feeding sites
are located in the riparian woodlands.
Other plant communities that are found less extensively in the City but which play
potentially important roles as wildlife habitat areas are the open grasslands, marshy
areas, and scrubby vegetation on the Airport lands in the City’s eastern section. These
areas provide food (red-legged frogs) and shelter for the San Francisco Garter Snake, an
endangered species. Grasslands also have value as potential mitigation corridors.
Lastly, the City’s parks and open space areas contain a variety of indigenous and
introduced California natives, including: Wild Lilac, Coast Live Oak, Toyon, Buckeye,
Jenesta, Elder, Wild Cherry, Eucalyptus, Coast Redwood, Monterey Pine, and Arizona
Cypress. Eucalyptus and Pine trees are also found on other City-owned parcels and
along the railroad tracks that run through the City, providing a visual buffer for adjacent
residences. Private and public landscaping along City streets also include a wide range
of domesticated and native plant species, and contribute significantly to the City’s scenic
quality.
Wildlife Habitats
The plant communities found in Millbrae’s parks and open spaces also provide valuable
habitats for a diverse population of wildlife. Following is a brief overview of some of the
species found in these habitat areas.
    Mammals: The Black-Tailed Jack Rabbit, Deer Mouse, California Meadow Mouse,
    Coyote, and Raccoon can occasionally be found in the City’s upper canyon areas and
    in Junipero Serra Regional Park, which is adjacent to Millbrae. The Grey Fox, Red
    Fox, Valley Pocket Gopher, Brushrabbit, Coast Deer, Bobcat, and Virginia Opossum
    can also be seen at times. The natural vegetation, seasonal availability of water, and
    isolation of these areas make them attractive to wildlife.
    Birds: Certain avians have found nesting places within the City’s parks and general
    open spaces. Species common to Chaparral areas in the City include California
    Quail, Chestnut-backed Chickadee, California Thrasher, and Rufous-sided Towhee.
    In grassland areas, the Brewer’s Blackbird and Mourning Dove are sometimes found.
    Other birds found in Millbrae include Allen’s Hummingbird, Robin, Bluejay,
    Mockingbird, Purple Finch, Herons, Egrets, Acorn Woodpeckers, Ravens, Red-
    Tailed Hawks, and owls.
    Reptiles and Amphibians: A few reptiles and amphibians find habitat in Millbrae.
    These include the Pacific Gopher Snakes, Arboreal Salamander, and Western Toad.
    The San Francisco Garter Snake and Red-Legged Frog, both endangered species, live
    on portions of the airport lands.
Rare and Endangered Species

The San Francisco Garter Snake (Thamnophis sirtalis tetrataenia) is an endangered species
known to live in and near Millbrae, generally west of Junipero Serra Freeway
(particularly within the Crystal Springs Reservoir watershed), and on marshy vacant
lands east of Highway 101, known as the “Airport lands.” Here the snake feeds on the
Red-Legged Frog, also an endangered species.
The San Francisco Garter Snake is federally listed as an endangered species, and is
considered one of the most beautiful snakes in North America. It has a wide strip of
greenish-yellow edged with black along its back bordered on each side by a broad red
and black stripe. The belly is greenish-blue in color and the top of the head is red.
Adults grow to a length of 18 to 51 inches.
Historically, the San Francisco Garter Snake was found on the San Francisco Peninsula
from approximately the San Francisco County line south along the base of the Santa
Cruz Mountains to at least Crystal Springs Reservoir and along the coast south to Ano
Nuevo Point. However, many of the snakes’ habitat areas have been destroyed by
urbanization.
The snakes’ present distribution is in isolated pockets within the historical range. The
Airport lands west of Bayshore Freeway represent the northeastern most known
occurrence of the snake on the Peninsula. It is one of only five known locations of the
snake (others have not been confirmed) and thus is a very significant location in terms of
the continued existence of the subspecies.
A three year study, funded by CalTrans and the Federal Highway Administration, was
undertaken to obtain more information on the snakes’ biology and ecology, and to
discuss the potential for future development of the property. The study was required as
mitigation for completion of Interstate 380 between San Bruno Avenue and the San
Francisco International Airport and BART Extension to Millbrae.
Soils
Erosion is generally not a serious problem in Millbrae, although in periods of heavy
rains some erosion and sliding has occurred on several vacant parcels in the City. Of
particular concern for soil erosion are steeper hillside lands where cuts, grading, or
landslides have occurred.
Soil that washes down from the hills eventually is deposited in the Bay. The Regional
Water Quality Control Board has an interest in the effect of soil erosion on San Francisco
Bay water. The Water Quality Control Plan (Basin Plan) for the San Francisco Bay
Region encourages local governments to regulate erosion and sedimentation. If local
governments do not adopt adequate controls, the Regional board can enforce erosion
control by issuing localized waste discharge requirements.
Water Resources
The water supply system must provide sufficient capacity to meet domestic,
commercial, and industrial user demands as well as satisfy fire protection requirements.
These components of demand are functions of land use, population density and per

capita water consumption. Residential water use varies with climate, lot size, system
pressure, metering practices, water rates, and the standard of living in the community,
as well as other factors.
The City of Millbrae contracts the right to purchase water from the San Francisco Public
Utilities Commission. The City, along with 29 other Bay area agencies, receives water
from Hetch Hetchy in the Sierra Nevada Mountains and the San Andreas/Crystal
Springs reservoirs in San Mateo County. Only a little more than half of Millbrae's water
is treated locally at the Harry Tracy Treatment Plant at the northwestern edge of
Millbrae prior to distribution to domestic and business users. The rest comes from
Hetch Hetchy.
The City's Public Works Department has an ongoing Water Conservation Program
codified in the Municipal Code and Urban Water Management Plan. Should drought
conditions return to the region, the City would be prepared to formulate and enforce
strict water conservation measures and water reclamation. Recycled water is used fto
water US 101 from Millbrae Avenue to San Francisco International Airport.
The water storage and distribution systems within the City are discussed in the Land
Use Element within the section focused on public services and facilities. The City is
currently undertaking a study to determine utility improvements for water distribution,
sanitary sewer collection, wastewater treatment and disposal, use of recycled water, and
storm water collection.
Air Quality
Air quality is a regional issue that affects the health of Millbrae residents. Addressing air
quality issues requires that all jurisdictions in the region play a responsible role in
addressing them. Following is a brief discussion of air quality issues as they pertain to
Millbrae and regional efforts to reduce air pollution.
     Pollutants and Pollution Levels. The San Francisco Bay Area is one of the state-
     designated critical air pollution basins. While over 75 percent of the region’s
     population lives in areas which meet National air quality standards, and while air
     quality has steadily improved in the last two decades, there are some portions of the
     region which have continued to exceed acceptable levels for ozone and suspended
     particulates during the past several years.
      The region’s most serious pollution problems are attributable to the hydrocarbons,
      nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide from automobile emissions. These emission
      pollutants are compounded by the region’s topography and climatic factors such as
      wind patterns and seasonal temperature inversions. Temperature inversions are the
      result of warm dry air riding over cool marine air at varying heights, creating a
      layering effect that limits the volume of air into which pollutants can be dispersed.
      The inversion coupled with low wind speeds reduces the “ventilation” or total
      volume of air available to dilute and disperse pollution. The poor ventilation
      resulting from inversions during the warm, sunny months fosters the development
      of photochemical oxidant, of which ozone is the major component. That is why the

 period from April to October is usually the “ozone season” in the Bay Area, when
 air pollution is most apparent.
 The Bay Area Pollution Control District which monitors air quality in communities
 throughout the Bay Area does not operate an air monitoring station in Millbrae, so
 specific information on air quality in Millbrae is not available. However,
 information on observed levels of pollutants and the number of days ambient air
 quality standards were exceeded is available for the monitoring station at Redwood
 City. In the 1985-89 period, the national standard for ozone of 0.12 parts per million
 (PPM) was exceeded one time. The State standard of 0.09 PPM was exceeded eleven
 times during that period.
Regulation of Air Quality. Millbrae is part of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Quality
Management District (BAAQMD) which regulates air pollution emissions
throughout the Bay Area according to regional air quality standards. Air quality
standards are set by the Federal Government (Air Quality Act of 1967) and
implemented through the Environmental Protection Agency and the California Air
Resources Board.
 Pursuant to the Clean Air Act of 1988, the BAAQMD in cooperation with the
 Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) and the Association of Bay Area
 Governments (ABAG) developed the 1991 Clean Air Plan (Air Quality Management
 Plan––AQMP) for the Bay Area. This plan includes long term control strategies for
 attaining and maintaining air quality standards. The Plan includes additional
 pollution controls on industry and reflects tighter emission standards on vehicles.
 Primary emphasis is on reducing the use of motor vehicles through Transportation
 System Management (TSM) and Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
 measures. TSM and TDM are discussed in the Circulation Element of the Millbrae
 General Plan.
 In order for Millbrae’s General Plan to be consistent with the AQMP, the City’s
 population and employment projections must fall within those anticipated in the
 AQMP. The City must also assure that the cumulative air quality impacts of land
 use patterns, potential development, and circulation policies for Millbrae are
 adequately mitigated. Lastly, the General Plan must require individual project
 analysis and impact mitigation consistent with CEQA requirements.
 The General Plan responds to these concerns in several ways:
 –– Making minimal changes to the City’s existing land use pattern and densities.
     Approximately 90 percent of the land in Millbrae is developed with urban uses.
     Growth in population and households is expected to be fairly moderate as the
     City approaches build-out due to the limited availability of vacant land in the
     City. Development in the Millbrae Station Area Specific Plan area is expected to
     result in the most significant change. From a regional sense, development of a
     higher intensity, transit-oriented mixed use area reinforces a city-centered
     concept of urban development that directs in-fill growth to areas where

         infrastructure capacity may be available or uncommitted. Without further
         information on the potential types and intensities of uses, it is not possible to
         evaluate potential air quality impact, however, transit-oriented development is
         highly desirable from a regional standpoint.
     –– Encouraging alternative transportation modes. The Plan supports and encourages
         frequent accessible transit service and the application of Transportation Demand
         Management (TDM) to promote the use, maintenance and expansion of
         alternative transportation modes such as transit, vanpools, carpools, and
         bicycles. A major focus of this effort is the City’s participation in and support for
         the San Mateo County Transportation System Management Plan. Also, the new
         Millbrae BART Station is seen as a significant new development towards
         encouraging transit use by city residents and employees.
     –– Encouraging mixed use development. The Plan encourage mixed uses, such as
         residential, commercial and office, within a single project to reduce vehicle trips.
     –– Ensuring compatible land uses. The Plan favors land use patterns that will reduce
         vehicle miles traveled by locating residential uses near services, transit, and
         shopping where compatible. The Plan also tries to minimize the impact of
         localized air pollutants on sensitive land uses such as hospitals, senior citizen
         housing, and parks through careful siting and use of buffer areas.
    Reviewing and mitigating project-specific impacts. The City reviews proposed projects to
    determine any projected impacts on air quality and require appropriate mitigation
    measures as necessary. Such measures may include preferential car pool parking,
    providing bicycle storage, bus stop shelters and/or reduced emissions from
    stationary sources.
    Coordination with other agencies. The City seeks to comply with and enforce provisions
    of the 1991 Bay Area Clean Air Plan and coordinate with the Bay Area Air Quality
    Management District regarding emissions from existing and future developments.
6.7 Energy Conservation
The Pacific, Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), transports energy to Millbrae. Energy
supply is offered by the ABAG Power Pool is generated in the Southwest, California and
Canada.
Since the 1970’s the United States and many other countries have been facing an energy
crisis. The cause of this crisis is two-fold: 1) the United States consumes more energy
than it produces, and 2) energy sources that were formerly feasible have been found to
create harmful environmental effects, such as coal and fuel oil with a high sulfur
content.
Energy conservation (reducing consumption) and the use of alternative energy systems
(producing energy in cleaner, more sustainable ways) are important aims for all Millbrae
residents to ensure that energy is available to meet future needs.

Following is a brief overview of some of the conservation techniques and alternative
energy efforts that can be undertaken to improve energy conservation in Millbrae.
    Title 24 of the Uniform Building Code. State law requires that all new building
    construction and additions meet energy efficiency standards as set forth in Title 24 of
    the Uniform Building Code. Title 24 establishes standards to ensure adequate light
    and ventilation in buildings, and requires new buildings and additions to be
    designed for energy conservation and efficiency.
    Insulation and Weather-Proofing. Property owners should retrofit their buildings with
    weatherstripping and caulking around doors and windows to reduce heat loss.
    Insulation of attics, exterior walls and water heaters will also contribute to reduction
    of heat loss.
    Solar Energy. Many buildings in Millbrae are situated or can be situated to take
    advantage of solar heating opportunities. Installation of solar panels on these
    buildings can help utilize solar energy for heating and cooling. Property owners
    should be encouraged to install solar panels for heating and cooling interior spaces
    with solar energy, and for heating swimming pools and spas.
    Solar Access. According to State law, each parcel in a subdivision has the right to
    receive sunlight across adjacent parcels for any solar energy system (Section 66475.3
    of State Government Code), and new residential subdivisions must provide to the
    extent feasible for passive and natural heating and cooling opportunities (Section
    66473.1). Similarly, the Solar Shade Control Act prohibits the placement of
    vegetation in locations that would shade a solar collector on another’s property.
    View preservation is also a concern.
6.8 Millbrae's Urban Forest
The City of Millbrae, with its 55 linear miles of streets has a tree density of 68 trees per
mile, which is slightly more than one-half the national average. Of the street tree species
found, 35% are Sycamore or London Plane trees. Ideally, no one species should
represent more than 5% of the tree population. The practice of pollarding (topping) has
resulted in a large number of poorly structured trees. Although, this pruning method
has been curtailed, view pruning is allowed in hillside locations.
On summer days, downtown areas of most cities are 3 to 10 degrees warmer than the
surrounding region. By shading urban concrete and asphalt, which absorb the sun's
rays, trees help lower a city's temperature. In addition, tree shade lowers air
conditioning cost 10-15%.
According to Forest Service analysis, trees can add 7-20% to the value of a property.
Trees strengthen neighborhoods values in Millbrae by giving streets identity and a sense
of place. Trees also protect building exteriors from deterioration due to sun exposure.
Trees also absorb sound and soften noise, serving as baffles against the noise of busy

boulevards and freeways. They can mask urban noise by generating pleasing sounds,
like rustling leaves and birdsong.
As of the 1998-2000 budget, the City will take over responsibility for street tree care and
pruning from private property owners. In addition, the Park and Recreation
Department has prepared a "Recommended List of Trees" differentiating small stature,
medium stature and large stature trees. The Park and Recreation Department has also
prepared Policy Guidelines for City Park and Open Space Trees/Views.
6.9 Recycling
The City operates a Source Reduction and Recycling (SRR) program, designed to meet
state law requiring a 50% reduction of waste to landfills by the year 2000. The program
approach is to reduce the amount of waste delivered to the landfill through outreach
and education to the community to inform them of the many opportunities to reduce,
reuse, recycle and buy recycled products. The City SRR program includes backyard and
worm composting, organic gardening, art reuse and waste prevention workshops,
school assistance, outreach and education activities technical assistance for businesses,
participation in the Bay Area Regional Shop Smart Program and Household hazardous
waste collection events. New programs being planned include curbside collection of
yardwaste and expanded mixed waste processing.
6.10 Recreation Programs
The Park and Recreation Department must balance the citizenry expectations for both
traditional and innovative programming while maximizing direct cost recovery.
Recreation programs cover special interest classes, feature special events, year-round
tiny tot/pre-school, after school sports and enrichment programs, adult sports, senior
nutrition, senior leisure activities, summer aquatics, summer youth camps, youth "at
risk" programs, building rentals and other co-sponsored events.
Over the past five years, overall enrollment has substantially increased in youth sports
and summer programs, however, the lack of sufficient capital has stalled
innovative/continuous improvement projects requiring funding (i.e. field/court
expansion and conversion, facility upgrades and other capital needs). In order to
respond to the demand and meet the ever changing needs, the Department continues to
look for viable public and private partnerships which are mutually beneficial.
6.11 Parks, Open Space and Conservation Goals
The goals set forth below provide a framework for the subsequent articulation of the
City’s policies and implementing programs that will guide future city actions regarding
the management of parks, open spaces, and natural resources. The goals are presented
in three sections: parks and recreation goals; open space goals; and conservation goals.
Parks and Recreation Goals

            Provide Sufficient, Diverse, and
  PC1       Accessible Recreational Opportunities
            Provide sufficient, diverse, and accessible recreational opportunities
            for all Millbrae residents—including children, youth, seniors, and
            others with special needs—in parks, recreation facilities, school
            yards and open space balanced with the protection of important
            habitat areas areas throughout the City.
            Maintain Existing Recreation Facilities
  PC2       Maintain current park amenities and infrastructure in a safe,
            attractive and functional recreation environment.
            Improve the Spur Property as a Recreational Resource
  PC3       Provide improvements to the Spur Property to enhance its function
            as a community-wide open space and recreational amenity.
Open Space Goals
            Protect Open Space Resources
  PC4       Preserve the undeveloped open space areas in the City to maintain
            visual buffers between developed areas, preserve natural and man-
            made resources, minimize health and safety hazards, and provide
            recreational opportunities.
            Provide for Public Access and Use of Open Space as Appropriate
  PC5       To enhance the recreational value of open space areas, provide for
            public access to and use of open space areas where such access and
            use will not harm the area’s natural features or habitat.
Conservation Goals
            Protect and Conserve Natural Resources
  PC6       Preserve natural resources which provide important habitat,
            ecological or archeological value, and maintain clean air and water
            quality.
6.12  Parks, Open Space and Conservation Policies
Goal PC1 –– Provide Sufficient, Diverse, and Accessible Recreational Opportunities
PC1.1         Recreation Needs. Respond to the diverse recreation needs of Millbrae
              residents and meet the long-term projected recreation needs and
              preferences of individuals and groups within the community, including
              those with special needs.

PC1.2        New Recreation Facilities. Pursue opportunities through public and
             private means for developing new recreational facilities and/or
             expanding and enhancing existing recreation facilities in those parks
             where existing facilities are deficient.
PC1.3        New Residential Development. Require that all new multi-family
             residential projects provide a significant amount of on-site open
             space/recreation facilities for residents or provide a combination of park
             in-lieu fees and on-site recreational facilities.
PC1.4        Joint Use of School Property. Maintain the levels of recreational service
             in Millbrae by continuing to coordinate with the local school districts in
             the joint use and maintenance of school recreation facilities.
PC1.5        Bicycle Routes and Facilities. Develop an action program for bicycle
             route improvements including signing, striping, paving and provision of
             bicycle facilities.
Goal PC2 –– Maintain Existing Recreation Facilities
PC2.1        Park Facilities Maintenance and Inspection. Continue regular inspection
             and maintenance of park facilities to prolong the life of equipment,
             ensure facility safety and accessibility, and enhance the enjoyment of park
             users.
PC2.2        Project Review. When reviewing new park facility proposals, assure that
             long term maintenance needs are considered, including need for future
             staff and equipment.
PC2.3        In-Lieu Recreation and Condominium Park Fees. Exact in-lieu fees
             according to California Government Code 66477 and the Municipal Code
             to fund park and recreation facility improvements, and use the interest
             earned on fees to fund facility maintenance.
PC2.4        Community Maintenance Efforts. Continue to encourage community
             organizations and private citizens to help the City maintain public parks
             and open spaces.
Goal PC3 –– Improve the Spur Property as a Recreational Resource
PC3.1        Spur Property Improvements. Enhance the function of the Spur property
             as a recreational amenity for City residents, with additional landscaping,
             hiking trails, benches and related amenities.
Goal PC4 –– Protect Open Space Resources

PC4.1 Open Space Protection and Preservation. Protect and preserve open
      space lands in the City, and maintain them as necessary to protect the
      public health, safety and welfare. Protected open space areas should
      include:
      (1) Portions of property which have significant value to the public as
           scenic resources or which serve public recreation purposes.
      (2) Portions of property which are identified through the EIR process as
           environmentally sensitive habitat areas or archaeological sites, with
           development setbacks and other mitigation measures as
           recommended in the EIR to ensure protection of such resources.
      (3) Portions of property subject to geologic or seismic hazards, erosion,
           flooding, liquefaction, or other hazards, unless such hazards can be
           adequately mitigated to assure the protection of public health and
           safety for the life of the project.
PC4.2 Development Review Process. Maximize open space preservation
      opportunities in the private development review process and other
      approaches that minimize on-going City costs and liability exposure and
      still achieve City open space goals.
PC4.3 Open Space Preservation. The following means will be considered for
      preserving open space resources, in order of priority: (1) private
      development review process; (2) public-private partnerships; and lastly,
      (3) public funds. Possible means are described below.
      Private Resources
      (1) Require permanent dedication of open space areas with high habitat,
           visual, recreational, or archaeological value as a condition of
           development. These lands should be owned and maintained by
           private parties unless they are appropriate for use as trails or other
           public-access uses.
      (2) Use visual or public-access easements and building setbacks to
           protect open space resources while allowing development on private
           parcels.
      (3) Use impact fees from development of land with lower open-space
           values to acquire easements or ownership on land with higher open-
           space values.
      (4) Encourage clustering of units to protect areas with high open space
           values.
      (5) Encourage grants and donations of undeveloped property with high
           open-space values from private individuals or organizations.
      (6) Encourage private, non profit and other public agencies to acquire
           and maintain undeveloped land for open space preservation. These
           methods are preferred over the use of city funds for acquisition.
             Public-Private Partnerships
             (1) When parcels on planned trail or pathway corridors are developed,
                 require the developer to construct the portion of the trail crossing the
                 parcel as one of the conditions of development.
             (2) Work with organizations such as the Urban Creeks Council, Trust for
                 Public Lands, Nature Conservancy, Coastal Conservancy, and other
                 cities to perform creek restoration and other tasks related to open
                 space.
             Public (City) Funds
             (1) Prioritize parcels with high habitat, visual, archaeological or
                 recreational values for purchase by the City if funds become available.
PC4.4        Improvements in Open Space. Design any improvements in open space
             areas to minimize adverse impacts to habitats (including provision of a
             buffer to minimize human disturbances), views, and other open space
             resources.
PC4.5        Trees and Landscaping. Protect existing trees and encourage drought-
             tolerant landscaping, including new tree plantings, in private and public
             areas, including street medians. Utilize the design review process to
             review landscaping plans and enforce tree and landscape goals,
             consistent with the preservation of views.
Goal PC5 –– Provide Public Access and Use of Open Space as Appropriate
PC5.1        Open Space Access. Pursue public access to open space lands through
             the Tentative Map process to require dedications, easements and other
             mechanisms in the Conditions of Approval for a project.
PC5.2        Access Design and Protection of Natural Resources. For open space
             areas in public ownership, clearly delineate areas which are appropriate
             for public use and access, and differentiate them from those areas to be
             protected from human disturbance. In areas where public access is
             appropriate, provide access points and accessible design features (e.g.,
             trails and related facilities).
PC5.3        Special Need Groups. Ensure that public access points and recreational
             design features provide equal opportunity for people with special needs
             to access and enjoy public open space areas.
PC5.4        Development Review. Review all new development or improvement
             proposals through the City’s development and design review processes
             for: (1) impacts on access to sunlight; (2) provision of landscaped
             setbacks; (3) provision of street furniture in public open spaces; and (4)
             impacts on views.

PC5.5        Critical Public Views and Ridgelines. Require assessment of critical
             public views and ridgelines as part of the project review process to assure
             that projects protect natural resources through proper site planning,
             building design, and landscaping.
Goal PC6 –– Protect and Conserve Natural Resources
PC6.1        Habitat Protection. Preserve important plant and wildlife habitats,
             including chaparral, broadleaf/riparian woodlands, open grasslands,
             marshy areas, creeks, and sensitive nesting sites. Loss of these habitats
             should be fully offset through creation of habitat of equal value, with the
             compensation rate for habitat recreation determined by a qualified
             biologist.
PC6.2        Rare and Endangered Species. Limit development in areas which
             support the San Francisco garter snake, red-legged frog, and other rare or
             endangered species. If development of these areas must occur, any loss
             of habitat should be fully compensated on-site. If off-site mitigation is
             necessary, it should occur within the Millbrae planning area whenever
             possible, and must be accompanied by plans and a monitoring program
             prepared by a qualified biologist.
PC6.3        Development Patterns. Encourage development patterns which
             minimize impacts on the City’s environmental resources and integrate
             development with open space areas. Cluster development and other
             creative site planning techniques should be encouraged to preserve open
             space, habitat, and other environmental or recreational resources.
PC6.4        Development Setbacks. Lands adjacent to sensitive habitat areas should
             be protected as public or private permanent open space through
             dedication or easements. New developments adjacent to such areas
             should provide adequate building setbacks to buffer against potential
             impacts, with adequate access easements provided to allow for necessary
             open space maintenance.
PC6.5        Air Quality. Strive to achieve federal and state air quality standards by
             managing locally generated pollutants, coordinating with other
             jurisdictions, and implementing measures to reduce automobile trips in
             Millbrae and the region. Require that local project Environmental Impact
             Reports meet the air quality analysis criteria set forth by the Bay Area Air
             Quality Management District.
PC6.6        Air Pollution Sensitive Land Uses. To the extent feasible, separate air
             pollution sensitive land uses from sources of air pollution.

PC6.7  Agency Coordination in Air Quality Improvements. Coordinate review
       of large projects with local, regional and state agencies to improve air
       quality.
PC6.8  Water Quality Strategies. Implement habitat protection programs and
       evaluate proposed projects for potential water quality impacts which may
       require sediment basins as part of grading activities, grease/oil traps
       where concentrations of such pollutants are anticipated, or other
       measures.
PC6.9  Water Quality. Maintain, at a minimum, the water quality levels
       established by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and achieve
       the highest possible level of water quality reasonable for an urban
       environment.
PC6.10 Wastewater Effluent. Ensure that treated wastewater meets the
       standards established by the State Regional Water Quality Board.
PC6.11 Water Conservation. Conserve water resources in existing and new
       development, and work with the San Francisco Bay Area Water Users
       Association and the water agencies of the San Mateo County to develop a
       regional approach to water conservation.
PC6.12 Water Saving Landscaping and Irrigation. Promote the use of low-
       water-use landscaping and irrigation devices in parks and require such
       devices of new projects during review of new projects and modifications
       to existing developments.
PC6.13 Property Owner Water Saving Techniques. Encourage all property
       owners to implement the following conservation techniques: utilize
       drought tolerant plant materials; limit turf areas to 25 percent of
       landscaping; limit hours of the day for watering; retrofit with water-
       conserving fixtures; retrofit existing bathrooms and install new
       bathrooms with ultra low-flow toilets and water-conserving shower
       heads.
PC6.14 Soil Stabilization. Prevent soil erosion by retaining and replanting
       vegetation, and by siting development to minimize grading and land
       form alteration. In hillside areas, require preparation of a drainage and
       erosion control plan when projects include land alteration or vegetation
       removal.
PC6.15 Energy Efficiency: Title 24. Require that all new buildings and additions
       in the City be in compliance with the energy efficiency standards of Title
       24 of the California State Building Code.
PC6.16       Solar Heating and Cooling. Encourage installation of solar panels for
             heating and cooling with solar energy.
PC6.17       Solar Heating for Pools. Encourage property owners to heat all new and
             existing spas and swimming pools with solar energy.
PC6.18       Energy Conservation. Promote energy conservation in new and existing
             development and encourage use of alternative energy sources, including
             passive heating and cooling, by allowing variances to site or building
             requirements (i.e., setbacks, lot coverage, building height, etc.) where
             consistent with public health and safety.
PC6.19                Recycling. Enhance the long-term viability of natural resources
             and reduce the volume of material sent to solid waste sites by continuing
             the City’s source reduction and recycling programs, encouraging the
             participation of all City residents and businesses.
6.13 Parks, Open Space and Conservation Implementing Programs
Parks and Recreation Programs
PCIP-1       Recreation User Surveys. Encourage feedback from recreation program
             participants, facility users and the general community with periodic
             surveys.
PCIP-2       Recreation Program Responsiveness. Based upon a periodic review of
             recreation user needs, expand and diversify recreation program offerings
             to address new and unmet recreation needs.
PCIP-3       Parks Facilities Plan. Consider adopting and regularly reviewing a Parks
             Facilities Plan which would address the need for new facilities as well as
             maintenance of existing facilities. This plan would be used as a basis for
             establishing park in-lieu fees, review of the City’s Capital Improvement
             Program, park use fees, volunteer assistance needs and ADA
             requirements.
PCIP-4       Park and Playfield Inspections. Perform and document monthly
             inspections of park amenities and infrastructure and inspect playfields
             during weekly maintenance.
PCIP-5       Park Facility Maintenance. Ensure that park and recreation facility
             maintenance is performed in a timely manner in response to problems
             and deficiencies noted in routine inspections.
PCIP-6       City/Schools Joint Use Agreement. Continue to implement joint use
             agreements with local school districts for the shared use and maintenance
             of their recreational facilities.

PCIP-7       Park Dedication Fees. Review current requirements for park dedication
             fees for new development and revise as needed.
PCIP-8       Pedestrian Improvements. Install the following improvements where
             appropriate to pedestrian walkways: benches, lighting, new landscaping,
             trash cans, and children’s play apparatus that do not require large safety
             areas (e.g., spring toys and sand play areas).
PCIP-9       Bicycle Facilities Action Program. Develop an action program to
             identify, prioritize, and implement needed improvements to bicycle
             paths, routes, signage, and parking facilities.
Open Space Programs
PCIP-11      Open Space Management Plan. Develop an Open Space Management
             Plan to identify criteria for use and maintenance of open space area, and
             to define the responsibilities of fire, police and public works in relation to
             open space maintenance and management. The Plan should also define
             the conditions of approval for development located in or adjacent to
             existing open space lands.
PCIP-12      Maintenance Funding. Identify funding sources for ongoing
             maintenance of open space lands.
PCIP-13      Street Tree and Landscape Master Plan. Develop a street tree and
             landscape master plan for major streets. The plan should promote the use
             of indigenous species and be guided by the concept of interconnected
             open space in Millbrae, linked visually via dense street plantings along
             the sides of streets and in median strips. The plan should include special
             plantings at gateways to the city.
PCIP-14      Tree Preservation Ordinance. Consider updating the Tree Preservation
             Ordinance that will define the types and sizes of trees to be protected,
             and will include specific criteria, procedures, and mitigation measures
             when trees are proposed to be removed.
PCIP-15      Adopt-a-Tree Program. Continue to implement the Adopt-a-Tree
             program to encourage additional plantings in the City right-of-way.
Conservation Programs
PCIP-16      Habitat Protection Ordinance. Comply with State and Federal laws
             regarding habitat protection to identify and protect areas of biological
             value, including chapparal, broadleaf/riparian woodlands, open
             grasslands, marshy areas, creeks, and sensitive nesting sites. The
             ordinance would include setback requirements, guidelines for impact

        avoidance and mitigation, standards for compensation of habitat loss (as
        established by a qualified biologist), and requirements for monitoring
        and habitat enhancement plans.
PCIP-17 Consultation on Fish and Wildlife Impacts. The City will continue to
        notify and consult with the California Department of Fish and Game and
        the Army Corps of Engineers when development projects are proposed in
        locations where there may be impacts to fish and wildlife and their
        habitats.
PCIP-18 Environmental Education. Establish public information/education
        programs to enhance public knowledge about environmental protection
        and conservation measures.
PCIP-19 Air Quality Strategies. Implement trip reduction and energy
        conservation measures, including jobs/housing balance and
        Transportation Systems Management programs as identified in the Land
        Use, Circulation and Housing Elements; and coordinate with regional
        and state agencies and other jurisdictions in enhancing air quality.
PCIP-20 Water Conservation Efforts. Work with other cities and agencies in the
        region to develop and implement a regional approach to water
        conservation.
PCIP-21 Water Emergencies. Declare a state of water emergency when
        mandatory water conservation and/or water rationing is necessary and
        prepare newsletter articles and brochures to educate customers about
        water conservation.
PCIP-22 Energy Information and Outreach. Continue to expand and monitor
        information about energy conservation and establish a public outreach
        program to inform Millbrae residents and businesses about the
        availability and importance of the information.
PCIP-23 Citywide Recycling Program. Continue the citywide residential
        recycling program.
PCIP-24 Source Reduction and Recycling Element. Continue to implement a
        Source Reduction and Recycling Element in accordance with State
        regulations.
PCIP-25 Recycling Information. Continue to inform all Millbrae residents and
        businesses about recycling opportunities.
PCIP-26 Recycling Bins Incentives. Consider waiving fees and simplifying the
        review process for trash enclosures around recycling bins.
PCIP-27 Deconstruction Program. Establish a program to recycle building
        construction and demolition material as much as possible.








































