































         CHAPTER 4.0
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                                                             4.0 Air Quality Element
4.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
 INTRODUCTION
The Air Quality Element is intended to protect the public's health and welfare by implementing
measures that allow the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control. District (SJVAPCD) to attain
Federal and State air quality standards that will move toward a sustainable level of air quality. To
achieve this goal, the Element sets forth a number of policies and standards to reduce current pollution
emissions b y r e q u i r i n g new development and renovations to include measures to comply with
air quality standards, and by relying on renewable energy sources. In addition, this Element contains
provisions to address new air quality requirements.
California Government Code Section 65303 enables a county or city to adopt "any other elements
or address any other subjects, which, in the judgment of the legislative body, relate to the physical
development of the county or city." The City of Huron has adopted the Air Quality Element to help
the community meet ambient air quality standards established by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency and the California Air Resources Board.
Climate change has become an issue of increasing concern in California, the nation, and the world.
Climate change is presently thought to be both naturally occurring and induced by increase in the
amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the earth’s atmosphere
attributable to the burning of fossil fuels.
Greenhouse gases have become the subject of increasing attention world-wide in recent years.
Evidence has been steadily growing that human activities have helped speed and magnify changes in
the global climate. The burning of fossil fuels is the primary manmade cause of greenhouse gases, a
fact that has led to calls for increased energy efficiency.
Since 2005, there has been a number of legislative changes that cover greenhouse gas impacts from
land use decisions.
      Executive Order S-3-05, issued by the Governor in 2005, set GHG emission targets for the
         State to meet, starting with a reduction to 2000 GHG emission levels by 2010 and concluding
         with a reduction to 80 percent below 1990 numbers by 2030. This order directed the ARB,
         California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal-EPA), Business Transportation and
         Housing Agency, the California Energy Commission and the Public Utilities Commission to
General Plan 2025 Policies Statement                                        Amended November 18, 2015
City of Huron                                                                                        4-1

4.0 Air Quality Element
         work together to develop a Climate Action Plan and report back on progress on meeting the
         statewide targets.
      Assembly Bill (AB) 32, signed by the Governor in 2006, established the first set of limits on
         GHG emissions for the State and put in place the regulatory framework needed to reach those
         targets. AB 32 set the 1990 GHG emissions level as a target to be achieved by 2020. In order
         to meet this goal, ARB is required to develop GHG emissions reporting procedures and adopt
         rules and regulations for reducing emissions by January 1, 2011, enforceable by January 1,
         2012.
      And finally, AB 375, signed by the Governor in 2008, sets out planning concepts intended
         reduce vehicle travel by promoting compact development. A goal of SB 375 is to help curb
         greenhouse gas emissions.
Taken together, both S-3-05 and AB 32 set emission targets that Huron will eventually be required to
attain. While explicit thresholds and requirements have yet to be developed, various State agencies
have begun to examine proposed land use plans and specific projects for their potential GHG impacts.
On the local level, the focus is on fewer automobile trips and more efficient homes and businesses
resulting in fewer pollutants and lower levels of GHG emissions.
PURPOSE OF THE AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
The purpose of the Air Quality Element is to identify air quality problem areas and implement
policies and standards to address those problem areas. Without the implementation and maintenance
of appropriate air quality standards, threats to public health and a declining quality of life may
result. The Air Quality Element has been included in Huron General Plan to ensure a healthy
environment through the management of our air resources.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
The Air Quality Element includes goals, objectives, policies and standards for minimizing the number
and length of vehicle trips, transportation alternatives, and for requiring area and stationary source
projects that generate significant amounts of air pollutants to incorporate air quality mitigation in
their design. This Element also includes goals, objectives, policies and standards for reducing climate
change impacts and integrating renewable energy benefits into the Huron General Plan.
GOALS
To protect the health and welfare of Huron residents by promoting development that is compatible
with air quality standards.
Provide for safe and reliable renewable energy sources to meet Huron’s needs and enable economic
growth.
Maximize opportunities to meet local energy needs from renewable energy sources in new and existing
development and on City facilities and land.
General Plan 2025 Policies Statement                                        Amended November 18, 2015
City of Huron                                                                                       4-2

4.0 Air Quality Element
OBJECTIVES
  A. Develop consistent and accurate procedures for evaluating the air quality impacts of new
       projects.
  B. As part of the development review process, develop mitigation measures to minimize stationary
       and area source emissions.
  C. Develop transportation systems that minimize vehicle delay and air pollution.
  D. Develop consistent and accurate procedures for mitigating transportation emissions from new
       and existing projects.
  E. Encourage alternative modes of transportation including pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit
       usage.
  F. Conserve energy and reduce air emissions by encouraging energy efficient building designs
       and transportation systems.
  G. Meet or exceed all current and future State-mandated targets for reducing emissions of
       greenhouse gases.
  H. Lead by example and integrate renewable energy generating systems at municipal facilities
       and on appropriate City land.
POLICIES AND STANDARDS
    4.1    Coordinate with other local and regional jurisdictions, including the SJVAPCD and the
           California Air Resources Board (ARB), in the development of regional and county clean
           air plans and incorporate the relevant provisions of those plans into City planning and
           project review procedures. Also cooperate with the SJVAPCD and ARB in:
           a.    Enforcing the provisions of the California and Federal Clean Air Acts, State and
                 regional policies, and established standards for air quality.
           b.    Encouraging economy clean fuel for City vehicle fleets, when feasible.
           c.    Developing consistent procedures for evaluating project-specific and cumulative air
                 quality impacts of projects.
    4.2    Require area and stationary source projects that generate significant amounts of air
           pollutants to incorporate air quality mitigation in their design, including:
           a.    The use of best available and economically feasible control technology for stationary
                 industrial sources;
           b.    The use of EPA-certified wood stoves in new residential units;
           c.    The use of new and replacement fuel storage tanks at refueling stations that are
                 clean fuel compatible, if technically and economically feasible;
General Plan 2025 Policies Statement                                           Amended November 18, 2015
City of Huron                                                                                        4-3
4.0 Air Quality Element
           d.    The promotion of energy efficient designs, including provisions for solar access,
                 building siting to maximize natural heating and cooling, and landscaping to aid
                 passive cooling and to protect from winter winds.
    4.3    Develop strategies to minimize the number and length of vehicle trips, which may include:
           a.    Promoting commercial/industrial project proponent sponsorship of van pools or club
                 buses;
           b.    Encouraging commercial/industrial project day care and employee services at the
                 employment site;
           c.    Encouraging the provision of transit, especially for employment-intensive uses of
                 200 or more employees;
           d.    Providing incentives for the use of transportation alternatives;
           e.    Providing expansion and improvement of public transportation services and facilities.
    4.4    Encourage transportation alternatives to motor vehicles by developing infrastructure
           amenable to such alternatives by doing the following:
           a.    Consider right-of-way requirement s for bike usage in the planning of new arterial and
                 collector streets and in street improvement projects;
           b.    Require that new development be designed to promote pedestrian and bicycle access
                 and circulation;
           c.    Provide safe and secure bicycle parking facilities at major activity centers, such as
                 public facilities, employment sites, and shopping and office centers.
    4.5    Encourage land use development to be located and designed to conserve air quality and
           minimize direct and indirect emissions of air contaminants by doing the following:
           a.    Locate air pollution point sources, such as manufacturing and extracting facilities in
                 areas designated for industrial development and separated from residential areas and
                 sensitive receptors (e.g., homes, schools, and hospitals);
           b.    Establish buffer zones (e.g., setbacks, landscaping) within residential and other
                 sensitive receptor site plans to separate those uses from highways, arterials, hazardous
                 material locations and other sources of air pollution or odor;
           c.    Consider the jobs/housing/balance relationship (i.e., the proximity of industrial and
                 commercial uses to major residential areas) when making land use decisions;
           d.    Provide for mixed-use development through land use and zoning to reduce the
                 length and frequency of vehicle trips;
           e.    Accommodate a portion of the projected population and economic growth of the
                 City in areas having the potential for revitalization;
General Plan 2025 Policies Statement                                          Amended November 18, 2015
City of Huron                                                                                         4-4
4.0 Air Quality Element
           f.    Locate public facilities (libraries, parks, schools, community centers, etc.) with
                 consideration of transit and other transportation opportunities;
           g.    Encourage small neighborhood-serving commercial uses within or adjacent to
                 residential neighborhoods when such areas are aesthetically compatible with
                 adjacent areas; do not create conflicts with neighborhood schools; minimize
                 traffic, noise, and lighting impacts; encourage and accommodate pedestrian and
                 bicycle access; and, are occupied by commercial uses that have a
                 neighborhood­scale market area rather than a community-wide market area;
           h.    Encourage a development pattern that is contiguous with existing developed areas
                 of the City.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
    4.6    Implement and enforce State and regional regulations pertaining to greenhouse gas
           emissions and climate change.
           a.    Participate with Fresno County and cities to complete a detailed Greenhouse Gas
                 Inventory including emissions generated from municipal operations, as well as
                 emissions generated by all sectors within the City, using methods approved by, or
                 consistent with guidance from, the ARB.
           b.    In collaboration with the community and stakeholders, participate in preparing a
                 Climate Action Plan that incorporates and / or addresses the following:
                •      Goals for reducing manmade greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the
                       community, municipal and business activities.
                •      Programs to prepare for potential impacts of climate change, and provide a phased
                       implementation plan to achieve these programs.
                •      Greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of 15 percent below the Greenhouse
                       Gas Inventory results by 2020 consistent with California Assembly Bill (AB) 32,
                       the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB32) and the guidance provided in
                       the associated California Air Resources Board Climate Change Scoping Plan.
                •      Outline a strategy to achieve 1990 GHG levels by 2020 and an 80 percent reduction
                       from 1990 GHG levels by 2050 in accordance with California State Executive
                       Order S-3-05.
    4.7    Collaborate, coordinate, and, if appropriate, partner with Fresno County or other local,
           regional and state agencies and organizations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
    4.8    Complete solar installation feasibility studies of City properties and consider
           participating in regional joint purchase program for solar energy generation where
           feasible and cost effective.
General Plan 2025 Policies Statement                                          Amended November 18, 2015
City of Huron                                                                                        4-5

4.0 Air Quality Element
    4.9    Retain City properties that are situated and compatible for use in generation of solar
           or low carbon generating processes to reduce dependence on fossil fuel energy
           production facilities to operate City facilities and utilities.
    4.10 Promote solar programs that provides renewable energy located on City facilities and
           land.
General Plan 2025 Policies Statement                                       Amended November 18, 2015
City of Huron                                                                                    4-6

























































