GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
    CITY OF COACHELLA, CALIFORNIA
                    Adopted April 22, 2015

CIT Y OF COACHELLA GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Adopted April 22, 2015

Ack nowledgements
California Endowment
A special thanks to The California Endowment for its grant
and helping to fund the creation of the General Plan Update
2035.
City Staff
Luis Lopez, Development Ser vices Direc tor
Monica Diaz, Permit Technician
David Garcia, City Manager
Bill Pattison, Finance Direc tor
Maritza Mar tinez, Public Works Direc tor
Jonathan Hoy, City Engineer
Kirk Cloyd, Utilities General Manager
Rosa Montoya, Planning Technician
City Council
Steven Hernandez, Mayor
Betty Sanchez, Councilmember
V. Manuel Pérez, Councilmember
Emmanuel Mar tinez, Councilmember
Magdalena Zepeda, Councilmember
Planning Commission
Eddie Cedeño
Mario Zamora, Chairman
Yvonne Franco, Vice Chairman
Jason Hernandez
Alber t Perez
Atay R amirez


Ack nowledgements
Wellness Advisor y Committee Members
Joey Acuna Jr., Deser t Recreation Distric t
Barb Adair, Deser t Recreation Distric t
Maria Aguirre, Lideres Campesinas
Elizabeth Arce, I nland Congregations United for Change - Esperanza /
Youth Representative
Olga S Betancour t, Coachella Valley Rescue M ission
Noelani Bonlle, Apostolic Assembly of the Faith in Christ Jesus
K aren Borja, I nland Congregations United for Change  
Sandra Carroll, H idden Har vest
Sandra Cardenas, I nland Congregations United for Change
Brett Daniels, Coachella Valley Water Distric t
Britni Edwards, Coachella Valley Housing Coalition
Maria Estrada, Coachella Valley Unified School Distric t
Joe Forgiarini, SunLine Transit Agenc y
M ichael Gialdini, O ffice of Super visor John Benoit
Gloria Gomez, Gallilee Center
Carlos Gonzalez, O ffice of Assemblymember V. Manuel Perez
Blaz Gutierrez, California Rural Legal Assistance
Ar turo J Hernandez, First 5 R iverside County
Esther Hernandez, R iverside County Depar tment of Public Health
Jonathan Hor ton, Coachella Valley Community Trails Alliance
Mark Lardenoit, Walgreens
Claudia Limon, R iverside County Depar tment of Public Health
David Lopez, Coachella Resident
Jacqueline Lopez, O ffice of Assemblymember V. Manuel Perez
Mariel Lopez, Riverside County Depar tment of Public Health and Spanish
language interpretation and translation throughout the process 
Noel Loughrin, Riverside County Four th Distric t Super visor John Benoit
Alex Luna, I nland Congregations United for Change  
Hec tor Marin, I nland Congregations United for Change


Ack nowledgements
Wellness Advisor y Committee Members
Jean Mar tines, Coachella Resident
Laura Massie, California Rural Legal Assistance
Cristina Mendez, California Rural Legal Assistance
Ashley Mendoza, Inland Congregations United for Change - Esperanza /
Youth Representative
Paul Palodichuk , Palm Springs Cultural Center Cer tified Farmer ’s Markets
Silvia Paz, O ffice of Assemblymember Vic tor Manuel Perez
Alber t Perez, Apostolic Assembly
Anita Petre, Sunline Transit
Christy Por ter, H idden Har vest
Abraham R amirez, Coachella Resident
Erik a R amirez, R aices Cultura
Christina R amos, Walgreens
Dr. R aul Ruiz, UC Riverside School of Medicine
Sara T. Resler, Coachella Valley Unified School Distric t
Marco Robles, Cardenas
John Rodriguez, I nland Congregations United for Change
David Saldivar, Augustine Band of Cahuilla I ndians
Patrick Swar thout, I mperial I rrigation Distric t
Elizabeth Toledo, The California Endowment
Denise Torres, Coachella Valley High School-Junior
Lupe Torres, Galilee Center
Jeff VanHoy, JFK Memorial Hospital
Jacqueline Vargas, Planned Parenthood
Israel J. Vasquez, R iverside County Depar tment of Public Social Ser vices
M iguel A. Vasquez, R iverside County Depar tment of Public Health
M ike Walsh, Coachella Valley Housing Coalition
Abel Zarate, Center Coachella 
R amona Zarate, New Life Family Worship
Rolando Zavala, R aices Cultura


Consultant Team
R aimi + Associates
Matt R aimi, AICP, LEED AP Principle
Matthew Burris, AICP, LEED AP, Projec t Manager
Beth Altshuler, Health Specialist
Fehr and Peers
Christopher Gray, AICP
Ear th Consultants International
Tania Gonzalez
Sargent Town Planning
David Sargent
R incon Consultants, Inc
Joe Power
Greg Mar tin

CONTENTS
  Introduc tion                                 		      1
  Setting the Stage                  		               1-1
  Location and Physical Geography            	        1-3
  Role of the General Plan 	                  	       1-4
  Plan Organization		                                 1-6
  Community Health and Wellness Element Public
    Engagement Process                                1-9
  Vision + Guiding Principles                     		    2
  Our Community Vision                                2-1
  Existing Conditions                           		      3
   History of Coachella                      		       3-1
  Demographics and Economic Conditions                3-2
  Land Use and Community Form                			      3-8
  Transportation					                                3-12
  Health and Health Care					                        3-14
  Climate and Air Quality					                       3-14
  Agriculture					                                   3-19
  Water Resources					                               3-20
  Parks					                                         3-23
  Regional Geology					                              3-24
  Seismic Hazards					                               3-25
  Soils					                                         3-28
  Flood Hazards					                                 3-29
  Fire Hazards					                                  3-32
  Hazardous Materials                                3-32
  Land Use + Community Charac ter               	       4
  Introduction                                        4-1
  Organization of This Element	                       4-1
  Our Community’s Goals                               4-2
  General Plan Designations                           4-4


CONTENTS
  Land Use + Community Charac ter Cont.              4
  Rancho Designations	                             4-7
  Neighborhood Designations	                      4-11
  Center Designations	                            4-22
  District Designations	                          4-34
  Specific Plans	                                 4-47
  Public Designations	                            4-48
  Building Types	                                 4-50
  Range of Compatible Land Uses	                  4-52
  Master Planning Process Described	              4-63
  Subarea Descriptions	                           4-66
  Goals and Policies	                             4-83
  Mobility                               		          5
   Introduction                      		   		       5-1
  Our Community’s Goals					                       5-1
  Street Typologies					                           5-2
  Transportation Network					                      5-7
  Goals and Policies					                          5-8
  Community Health + Wellness 	         			          6
   Introduction                      		 		         6-1
   Our Community’s Goals					                      6-1
   Goals and Policies                              6-3
  Sustainability + Natural Environment	        		    7
  Introduction                       		 		         7-1
   Our Community’s Goals					                      7-2
   Goals and Policies                              7-3
   Safety                                    	       8
  Introduction                       	             8-1
  Our Community’s Goals                            8-2
  Goals and Policies	                              8-4


CONTENTS
  Infrastruc ture + Public Ser vices              		     9
  Introduction                                         9-1
  Our Community’s Goals                                9-2
  Goals and Policies	                                  9-3
  Noise                                        	       10
  Introduction                          		  		        10-1
  Our Community’s Goals		                             10-1
  Goals and Policies                                  10-3
  Housing                                       	      11
  Introduction                                        11-1
  Our Community’s Goals                               11-2
  Goals, Policies, & Implementation Actions           11-3
  Quantified Objectives                              11-16
  Implementation Ac tions                              12
  Implementation Program                    		        12-1
  Land Use and Community Character	                   12-2
  Mobility                                            12-4
  Community Health and Wellness			                    12-6
  Sustainability and Natural Environment			           12-9
  Safety				                                         12-10
  Infrastructure and Public Services			              12-11
  Noise                                              12-12
  Appendix                     				                     A
   A. Noise Technical Appendix				                     A-1
   B. Safety Technical Background Appendix				         B-1
   C. Zoning Consistency Appendix				                  C-1


The City is at the threshold of establishing its new identify, an identity that will be realized during the
next growth cycle. With the current economic slowdown, the City must take a breath and consider who
and what it wants to be. The last 10 years have been frenetic and chaotic, with the housing boom
promising great opportunity to communities, much of which was not realized as boom became bust and
the recession set Coachella was not spared the housing bust, experiencing high unemployment, high
foreclosure rates and abandoned subdivisions.
During this time of economic uncertainty, California has made great strides in addressing the looming
threat of global climate change and energy security, passing landmark legislation that commits the state
to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions, become more energy efficient and strive toward more
sustainable land use patterns. While these macro trends will affect Coachella, environmental challenges
are not limited to global trends. Like many agricultural communities, Coachella faces water quality
challenges that could affect the health of its residents. And, like so many other Riverside County
communities, Coachella suffers from poor air quality. It is not surprising, then, that public health has
moved to the forefront of public consciousness. As this awareness has grown, the role of city planning
in affecting public health has also grown as has the demand for healthy, walkable, equitable
communities.
These trends have had an enormous impact on Coachella, and present a tremendous opportunity. In
the near future, governments will be operating in a state of austerity, with limitations on tax revenue
and dependable financial support from the state and federal governments. Coachella’s median
household income is 41% lower than the state average, it’s retail sales are 42% lower than the state
average and nearly a quarter of its residents are living below the poverty level. The City is in great
need of economic development that will provide the community with better paying jobs and more tax
revenue. While local economic development can be a mercurial effort that is strongly influenced by
larger external market forces, efficiency of infrastructure and land development economics are key fiscal
health goals. The City is also picking up the pieces of failed developments, struggling to deal with
incomplete subdivisions with incomplete infrastructure. But Coachella is a community of resilient,
optimistic people and the City is taking advantage of inexpensive land and state and federal programs
to bring new amenities, such as new parks and improved pedestrian infrastructure.
Coachella’s resiliency and optimism stem from its social cohesion. Coachella is a tightly knit community,
and this characteristic is one of the most valuable resources the City has. The social cohesion has
created great community leaders and provides immeasurable benefit. Maintaining this cohesion and
sense of identity, ensuring that it is not lost as the City grows, is critically important as this community
grows into a bustling city that is three times more populous than it is today.
As the last growth cycle waned, there was much interest in development opportunities in Coachella.
While the City’s current population is around 40,000, it is likely to be 155,000 by 2035. Including the
INTRODUCTION                                                                                             | 01-1

land within its sphere of influence area, the City could accommodate over 250,000 people. Further,
the population in southeastern Coachella Valley is expected to increase to between 300,000 and
500,000 people within a generation or two. This significant growth creates both challenges as well as
tremendous opportunities and possibilities.
As the economy begins to recover, the community has had a period of time to stop and consider its
future. Decisions on growth and development made now – decisions about where roads are built, how
neighborhoods are designed, and the type of jobs to pursue – will have a lasting impact on the City.
These decisions can make Coachella unique and different from its neighbors, charting a new course for
the future.
This General Plan is the community’s statement of the community’s values and its vision for its future.
Like the creative, adaptive and resilient people that make up Coachella, this General Plan establishes
Coachella to be a unique City within the Valley. Coachella is embracing its roots as a walkable,
authentic desert town and, as such, establishes a departure from the conventional, automobile-oriented
development patterns have burdened so many California communities. Most of the development in
California after World War II was automobile-oriented, with roadway and neighborhood designs that
emphasized the efficient operation of the automobile. Such design priorities can be seen in the wide
roadways, large block sizes, narrow sidewalks, and large street setbacks of so many communities.
Instead, Coachella has chosen to approach its growth in a people-oriented fashion, calling for vibrant,
equitable neighborhoods, human-scale corridors and protection of its natural resources. Coachella
desires to move forward, emphasizing community designs that prioritize active transportation modes
such as walking and bicycling, encourage social interaction and create traditional neighborhoods. And, it
is this approach that puts Coachella on a path to becoming a healthier, more sustainable community.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                       | 01-2

LOCATION AND PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY
Coachella is a desert community of approximately 40,000 people located at the eastern end of the
Coachella Valley, in Riverside County, California. The City was founded in 1876 and later incorporated
in 1946. Coachella is located southeast of the San Gorgonio Pass, east of the San Jacinto and Santa
Rosa Mountains, north of the Salton Sea 68 feet below sea level. Interstate 10 runs the length of the
Coachella Valley, connecting the Coachella with nearby cities and the Southern California region. Figure
1-1: Regional Location Map shows Coachella’s location within Riverside County.
The current City limits encompass 18,564 acres and the sphere of influence encompasses 14,755
additional acres around the City. Figure 1-2: Jurisdictional Limits Map shows the geographic extent of
these various areas.
Figure 1-1: Regional Location Map
INTRODUCTION                                                                                      | 01-3

ROLE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The Coachella General Plan is the primary legal document to guide long-term growth, development and
conservation in the City and the Sphere of Influence. The General Plan is the articulation for the City’s
vision of growth for the next 80-100 years with specific steps to guide development toward that vision
between now and 2035. As such, the General Plan identifies the goals, policies and actions that will
enable the City to achieve this vision.
Its purpose is:
      •   To identify long-term goals
      •   Provide a basis for decision-making
      •   Provide citizens a forum for input on their community’s direction
      •   Inform citizens, developers, decision-makers, and other cities of the ground rules for
          development within the City.
Much of its content was developed through a conversation with the community that has taken place
over the last five years. The people of Coachella are extremely interested in how the design of the City
affects their health and the health of future residents. As such, this General Plan addresses many
topics that connect public health and the built environment and the General Plan contains one element,
the Health Element, which is dedicated to health. Additionally, it is important to the community and the
Figure 1-1: Jurisdictional Limits Map
INTRODUCTION                                                                                        | 01-4

City that health topics be integrated within the General Plan, thus, many health-related topics can be
found throughout the remainder of the elements. The Land Use Element contains topics on healthy
community design and universal access. The Transportation and Circulation Element contains the goals
and policies that address active transportation and transportation safety. The Sustainability and Natural
Resources Element contains goals and policies on park, trails and the impact of climate change as well
as extreme weather. Finally, the Safety Element contains goals and policies on environmental health.
The General Plan also represents current thinking about Smart Growth planning, such as using land
use designations that rely on “Place Types” instead of conventional designations that are limited to the
use that occupies the land, revitalizing corridors and districts with mixed use development and activity
nodes, an emphasis on connectivity and walkability, and preserving and enhancing existing
neighborhoods. As Coachella continues to evolve, this General Plan aims to carefully guide the
character of its growth and development in order to realize a healthier community.
S TAT U TO RY R E Q U I R E M E N T S / AU T H O R I T Y
Legally, the State of California requires that “each planning agency shall prepare and the legislative
body of each county and city shall adopt a comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical
development of the county or city.” (Gov’t Code § 65300). Within this general requirement, some
aspects of the general plan are tightly prescribed, while others are left to the discretion of individual
cities or counties. In sum, the general plan:
•    Must set forth a “statement of development policies” that includes “objectives, principles, standards,
     and plan proposals,” and must include seven mandatory elements – land use, circulation, housing,
     conservation, open space, noise and safety – as well as any optional elements the City chooses.
     (Gov’t Code § 65302).
•    Must be an “internally consistent and compatible statements of policies.” (Gov’t Code § 65300.5).
•    “. . . may include any other subjects which, in the judgment of the legislative body, relate to the
     physical development of the county or city.” (Gov’t Code § 65303).
•    Should “accommodate local conditions and circumstances” (Gov’t Code § 65300.7)
•    “. . .may be adopted in any format deemed appropriate or convenient by the legislative body,
     including the combining of elements,” provided it meets other minimum requirements (Gov’t Code §
     65301).
This General Plan meets the above legal requirements and also introduces some discretionary elements
the City has deemed appropriate (i.e. the Infrastructure and Public Services, Health and Wellness
Element, as well as discretionary sections of elements such as the Green Building and Climate Change
sections of the Sustainability and Natural Environment Element).
A P P LI C A B I LI T Y
This General Plan applies to all property within the existing City limits and the adopted Coachella
Sphere of Influence (Figure 0-2) This plan will be administered by the Coachella Community
Development Department, the Coachella Planning Commission and the Coachella City Council according
to the procedures and requirements set forth in the Municipal Code.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                           | 01-5

M AI N T E N A N C E A N D U P DAT E O F P L A N
The General Plan will be implemented over an extended period of time (20+ years, with a time horizon
of 2035). During this time, the long-range planning efforts for Coachella will continue using the goals
and objectives as a guide. However, the General Plan is a living document, and presents the outcomes
desired by the community based on their current goals and local conditions. As the City grows and
changes, it may become necessary to amend specific policies and implementation actions as economic
and demographic conditions change while new ideas about growth and conservation are formed. In fact,
state law encourages annual reviews of implementation actions and recommends that the entire General
Plan be thoroughly reviewed every five years to ensure it is still consistent with the community’s goals.
Any part of a general plan may be amended to accommodate changing conditions. Property owners, the
Planning Commission, the City Council, or City staff may propose amendments. Proposed changes must
be reviewed by the Planning Commission and the City Council at public hearings and the potential of
environmental difficulties must be evaluated in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act.
PLAN ORGANIZATION
The General Plan is organized into the following chapters:
INTRODUCTION
The Introduction provides a summary of the impetus for the update of the General Plan, including a
brief synopsis of the trends facing the City. This section of the General Plan also describes the role of
the General Plan in Coachella, how it is intended to be used and administered and an overview of the
Plan.
VI S I O N A N D G U I DI N G P R I N C I P L E S
The Vision establishes the ideal city Coachella is striving to become. The Vision is long term in nature
and is intended to be reached over the course of one or two generations of thoughtful growth and
development. This chapter of the General Plan also includes Guiding Principles that help explain the
nature of new development that is sought within Coachella. It is expected that the Vision will help guide
decisions about community growth as new development and updates of the City’s various plans and
ordinances are considered.
E X I S T I N G CO N DI T I O N S
The Existing Conditions section provides an overview of the physical, social and economic conditions at
the time the General Plan was developed. Descriptions of the City’s various resources and conditions
are summarized for the relevance to the topics addressed in the various elements of the General Plan
and includes the City’s history, natural environment, regional geology and natural hazards, agriculture,
water resources, health conditions, circulation network and demographics.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                         | 01-6

TO P I C A L E LE M E N T S
This General Plan is comprised of the state-mandated elements, an additional element addressing
community health, and the previously prepared and adopted Housing Element. These elements serve as
chapters that address related topics and issues. The General Plan contains the following elements:
    •    LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER
    This element presents the approach to land use and urban design. Within this element are the
    General Plan land use designations, the designation map along with goals and policies that indicate
    the community’s preferences and priorities for the character and performance of new development.
    •    MOBILITY
    This element presents the approach to transportation, addressing access and mobility within
    Coachella. Included in this element are descriptions of street types, the circulation network map as
    well as goals and policies addressing existing and future transportation facilities in Coachella.
    •    COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS
    This element presents the community’s priorities for realizing a healthy community. It includes goals
    and policies that address existing community health concerns as well approaches to managing new
    development to prevent future health issues.
    •    SUSTAINABILITY +       THE  NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
    This element presents the community’s approach for dealing with open space, conservation of
    natural resources, pollution prevention, climate change and green design.
    •    SAFETY
    This element contains the community’s approach in reducing the potential risk of death, injuries and
    property damage resulting from natural disasters and hazards such as earthquakes, floods, fire and
    extreme weather. The element contains goals and policies that will help guide the City’s decisions
    related to new development and the risks to the health, safety, and welfare of local hazards.
    •    INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES
    This element presents the community’s intent for the development of its water, wastewater,
    stormwater, and energy networks. The element also includes goals and policies that address the
    provision of public services such as police, fire and education.
    •    NOISE
    This element addresses the approach for minimizing the community’s exposure to harmful noise
    levels. The element analyzes and quantifies future noise levels. It includes a map summarizing the
    results, and presents goals and policies for managing exposure to excessive noise.
    •    HOUSING
    The City’s Housing Element was prepared before the General Plan update and is undergoing a
    separate update process. The current Housing Element will remain a component of the City’s
    General Plan until the Housing Element update process is complete, at which the updated Housing
    Element will be adopted by the City and become a part of this General Plan.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                          | 01-7

I M P L E M E N TAT I O N
The General Plan provides a vision for the future of Coachella and guidance about how to attain that
future. City staff, the city council, the planning commission, and other boards and commissions, as part
of their duties to the City, will carry out the goals and policies of the plan. Plan implementation will be
achieved through the adoption, implementation and revision of the municipal code, annual budget,
capital improvements program, and through on-going decisions about development proposals. Indeed,
all City programs, policies and actions must and will be made consistent with this General Plan to meet
state requirements.
To assist with the effort of implementing this General Plan, the final chapter, Implementation, provides a
list of actions that the City will undertake to carry out the vision. Each action includes a description, a
level of priority, a timeframe for accomplishing the tasks the responsible parties for each action, and a
list of relevant goals implemented by the action.
Community members, neighborhood groups and local organizations are encouraged to get involved in
the on-going planning efforts of the City and to participate in the implementation of the General Plan.
By active, thoughtful involvement, City residents can be part of the process of shaping and growing
Coachella to make it an even more active, prosperous and welcoming city than it is today.
ELEMENT STRUC TURE
Each new element of the General Plan (not including the existing Housing Element) is organized with
the following sections:
•    Introduction. Each element has a summary introducing the element’s purpose and intent, describing
     the community’s desired future outcomes on the topics covered by that element.
•    Our Community’s Goals. Following each element vision is a summary of the topics covered,
     providing quick reference and easy understanding of the community’s plan for achieving its vision
     for the future.
•    Goals and Policies. Each element contains a series of goals and policies responding to the key
     opportunities and issues associated with achieving the community’s vision, and are intended to
     provide clear direction in how the City will implement the overall vision of this plan.
     The policies in this General Plan use language that reflects the following principles:
•    Mandatory – Certain policies are critical and must be implemented. Thus, compliance with the
     policy or action is mandatory. Language used to describe this intent includes require, prohibit,
     conduct, maintain and implement.
•    Advisory – Many policies are strongly encouraged by the City but total implementation may not be
     possible for a variety of reasons, thus compliance is not mandatory. Language used to describe this
     intent includes encourage, consider, explore, allow, discourage and promote.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                            | 01-8

Health is a critical value for the Coachella community. Coachella residents define health very broadly to
include physical, mental, emotional, social, and spiritual health. Accordingly, residents expressed a
desire for the City’s General Plan update to integrate and highlight community health as a key value
central to the City.
Through a generous grant from the California Endowment and the dedicated efforts of the local
community based organizations, the Riverside County Public Health Department, local businesses,
community members, and City Staff, the community dedicated their time to be part of a rich
participatory planning process to help guide the creation of the Community Health and Wellness
Element (Health Element). The process unified numerous groups around the common goal of improving
health, equity and quality of life in Coachella. This process combined qualitative and quantitative
research to understand Coachella’s health issues and opportunities and to set policy priorities.
To understand numerous different aspects of the community’s health, the general plan update team
conducted numerous stakeholder interviews, produced an existing health conditions report, used a
community outreach toolkit to conduct focus groups with special population groups, and hosted public
community workshops.
Additionally, this process would not have been possible without the Wellness Advisory Committee
(WAC). The WAC members met seven times between July 2011 and March 2013 to provide feedback
to the City on policy and to support community outreach efforts. With the help of the WAC, the City
hosted three energetic, well attended, and productive Fiestas de la Salud (or Community Health and
Wellness Element public workshops).
Figure 1-3: Health Element Public Engagement Summary
While the Health Element was the centerpiece of this process, the input collected informed the direction
of some of the more traditional general plan topics. The Health Element process input informed the
entire element as well as the development of goals and policies throughout other elements.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                          | 01-9

         Throughout the general plan, the icon to the left appears next to goals and policies that came
         directly from the Health Element community process. Numerous other goals, policies and
         actions in this plan did not come from the Health Element process, but will likely have indirect
health benefits to the community over time. While the supportive goals and policies are potentially
beneficial to the overall health and wellness of the community, this icon is used strictly for identifying
results of the Health Element process.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                            | 01-10
Coachella’s vision is to transform the City from a small town to a medium-sized, full-service city – a
city where people can live, work, and play – and the driving force behind the Valley’s economy.
To become a diverse, vibrant, full-service city, Coachella will develop a series of unique neighborhoods,
districts and corridors while offering a range of amenities and destinations. Each of these areas will
have a unique look and feel and contribute in a distinct way to the City’s overall vision. In terms of
employment, the City will move beyond reliance on its two main industries – agriculture and hospitality
services – and transform itself to a mature mix of economic activity and job opportunities. These jobs
will be organized in a range of districts throughout the City providing economic opportunities for all
segments of the population. These diversified districts will include an office/research & development
district located south of the Downtown, a light-manufacturing district focusing on small-scale production
and other local support businesses and a more traditional industrial district with larger-scale
manufacturing and logistics uses.
The City will offer a range of housing for all ages and incomes organized into mixed income, walkable
and distinct neighborhoods. These neighborhoods will be supported by a variety of retail, shopping and
entertainment destinations, including neighborhood shopping areas and destination-style entertainment
venues such as a soccer stadium, a gaming “strip” and resort hotels. There will also be a wide range
of civic amenities including a diverse downtown, a hospital, and high-quality schools, and the City will
form strong partnerships with the College of the Desert. The residential, commercial and civic sectors
will be complemented by a wide range of passive and active open spaces throughout the City providing
new recreational opportunities to residents. All will be connected by a true multi-modal transportation
system that balances transit, walking, biking and auto use. Transportation and new development will
evolve with a recognition of environmental constraints and with an awareness of global and local
environmental concerns.
Figure 2-1: Vision Map, Figure 2-2: Open Space Network Vision, and Figure 2-3: Road Network
Vision, provide an illustration of the City’s vision on the following pages.
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                            | 02-1

                            Page intentionally left blank
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                               | 02-2
                            Figure 2-1: Vision Map
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                        | 02-3
                            Page intentionally left blank
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                               | 02-4
                            Figure 2-2: Open Space Network Vision
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                       | 02-5
                            Page intentionally left blank
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                               | 02-6
                            Figure 2-3: Road Network Vision
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                 | 02-7
                            Page intentionally left blank
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                               | 02-8
The Guiding Vision comprises of 20 Guiding Principles that will be key to the success of achieving the
Vision as the City grows. These components are described below, providing clear and concise
explanation of the Vision and how it will be realized.
In the future, Coachella will be…
Coachella will be distinct from the other cities in the
Coachella Valley, an authentic California desert town,
exhibiting strong traditional architectural elements of the
region’s history. Additionally, the City will be comprised
of walkable neighborhoods in high demand by new
arrivals to the Valley and different from the conventional
subdivisions that populate the Valley. With this distinct
character and its geographic location, the City becomes
the eastern gateway to the Coachella Valley.
Coachella will be a complete City at the conclusion of             Figure 2-4: Walkable neighborhoods that preserve
each economic cycle. The City will grow incrementally              City's history also support active lifestyles for
over time in a way that maximizes investments, enhances
                                                                   existing and new residents.
connectivity and efficient land use, and saves costs for
the City. This will allow the City to grow in a scalable manner that provides complete neighborhoods,
complete streets and a complete City over the course of each economic cycle. With major development
opportunities within the heart of the City and on its eastern edge, the next phase of development will
concentrate development in the areas around Avenue 50 and 52. New development will generally be
contiguous (or proximate) to existing development and leapfrog development will be avoided.
Coachella will have a range of housing and will have homes for people across generations, cultures
and incomes. This will help reinforce the community’s economy
and increase social equity by providing opportunities for people
and families to live and stay in Coachella, going from one
housing type to another as their needs and means change over
time.
Coachella will have thriving, neighborhood-scale retail. As a
full-service city, Coachella will offer diversity of retail services.
There will be a series of neighborhood shopping nodes, or
                                                                          Figure 2-5: Walkable neighborhood retail
“village centers” located throughout the city. These village
centers are smaller, compact and walkable retail nodes and                also helps support the local economic base.
include markets, restaurants, cafes and professional services and will serve to provide the community
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                                        | 02-9

members with their everyday needs. The village centers will be attractive, connected via sidewalks and
bike trails to neighborhoods and, in some locations, include high-density housing.
Coachella’s Downtown will be the heart of the
City. The Downtown plays an important role,
giving the City a sense of place and a location for
community and civic gathering, and its continuing
viability will play an important role in Coachella’s
future success. A vision for the Downtown was
developed through the Pueblo Viejo Revitalization
Plan, and implementing this plan is a priority for
the City. In general, the Downtown should focus
on civic, arts and residential uses, including the
new city hall, an expanded library, a senior
center, medium- and high-density housing, art
                                                       Figure 2-6: A downtown with complete sidewalks promotes
galleries and retail uses. New restaurants should
also be located in the Downtown area to serve          activity and a rich city center.
both daytime employees (in the office/R&D
district to the east) and also create a city-wide and regional dining destination.
Coachella envisions a future which includes
thriving physical, emotional and spiritual health for
the entire community. Neighborhoods will provide
opportunities for residents to improve their
physical and mental health while meeting daily
needs – walking to the store, meeting friends,
bicycling to school, taking transit to work and
having access to nutritious and affordable foods
that can be purchased or grown in the                 Figure 2-7: Incorporating fun places for people of all ages
neighborhood. The City will find innovative
solutions to ensure its streets, parks and public     to play will promote activity and a variety of recreation
spaces are safe, accessible and inviting for all      opportunities.
users.
The future of the City will include a significant amount of parks, open space and other public spaces.
These should be dispersed throughout the City and connected via networks of trails and “green streets.”
Specific ideas for this include new, major recreational facilities for soccer, football and baseball, a
network of small- and medium-scale neighborhood parks, and multi-use recreational trails along the
Whitewater River and the Coachella Canal with southwest-northeast fingers that run toward the hillsides
northeast of the City. The Downtown, employment districts and village centers will include plazas and
town squares that can serve as meeting places for residents and visitors. Additionally, where safe and
feasible, the City will capitalize on environmental constraints such as faults, channels and liquefaction
and landslide zones to achieve these open space and park objectives.
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                                  | 02-10

Coachella will be a walkable community where neighborhoods
will have many amenities within easy walking distance of
homes. The pedestrian environment is safe and inviting and
residents, including the young and the old, have equal
pedestrian access to everyday service and destinations.
Coachella will have a balanced, multi-modal transportation
system and neighborhoods that are ready for transit. Streets
will be planned and designed to accommodate multiple modes
and prioritize community design that fosters accessibility to
transit. These streets will accommodate future Bus Rapid
Transit, have safe bicycling facilities and be pleasant to walk
along. Walking and cycling amenities will be organized in a
highly connected network. Streets and neighborhoods will be              Figure 2-8: Outdoor cafes invite pedestrian
designed in tandem to reinforce the balanced operations of               activity and move people away from drive-
multiple modes of transportation.                                        thrus.
Coachella will have great opportunities for lifelong learning. The community will have access to
education resources and facilities within the City. In turn, better access to education and public services
will increase social cohesion and support local economic development as great educational opportunities
and a highly trained workforce will increase the City’s economic opportunities. Siting and constructing a
campus of the College of the Desert within Coachella will help achieve this vision by expanding the
local opportunities for training and lifelong learning. Additionally, a new college or university near
Downtown would expand the City’s potential for research and development-based industries and help
reinforce the revitalization of the Downtown.
Figure 2-9: Complete streets provide the built environment that will support economic, civic, and retail activity for
many generations.
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                                         | 02-11

Coachella will be a highly accessible community. The future network will allow dispersed road access
with many choices across the City, instead of concentrating traffic on a few major arterials. To achieve
this, east-west and north-south roadways should be spaced approximately every quarter or eighth of a
mile. Additionally, all new development projects – residential and non-residential – will be planned and
constructed with small block sizes and frequent transportation connections to support access to, and
through, the developments. Given that the City will grow from a small town into a medium-sized City,
plans should be made for a comprehensive network of transit, bike paths and other non-driving options,
ensuring access and mobility for all age and income levels, more active lifestyles and will address the
growing concern over global climate change.
The City has a clear vision of a highly desirable community with beautiful, livable neighborhoods. To
achieve this vision and an improved standard of living, every future development project must meet the
City’s high standards for design quality and building construction.
Entertainment uses will play an important part in
Coachella and will be comprised of casinos,
sports complexes, resorts, destination retail
districts, arts, cultural venues and perhaps even
a theme park. These regional entertainment
uses will help establish Coachella as a
destination in both the Coachella Valley and
Southern California.
                                                      Figure 2-10: Regional attractions will offer residents and
The City has a rich history and Coachella’s           visitors entertainment opportunities and support the economy
strong cultural traditions will be reinforced         within the City.
through the community’s development, not only
in the form of new development but also through the types of uses that come to Coachella. Art will be
integrated into public places, enriching community centers and streetscapes and supporting local artists.
The emphasis on culture will attract small galleries, a performing arts theater and a local cultural history
museum.
Coachella will have a diverse, resilient economy. Developing a strong economy is imperative to the
future success of the City. The economic and employment vision calls for transforming the City from a
two-industry town (agriculture and hospitality) to a city with great diversity of economic activity and
uses. These uses will include small manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, large-scale industrial,
office and professional, resort- and entertainment-related services, research and development, health
care and retail. In addition to providing jobs for a large portion of the community, the diverse economy
will also be resilient, better able to withstand the ebb and flow of regional and global economic cycles.
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                                   | 02-12

Coachella will have a healthy, sustainable agricultural
economy. Agriculture has always been a primary
component of the City, providing jobs, major economic
activity and physical definition to the community. Agriculture
has the potential to continue to play an important role in
the City’s economy but can only do so if this important
economic resource is managed appropriately. By focusing
the next wave of growth between Avenues 50 and 52, the
City’s agricultural base can remain largely intact, supporting
the greater agricultural economy in the valley.
                                                                 Figure 2-11: Preserving agriculture as a large
                                                                 part of the City's economy will promote local
The City will support and implement measures to raise            food and job opportunities.
property values by capitalizing on the City’s natural resources and improving average household
income. Additionally, a key element of this principle will be implementing efficient infrastructure and
community building patterns by making sound development decisions and phasing in new development
to not unduly burden the City with infrastructure maintenance costs.
Coachella has stunning views of the hillsides, the verdant agricultural fields along with the amenities of
the Coachella Canal and the Whitewater River. The City also straddles the San Andreas Fault, which,
in turn, helps define the extreme topographical differences within Coachella. The natural amenities
provide great value to the City, through economic activity and aesthetics. The City will respect and
preserve these amenities, which create value in its neighborhoods, preserve its economy, provide
regional access along recreational trails and conserve for future generations.
Coachella is an old town with a rich history. The
preservation of its historic and cultural resources is essential
to maintaining the sense of traditional continuity and
community pride as the City grows. When new development
comes into the City, community heritage is taken into
consideration and will be reflected in the design of the
buildings, neighborhoods, parks and streets.
Coachella has a rich history of an active populace,
producing advocates and strong community leaders. The             Figure 2-12: Public art embraces cultural
notion of democracy and participation in public process is a      history and can strengthen the social
strong tradition in Coachella playing a strong role in the        community fabric.
development of the General Plan. The City and its
community leaders will continue to foster this process of open    dialogue, public process and democracy,
maintaining the tradition of participation in civic affairs.
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                                | 02-13

Like any great city, Coachella has developed around the basic unit of the neighborhood. A true
neighborhood is not a subdivision but a unique and identifiable area designed around a center with a
pedestrian-friendly mix of uses and a range of housing for people in all stages of life. In truth, the
walkable neighborhood is the fundamental building block of the best towns. Neighborhoods are often
defined as the area within a quarter mile walking distance from the center to the edge, which most
residents can walk to meet their daily needs. This represents a marked shift from approaching
development through individual subdivisions. The City will not follow the path of so many other
California communities and become one of incomplete subdivisions. With this Plan, each new
subdivision will be considered within the context of the larger unique, walkable neighborhood that it is
helping to build.
Figure 2-13: Comprehensive planning allows for neighborhoods and communities that will be livable and healthy for
all residents, and promote overall wellbeing for City residents.
VISION + GUIDING PRINCIPLES                                                                                 | 02-14
Coachella is a desert community of
approximately 40,000 people located at the
eastern end of the Coachella Valley, in
Riverside County, California. The City was
founded in 1876 and later incorporated in
1946. Before the settlement of the Coachella
Valley by Europeans, the Valley was home to
the Agua Caliente band of Cahuilla Indians.
The Cahuilla Indians are the first known
human inhabitants of the Coachella Valley.
The Cahuilla were hunters and gatherers,
generally divided into three groups based on
their geographic setting: the Pass Cahuilla of
the Beaumont/Banning area; the Mountain
Cahuilla of the San Jacinto and Santa Rosa
Mountains; and the Desert Cahuilla from the
Coachella Valley, as far south as the Salton
Sea. Varying clan groups of the Desert
Cahuilla had many villages throughout the
Coachella Valley. Planted crops, as well as
hunting and gathering, was identified as the
primary way of life for the Cahuilla. Before
European contact, population for the
Cahuillas ranged from 3,600 to as high as
10,000. Due to European diseases, such as
smallpox, the Cahuilla population was
decimated during the 19th century. The first
official United States land survey in Southern
California in the mid-1850’s noted eight
Indian villages or Indian rancherias within, or
just outside, the present boundaries of
Coachella, presumably occupied by the
Desert Cahuilla people.                          Figure 3-1: Coachella circa 1949.
A number of roads and trails were observed crisscrossing the planning area, connecting the villages
and rancherias to one another. Two of these roads and trails, both traversing through the planning area
in a northwest-southeast direction, appear to have been the main thoroughfare for traffic in the vicinity.
One road passed through the planning area in the southwestern corner while the other was recorded
along the Whitewater River/Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel bed, running directly through the
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                 | 03-1

center of the planning area. These two main roads were considered to be two branches of the ancient
Cocomaricopa Trail.
With the discovery of gold in California in 1848, the first wave of non-Native American immigrants
began arriving in California. In 1862, this ancient Cocomaricopa Trail was “rediscovered” by William
David Bradshaw, and soon became known as Bradshaw Trail as he transformed the route into
Riverside County’s first road. A stagecoach was put into service adjacent to this trail as gold miners
and settlers began arriving in the Valley via the Trail.
In 1866, development of the Southern Pacific Coachella Valley railroad brought waves settlers to the
Coachella Valley, and a series of new communities sprang up along the tracks. Once the Southern
Pacific Railroad route connecting the desert and Los Angeles was completed in 1877, the Valley’s
population began to expand more rapidly. By the early 20th century, Euroamerican settlements had
replaced the Indian villages and rancherias to become the prevailing cultural landscape in the area.
In the 1920s and 1930s, U.S. Highways 99 and 60-70 were completed, further facilitating travel,
migration and economic growth in the Valley’s primary economic sectors for tourism and agriculture.
Palm Springs and neighboring cities became a major destination for Hollywood celebrities and other
vacationers during the years before World War II. The Valley’s population continued to grow during the
war as troops from nearby training centers came to Palm Springs and other cities looking for relaxation
and entertainment.
The highways, combined with major irrigation projects that brought water from the Colorado River, have
supported a prosperous agricultural sector. By the 1940s, the planning area showed significant growth
in population and agriculture. The cities of Coachella and Indio, and the unincorporated areas of Mecca
and Thermal became known for niche crops such as dates, grapes, lemons, oranges, avocados, figs,
persimmons and even mangos. The fast-growing date palm industry in the Coachella Valley had
become the main agricultural staple in the region. Since the late 1940s, the Coachella Canal has
served as the main water supply for residents of the Coachella Valley.
The completion of the Coachella Canal had a dramatic impact on the growth of the Coachella Valley,
taking place in the western portion of the City south of the Coachella Canal, while the eastern portion,
north of the canal, essentially remained untouched by civilization.
While Coachella has been a small town since its inception, its population has grown very quickly.
Between 2005 and 2010, the City’s population increased by nearly one-third, jumping from 30,879 to
40,704 in only five years. And, the City’s population is expected to continue to grow at a high rate for
the foreseeable future. The Southern California Association of Governments 2012 Regional
Transportation Plan estimates that Coachella could grow to 70,200 by 2020 and 128,700 by 2035.
This is a massive amount of growth that the City must be prepared to accommodate.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                 | 03-2

In 2010, 40,704 people lived in the City of Coachella’s 8,998 occupied housing units. On average,
4.51 persons were living within each occupied housing unit. As compared to the statewide (2.96) and
countywide averages (3.2), Coachella had more persons living within each occupied unit. Further, the
average number living in mobile homes was 5.8 persons in 2007.1
Table 3-1: Housing Occupancy2
                                                    % OF                              PERSONS PER
  HOUSING                       OCCUPIED            OCCUPIED                          OCCUPIED
  OCCUPANCY                     UNITS               UNITS             POPULATION      UNIT
  OWNER-OCCUPIED                5,586               62.1              25,519          4.57
  RENTER-OCCUPIED               3,412               37.9              15,127          4.43
In Coachella, 62.1% of the housing units were owner-occupied and 37.9% were renter-occupied in
2010, and 21.7% of homes are in multi-family structures. As compared to California as a whole, this
was a higher proportion of owner-occupied units (56%) and lower proportion of renters (44%).
Riverside County had 67% owner-occupied units and 33% renter-occupied units.
In Coachella, 62.1% of the housing units were owner-occupied and 37.9% were renter-occupied in
2010, and 21.7% of homes are in multi-family structures. As compared to California as a whole, this
was a higher proportion of owner-occupied units (56%) and lower proportion of renters (44%).
Riverside County had 67% owner-occupied units and 33% renter-occupied units.
The jobs-housing ratio is a basic tool to measure whether the number of jobs and housing units within
a community are roughly equivalent. In Coachella, the jobs-housing ratio was 0.65 (5,831 jobs ÷
8,998 housing units) in 2010. The recommended standard for jobs-housing unit ratios is based on the
assumption the average number of workers per household is approximately 1.5. As such, the Coachella
jobs-housing ratio is significantly lower than the recommended standard, indicating the area is job-poor,
requiring many of workers to travel outside the jurisdiction to find employment.
In 2010, there were 5,831 jobs in Coachella, 11% below the 2007 total of 6,593. The total included
salary and wage jobs held by business owners and self-employed individuals. For particular sectors,
1
  A 2007 Poder Popular report.
2
  U.S. Census Bureau (2011). 2010 Census Summary File 1— California).
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                | 03-3

total manufacturing jobs numbered 208, construction accounted for 245, retail trade jobs numbered 867
and professional and management accounted for 555 jobs.3
                   Information, 0.2%                                                         Manufacturing,
                                                             Construction, 4.2%
                                                                                                   3.5%
                                                                                                         Wholesale, 6.8%
                               Agriculture, 29.7%
                                                                                                                   Retail, 14.7%
           Public
      Administration ,
           0.7% Other
                                                                                                              Transportation-
                 Services,
                                                                                                              Warehousing-
                                        Education-Health,
                    1.7%
                                                                                                              Utilities, 12.6%
                                              11.3%
            Leisure Hospitality,
                      4.1%
                                      Professional-                                        Finance-Insurance-
                                  Management, 9.4%                                          Real Estate, 1.1%
Figure 3-2: Jobs by Sector in 20104
In March 2012, the unemployment rate in Coachella was higher than neighboring communities and
county and statewide averages. The California Employment Development Department reported the
unemployment rate in Coachella was 20%, higher than the California unemployment rate (11%) and the
Riverside County rate (12.7%). Table 3-2 shows the unemployment for cities in the Coachella Valley,
Riverside County and statewide in March 2012. Between 2006 (before the recession) and 2012, the
3
  Southern California Association of Governments, (2011). Profile of the City of Coachella. Available at
http://www.scag.ca.gov/resources/pdfs/2011LP/Riverside/Coachella.pdf.
4
  Southern California Association of Governments, (2011). Profile of the City of Coachella. Available at
http://www.scag.ca.gov/resources/pdfs/2011LP/Riverside/Coachella.pdf.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                                           | 03-4
unemployment rate in Coachella rose 169%, increasing from 8% to 20%. Similarly in Riverside County
over the same period, the unemployment rate increased 169%, from 5% to 12.7%.5
Table 3-2: Unemployment Rates in March 20126
  REGION                                     UNEMPLOYMENT RATE MARCH 2012
  COACHELLA                                                          20.0%
  INDIO                                                              13.8%
  PALM DESERT                                                          7.6%
  RIVERSIDE COUNTY                                                   12.7%
  CALIFORNIA                                                         11.0%
According to the American Community Estimates (2008-2010), approximately 24% of the households
in the City had income below the Federal poverty level during the last 12 months. This was significantly
higher than the countywide (13%) and statewide (14%) averages. Further, 28% of the households
earned incomes less than $25,000 per year and 51% of households earned less than $50,000 per
year.
Senate Bill 244 (SB 244) requires procedural steps to be taken that ensure the identification,
consideration, and protection of disadvantaged communities to be included in the general plans.
Disadvantaged community settlements occur where a majority of residents have less income and higher
density living have also been found to have insufficient infrastructure. According to SB 244 sufficient
infrastructure in community developments includes sidewalks, safe drinking water, and adequate waste
processing. Lack of these basic necessities negatively impact residents’ health, safety, and quality of life
as well as generate inequities in the larger economic market. Additionally, continuous lack of
infrastructure investments increases the equality gap and further impairs the quality of life of residents
living in disadvantaged communities. These disadvantages not only create hardship for residents, but
can weaken the social and economic health of the City, Sphere of Influence, and region where
disadvantaged communities are present.
In response to adjust reduce inequalities and protect disadvantaged communities form such hardship,
SB 244 has set in place criteria to identify the location of disadvantaged communities, and assess gaps
in infrastructure. Through local governments and local agency formation commissions (LAFCos),
establishment criteria are used to site communities, and work with counties and cities to comply with
SB244.
5
   Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2012). Local Area Unemployment Statistics. Available at http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/dsrv.
6
   California Employment Development Department (2012). Labor Market Information. Available at
http://www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov/.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                                       | 03-5

City and counties are also required to follow procedures to identify island, fringe, or disadvantaged
communities, assess infrastructure needs of each community, and outline potential funding mechanisms
to address infrastructure improvements in these communities. These requirements are to be included in
the land use element of a general plan update, in conjunction with adoption of the city’s housing
element.
According to SB 244 a disadvantaged community meets the following criteria:
    1) Housing contains 10 or more dwelling units in close proximity to one another;
    2) Community is either within a city SOI, is an island within a city boundary, or is geographically
         isolated and has existed for more than 50 years; and
    3) The median household income is 80 percent or less than the statewide median household
         income.
Within the City of Coachella and its Sphere of Influence, there are five communities that are considered
to be disadvantaged communities under SB 244: Shady Lane, Cocopah, Thermal, Fillmore, and Vista
Santa Rosa. Following are brief descriptions of these communities. Figure 3-3, shows there location
within the Planning Area. Table 3-3 shows the infrastructure needs in each of the five disadvantaged
communities in Coachella
         1.   Shady Lane. This community has water and sewer available nearby on 54th street. Water
              wells in this area have a high mineral content, and there is no stormwater management
              infrastructure in the Shady Lane community. Additionally, this neighborhood is so dense that
              septic is no longer viable and it needs to be connected to the wastewater treatment system.
         2.   Cocopah. The nearest water and sewer facilities are between one and two miles away from
              the community. The water quality is adequate and is supplied through private wells. Septic
              capacity and quality is considered adequate, as the community is low in density, and low in
              overall wastewater demand. In addition, there are current plans for water and sewer
              infrastructure improvements upon development of the La Entrada Specific Plan.
         3. Thermal. Thermal does not have storm drain facilities. This area is included in the
              Coachella Valley Water District and receives water and wastewater sewer through the
              district.
         4.   Fillmore Street. This community has adequate well and septic facilities due to low density
              and low treatment demand. Like the rest of the City, there are no stormwater facilities in
              the area.
         5.   Vista Santa Rosa. Water wells in this community are depleted. There is also no sewer or
              storm drain infrastructure. However, septic treatment is adequate.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                  | 03-6

Figure 3-3: Location of the five disadvantaged communities in Coachella
Table 3-3: Disadvantaged Communities Infrastructure Needs Analysis
 NEIGHBORHOODS                    WATER         SEWER       STORMWATER            FIRE
 SHADY LANE                          Y            Y               Y               N
 COCOPAH                            N            N                Y               N
 THERMAL                            N            N                Y               N
 FILLMORE                           N            N                Y               N
 VISTA SANTA ROSA                    Y           N                N               N
Financial investments in infrastructure improvements will supply disadvantaged communities with a better
environment to improve the health and safety of each community. There are several strategies to fund
the necessary improvements that would be applicable to these communities. These include:
Development impact fees. The City is able impose development impact fees for projects that could
affect disadvantaged communities or for projects that would also require infrastructure to be extended
near or past a disadvantaged community. The City has done so in previous project developments, and
is able incorporate such fees into the City’s development review and permitting process. These
additional fees would be allocated to support the planning, building and implementation of infrastructure
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                 | 03-7

to meet necessary service levels in disadvantaged communities. The City can use these funds now, as
well as continue to collect funding to support maintenance, or future additions to meet adequate levels
of service.
Master plan implementation. It is common practice for cities to actively prepare and adopt infrastructure
and utilities master plans, or similar plan types. These plans have the potential to allocate City funds
towards building and maintaining necessary infrastructure improvements in identified disadvantaged
communities. Potential plans, including a water master plan, a wastewater master plan, and a
stormwater management plan, provide frameworks for infrastructure improvements throughout the City,
including in disadvantaged communities. Within each plan, proposed funding opportunities and allocation
strategies would be included to support infrastructure improvements. Once plans are adopted by the
City, the approval of funding allocation and plan implementation can begin working towards closing the
infrastructure service gaps in disadvantaged communities. This General Plan includes policies for the
creation, maintenance, and implementation of such master plans needed to address the infrastructure
needs of these five disadvantaged communities.
General Fund. The City can allocate infrastructure investments as a part of annual budget expenditures
and allocate a certain amount or percentage of spending towards improvements in disadvantaged
communities and typically occurs through the City’s Capital Improvements Program. City decision
makers and City officials can allocate funding, or community members could also recommend and
propose part of the City’s general fund go towards updating infrastructure to an adequate level of
service. This may ultimately benefit the economic viability of the City, and have a secondary benefit of
adding revenue back into the general fund.
Loans, grants, and program funds. There is potential for periodic grant opportunities and government
loans, to fund the necessary infrastructure improvements. Potential funding opportunities could also
come from Proposition 84 and the Water Authority and Sanitary District Enterprise Funds. Application of
such funding opportunities can be done with partnerships between the City and various utilities
companies, the Coachella Valley Water District, or any other interested party.
Development funded improvements. Some disadvantaged communities are in unincorporated areas,
and in areas where development is happening at a slower pace. As development continues, the City
may consider annexing this land, and could require that development in identified disadvantaged
communities fund infrastructure improvements necessary to meet sufficient levels of service. During the
permitting and development projects must have necessary infrastructure plans for meet adequate levels
of service for the project as well as additional investments into infrastructure that will support the
project’s surrounding community.
At the time this plan was prepared, 18,530 acres of the City was developed. The City’s Planning Area
of 45,300 acres is only partially developed, with nearly 27,000 acres undeveloped. Of that
undeveloped land, approximately 10 percent of it has been entitled for future development. Most of the
City’s houses are modest, varying greatly in vintage. However, many of the City’s neighborhoods suffer
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                    | 03-8

from an incomplete transportation network, unfinished subdivisions, poor access and limited parks and
neighborhood serving uses. The City’s urban fabric is in need of repair.
The land uses within Coachella’s various neighborhoods and commercial areas include residential
housing, public spaces (parks and streets), industrial activity and commercial activities, such as
restaurants, retail stores, offices, and services. Some areas within the City’s commercial areas have a
mix of uses, including commercial and industrial on the same parcel, or on neighboring parcels. Table
3-5 identifies the total distribution of existing land uses in Coachella as of 2008.
Table 3-4: Land Use Designations
                                                                               % OF TOTAL AREA
                                                                               EXCLUDING
                                                           % OF TOTAL          AGRICULTURE AND
   LAND USE CLASSIFICAT ION                   ACRES        AREA                VACANT LAND
   AGRICULTURE                                   11,174           33%                       -
   COMMERCIAL AND SERVICES                         138            0.4%                    3%
   EDUCATION                                        98            0.3%                    2%
   FACILITIES                                       54            0.2%                    1%
   GENERAL OFFICE                                  101            0.3%                    2%
   INDUSTRIAL                                      892             3%                     18%
   MIXED COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL                  5            0.01%                    0%
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL                         55            0.2%                    1%
   OPEN SPACE AND PARKS                            109            0.3%                    2%
   OTHER RESIDENTIAL                               277             1%                     6%
   SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL                      1,007            3%                     20%
   TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS,
                                                  1,889            6%                     38%
   + UTILITIES
   UNDER CONSTRUCTION                              300             1%                     6%
   VACANT                                        18,224           53%                       -
   GRAND TOTAL                                   34,322          100%                    100%
Agricultural land comprises approximately 33% of the area. Transportation, communications and utilities
comprised 6% of the land area, and both single family residential and industrial land account for 3% of
the land area. All other uses comprised 2% of the land area. By excluding agriculture and vacant lands,
transportation, communications and utilities comprised 38% of the land area, single family residential
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                | 03-9

represented 20% of the land area, and industrial land accounted for 18% of the land area. All other
uses comprised 24% of the land area.
According to the 2010 Census, the population density of Coachella was 2.20 persons per acre for the
entire city7. The population density was about four times higher than the county and six times higher
than the state. Compared to other cities, however, Coachella’s population density was lower than Palm
Desert (2.82), Indio (4.07) and Riverside (5.58). However, when looking at population density for only
the developed areas of the city (west of SR86), the result is much different; Coachella’s developed
areas have a density of 6.71 persons per acre. Although Coachella’s residential development patterns
are similar to the rest of the region, some neighborhoods have smaller lots and household size in
Coachella is much larger than other geographic areas.
Population is not uniformally distributed in Coachella, ranging from zero on the eastern and southern
sides of Coachella to more than 30 people per acre. Figure 3-4 shows the population density within
the Coachella city limits and General Plan Planning Area.
  Figure 3-4: Population Density - Persons per Acre
7
  U.S. Census Bureau (2011). 2010 Census Summary File 1— California).
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                               | 03-10

The layout and quality of the streetscape varies significantly by neighborhood and City region. In some
older residential communities, sidewalks are separated from roadways by landscaped parkways, often
incorporating grass and shade trees. In the newer residential areas, sidewalks are typically adjacent to
the curb and gutter while landscaping is minimal. There are examples of utility poles and street lights
embedded directly into the sidewalk in these areas, creating obstructions and potential hazards in low-
light conditions.
Sidewalks are generally continuous in the residential neighborhoods, though there are occasionally gaps
in connectivity between neighborhoods. In more newly developed areas of the City, residential tracts
may have sidewalks within the community and on the major roads immediately adjacent but sidewalks
may not extend all the way to the next development, creating an island effect. This is often due to the
fact developers were required to widen roads and provide sidewalks for the street sections directly
abutting their sites, but were not required to implement improvements beyond those boundaries. If
neighborhoods are not built proximate to one another, gaps in the pedestrian network are observed.
Older neighborhoods tend to feature better connectivity between blocks, but lack a continuous style or
layout. Walkway widths, setback from roadway, landscaping and disabled person’s access all vary. In
general, the pedestrian network in these older neighborhoods could be considered safer and more
walkable. The main component missing is favorable destinations; houses, schools and parks are
connected and within walking distance but food service and commercial developments are still focused
outside of these residential areas, requiring residents to either walk in a less pedestrian-friendly
environment or use another form of transportation. Outside of residential and commercial core areas,
sidewalks are not common.
Crosswalks are common at intersections of higher volume streets throughout the City. They are less
common at intersections of residential streets and collectors/arterials. In some of the newer areas in
the northern part of the City there may be as much as a half-mile between safe pedestrian crossing
locations at major arterials, limiting access between the residential developments by foot. In the central
residential area of the City, pedestrian connectivity between the neighborhood blocks is better, with
more mid-block crossing. Many of these crosswalks also feature higher visibility marking, such as ladder
painting. Crosswalks are also much more prevalent in the vicinity of parks and schools. One area of
concern is SR86S, where there are few intersections, and little to no pedestrian right of way. This
essentially isolates pedestrians east of the highway from the rest of the City.
Despite the incomplete pedestrian facilities, field investigations indicate walking is a common form of
transportation for residents in the older neighborhoods, particularly in the southern half of the City.
Residents were observed walking alone, in couples, in groups and with children. Pedestrians were
observed carrying food and other groceries. In the newer residential developments, less walking was
observed, which may correspond with higher auto ownership, less pedestrian-oriented design or both.
Block size varies in Coachella, primarily by age. Older residential neighborhoods and commercial areas,
such as the downtown core, feature smaller blocks laid out in a traditional grid pattern. The average
distance between intersections in the downtown core and surrounding neighborhoods is 300 to 400
feet. Even in residential areas, where rows are used in place of a square grid pattern, the road system
is uniform and the intersection distance doesn’t typically exceed 400 feet. A commonly used measure
for walkable neighborhoods is an intersection distance of 500 feet. The triangle formed by Grapefruit
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                   | 03-11

Blvd, Harrison Street and 52nd Avenue could be considered “walkable” as it has access to services,
homes, outdoor areas and commercial zones all within a half-mile distance. As you move farther away
from downtown, block sizes increase and cul-de-sacs become more common.
Newer residential developments usually feature an internal road network that is isolated from the arterial
roadways providing access to the site except for occasional entries and exits mid-block. These roads
rarely form a connected grid pattern, and as a result, travel distances between homes is increased, and
access to the major roadways is often limited to one or two points for the entire development. The
resulting intersection spacing can exceed 1200 feet. This configuration is commonly known as a
“superblock”, where arterial roads surround an independent residential neighborhood. However, in these
areas pedestrian connectivity outside the neighborhood is lacking. Walls along property lines prevent
access to connector roads and arterials from homes directly adjacent to the roads, and pedestrian paths
are not common.
Recent commercial developments are typically built on large lots and feature a big, central parking lot
serving all businesses, creating large blocks. In the rural and industrial areas, blocks can grow very
large, having no internal circulation between the avenues, with a half-mile between intersections.
Coachella’s transportation network consists of freeways, arterial roadways and local streets. State
Routes (SR) 86, 86S and Grapefruit Boulevard (SR111) provide connectivity to neighboring cities, as
does an established transit (bus) service. The safe and efficient movement of goods and vehicles is a
key element in Coachella’s future social and economic well-being.
Coachella’s roadway system includes regional freeways, major arterials and local streets. Two major
functions of roadways are to serve through traffic and provide access to adjacent property, and different
roadways prioritize these functions differently. For instance, arterials generally prioritize the movement of
traffic over access to individual adjacent properties, while local streets emphasize access to private
properties over through traffic. Roadways are also the backbone of the bicycle and pedestrian network.
Collectively, the average daily trips of the City’s aggregate land uses can be measured by VMT, or
vehicle miles traveled. In 2008, Coachella generated 245 million VMT; in 2010, 308 million.
Walking and bicycling are environmentally friendly modes of transportation that enhance personal and
social well-being. In addition to transportation, these modes of travel provide health and economic
benefits. Walking and bicycling are recognized as integral components of Coachella’s transportation
system. Safe, convenient, attractive and well-designed pedestrian and bicycle facilities are essential if
these modes are to be properly accommodated and encouraged. Well-designed pedestrian and bicycle
facilities are safe, attractive, convenient and easy to use. Inadequate facilities discourage users and
unnecessary facilities waste money and resources.
The bicycle system in Coachella primarily consists of shared bicycle and motor vehicle facilities. There
few dedicated bicycle facilities in Coachella and the City is actively working to expand the network of
bicycle lanes and bicycle paths.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                    | 03-12

Public transportation in Coachella is operated by SunLine Transit Agency, which enables commuters to
travel within the City and adjacent cities with minimal transfers. Currently, SunLine operates buses on
two routes within the City including Routes 90 and 91. Route 90 operates seven days a week and
connects also Coachella to Indio. Service frequency is 35 minutes weekdays and weekends. Route 91
operates seven days a week and connects Coachella to Indio, Thermal, Oasis and Mecca. Weekday
service frequency is 60 minutes and weekend service frequency is 80 minutes.
Ridership data indicates that each of these lines accommodates 700 trips per day during the week.
Approximately 24% of ridership for Route 91 originates or terminates in Coachella. Route 90 provides a
similar number of trips as Route 91, but operates almost entirely within Coachella. This could be taken
as an indicator that transit ridership within the City is higher than in surrounding cities or towns.
Ridership during the week is significantly higher than the weekend, which indicates transit may be the
primary method of work commuting for many residents. Line 90 sees a high volume of ridership
commuting west into Indio in the morning and returning in the evening. From this information, we can
infer transit is an important element of the commute within the Coachella Valley as it facilitates travel
between Coachella and adjacent cities.
The City’s land use patterns and topography play an important role in the way residents travel in and
around the City. Coachella residents have access to several modes of travel such as walking, bicycling
and public transit. However, the automobile is the primary means of travel within the City.
The 2005-2009 American Community Survey (ACS) was analyzed to determine mode split for the City
of Coachella, Riverside County, California and the United States. Table 3- provides a comparison
between the City, county, state and national level for these commute characteristics.
As is clear from the Table 3-5, a majority of Coachella residents choose to drive rather than using
other modes of transportation. Coachella residents carpool more frequently than the county, state and
national average, which is likely indicative of less access to vehicles than elsewhere in the Southern
California region. Public transit utilization is lower than County, though our ridership information indicates
that it is an important travel mode. Average commute time to work is 21.0 minutes in Coachella,
according to the 2005-2009 American Community Survey data.
Table 3-5: Modal Transportation Shift8
COMMUTE MODE               COACHELLA               RIVERSIDE
CHOICE                     CITY                    COUNTY             CALIFORNIA          UNITED STATES
SINGLE OCCUPANT AUTO 72.8%                         75.3%              73.1%               76.1%
CARPOOL                    21.2%                   15.3%              12.3%               10.6%
PUBLIC TRANSIT             0.9%                    1.4%               5.0%                4.8%
BICYCLING/WALKING          1.6%                    1.9%               2.8%                2.9%
OTHER MEANS                1.2%                    1.2%               2.2%                1.7%
WORK AT HOME               2.2%                    4.9%               4.7%                3.9%
8
  2005-2009 American Community Survey.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                    | 03-13

Regional hospital and emergency services are generally good based on a national perspective. Tenet
Health Care owns JFK Memorial Hospital, the main regional provider, capturing 62% market share. The
other regional hospital providers are Eisenhower Medical Center (14% share of the market) and Desert
Regional Medical Center (11% share of the market).
Along with major health care providers, there are also several clinics and family care centers that serve
Coachella. Clinicas de Salud del Pueblo, Santa Rosa Del Valle Clinic and Clinica Medica Del Valle are
located within the City.
Despite the availability of regional hospitals and local clinics, there are significant transportation issues
for Coachella residents. This prevents some residents from accessing services that are available in
Indio, such as the primary care clinic and WIC clinic, as well as other locations outside of Coachella9.
Several SunLine transit routes do provide access to medical facilities, but service is infrequent and often
requires the passenger to transfer to another line. For example, SunLine Routes 80 and 81 provide
access to John F Kennedy Memorial Hospital, but these buses only run once an hour, fifteen hours per
day.
To support the full health-care demand of Coachella, it would need approximately 42 additional
physicians: 12 adult primary care physicians, four pediatricians, 16 medical specialists, and 10 surgical
specialists. Most of these specialists were located near JFK Memorial Hospital, Eisenhower Medical
Center, or Desert Regional Medical Center.10
Asthma affects adults and children in Riverside County, particularly children living in relative poverty.
Asthma is triggered by a number of factors, including smog, dust, pollen, smoke and cockroaches. In
Riverside County, approximately 14% of the children up to 17-years-old have been diagnosed with
asthma and many children suffer from asthma that result in trips to the ER or hospitalization.11 In
Eastern Riverside County, asthma was cited as the one of the top 10 reasons for emergency
department visits for children 5 to 14 years old.12
The climate of the Salton Sea Air Basin where the City is located, is typical of a desert regime, with
large daily and seasonal fluctuations in temperature and relatively high annual average temperatures.
Temperatures frequently exceed 100 degrees Fahrenheit (°F) for the summer months. During winter,
temperatures can drop to near freezing (and below freezing at higher elevations). Throughout the year,
average daily relative humidity and average rainfall are low. Daily temperature fluctuations and seasonal
9
   Medical Development Specialists LLC. (2011). Healthcare Needs Assessment.
10
   Medical Development Specialists LLC. (2011). Healthcare Needs Assessment.
11
   Meconis KD. Childhood Asthma in Riverside County, 2009. (2011) Riverside, CA: Riverside County Department of Public Health,
           Epidemiology and Program Evaluation.
12
   Health Assessment Resource Center, (2010). Eastern Riverside County Community Health Monitor.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                                      | 03-14

variations are generally extreme. Clear skies with rapid heating and cooling of desert soils create high
temperatures by day and quick cooling by night. Daily temperatures range from the mid-40s to low 70
degrees during winter, and from low 70s to mid-100s during summer. The average annual rainfall is
about 3 inches, and the average annual air temperature is about 72.
The weather of the area is governed by large-scale warming and sinking of air in the semi-permanent
subtropical high-pressure center over the Pacific Ocean. The high-pressure ridge blocks most mid-
latitude storms, except in the winter when the high-pressure ridge is weakest and farthest south. The
coastal mountains prevent the intrusion of the cool, damp air found in California’s coastal regions.
The flat terrain and strong temperature differentials created by intense heating and cooling patterns
produce moderate winds and deep thermal circulation systems. As a result, the general dispersion of
local air pollution is greater than in the coastal basins where polluted inversion layers may remain for
long periods of time.
Health-based air quality standards have been established by California and the federal government for
the following criteria air pollutants: Ozone (O3), Carbon Monoxide (CO), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2), Sulfur
Dioxide (SO2), Respirable Particulate Matter (PM10), Fine Particulate Matter (PM2.5) and lead. These
standards were established to protect sensitive receptors with a margin of safety from the impact of
adverse health due to exposure to air pollution. The California standards are more stringent than the
federal standards and, in the case of PM10 and SO2, much more stringent. California has also
established standards for sulfates, visibility-reducing particles, hydrogen sulfide and vinyl chloride.
Air quality of a region is considered to be in attained by the National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS) if the measured ambient air pollutant levels are not exceeded more than once per year,
except for O3, PM10, PM2.5 and those based on annual averages or arithmetic mean. The NAAQS for
O3, PM10, and PM2.5 are based on statistical calculations over one- to three-year periods, depending on
the pollutant. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) is the state agency responsible for setting the
California Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS). Air quality of a region is considered to be attained
by the CAAQS if the measured ambient air pollutant levels for O3, CO, NO2, SO2, PM10, PM2.5, and
lead are not exceeded, and all other standards are not equaled or exceeded at any time in any
consecutive three-year period.
The US EPA designates air basins as being in “attainment” or “nonattainment” for each of the seven
criteria pollutants. Nonattainment air basins are ranked (marginal, moderate, serious, severe, or
extreme) according to the degree of the threshold violation. The stringency of emission control
measures adopted by a state or air district depends on the severity of the air quality within the specific
air basin. The status of the Riverside County portion of the Salton Sea air basin with respect to
attainment with the NAAQS is summarized in Table 3-6.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                     | 03-15

Table 3-6: National Ambient Air Quality Standard Designations Status
  POLLUTANT                                                       DESIGNATION/CLASSIFICATION
  OZONE (O )  3
                1
                                                                  Nonattainment/Severe-15
  NITROGEN DIOXIDE (NO )      2                                   Attainment/Unclassified
  CARBON MONOXIDE (CO)                                            Attainment/Unclassified
  SULFUR DIOXIDE (SO )     2                                      Attainment/Unclassified
  RESPIRABLE PARTICULATE MATTER (PM )           10                Nonattainment/Serious
  FINE PARTICULATE MATTER (PM )       2. 5                        Attainment/Unclassified
  LEAD (Pb)                                                       Attainment
For PM10, the Riverside County portion of the basin was required to meet the national standard by
2001; however, elevated annual PM10 levels from 1999 through 2001 prompted the SCAQMD to adopt
the 2002 and 2003 Coachella Valley PM10 State Implementation Plan (CVSIP), both of which
demonstrated attainment of the federal PM10 NAAQS by 2006.13 In 2006, the US EPA repealed the
annual PM10 standard14 due to a lack of evidence linking health problems to long-term exposure to
coarse particle pollution. The revocation of the annual PM10 standard became effective December 17,
2006.15 Over the past five years, annual average PM10 concentrations have met the levels of the
revoked standard and peak 24-hour average PM10 concentrations have not exceeded the current federal
standard; thus, the Riverside County portion of the basin is currently eligible for redesignation as
attainment.16 However, a formal request for redesignation has not been submitted to the US EPA.
Therefore, the region remains nonattainment for the federal PM10 standard.
CARB supervises and supports the regulatory activities of local air quality districts as well as monitors
air quality itself. CARB will designate an area as nonattainment for a pollutant if monitoring data show
that a California Ambient Air Quality Standard (CAAQS) for a particular pollutant was violated at least
once during the previous three years. In addition to the criteria pollutants, CAAQS have been
established for visibility-reducing particulates, hydrogen sulfide, and sulfates.
CARB establishes policy and statewide standards and administers the state’s mobile source emissions
control program. In addition, CARB oversees air quality programs established by state statute.
CARB makes area designations for 10 criteria pollutants: O3, CO, NO2, SO2, PM10, PM2.5, sulfates, lead,
hydrogen sulfide, and visibility-reducing particles. The status of the Riverside County portion of the
basin with respect to attainment for the CAAQS is summarized in Table 3-7.
13
   South Coast Air Quality Management District, Final 2003 Coachella Valley PM10 State Implementation Plan, http://www.aqmd.gov/
      aqmp/PM10PLans.htm, (2003).
14
   US Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR Part 50, “National Primary and Secondary Ambient Air Quality Standards,”
          http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html. 2010.
15
   Ibid.
16
   South Coast Air Quality Management District, 2007 Air Quality Management Plan, (2007) 8-1.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                                       | 03-16

Table 3-7: California Ambient Air Quality Standards Status
  POLLUTANT                                                          DESIGNATION/CLASSIFICATION
  OZONE (O )  3                                                      NONATTAINMENT
  NITROGEN DIOXIDE (NO )         2                                   ATTAINMENT
  CARBON MONOXIDE (CO)                                               ATTAINMENT
  SULFUR DIOXIDE (SO )      2                                        ATTAINMENT
  RESPIRABLE PARTICULATE MATTER (PM )             10                 NONATTAINMENT
  FINE PARTICULATE MATTER (PM )         2. 5                         UNCLASSIFIED
  LEAD (PB)  2
                                                                     ATTAINMENT
  SULFATES (SO )    4                                                ATTAINMENT
  HYDROGEN SULFIDE (H S)       2                                     UNCLASSIFIED
  VINYL CHLORIDE       2
                                                                     UNCLASSIFIED
  VISIBILITY-REDUCING PARTICLES                                      UNCLASSIFIED
During the last several decades, an overwhelming body of scientific evidence has demonstrated that
human activity is altering the Earth’s climate by increasing the concentration of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere. Climate change poses significant risks for, and may already be affecting, human and
natural systems, including coastal infrastructure, human health, energy sources, agriculture and
freshwater resources.17 Human activities, such as the use of fossil fuels, industrial processes, and land
use changes, have increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, intensified the
greenhouse effect, and caused changes to the climate. Since the Industrial Revolution, greenhouse gas
concentrations have risen 40% in the Earth’s atmosphere and are at a level unequaled during the last
800,000 years. Higher concentrations of greenhouse gases trap additional energy in the atmosphere,
resulting in more rapid warming. During the last century, the global average temperature rose 1.4°F with
significant variation across the planet.18 In California, average temperatures rose 2.1°F between 1915
and 2000.
From 2005 to 2010, greenhouse gas emissions in Coachella rose. Metered electricity and natural gas
use, vehicle fuel consumption, and water use all increased. Between 2005 and 2010, greenhouse gas
emissions increased from 312,628 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e) to 349,032
MTCO2e, a 12% increase in emissions. Greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector
accounted for 180,078 MTCO2e, or 51% of all community emissions. Emissions per person in
Coachella were 8.7 MTCO2e in 2010. 2010 per capita emissions were down from the 2005 emissions
of 10.5 MTCO2e per person. Similar to person emissions, per service population emissions fell from 8.5
MTCO2e in 2005 to 7.6 MTCO2e in 2010.19
17
   National Research Council, 2010. Advancing the Science of Climate Change. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
18
   Thomas R. Karl, Jerry M. Melillo, and Thomas C. Peterson (eds.), 2009. Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States.
19
   Service population is defined as population (residents) plus employment (jobs).
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                                        | 03-17

Table 3-8: Community Greenhouse Gas Emissions (2005-2010)
  COMMUNITY-WIDE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS                                                                          2005             2010
  AGRICULTURE                                                                                                             N/A                                        8,844
  COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, & PUBLIC                                                                                    78,128                                       72,294
  LIGHTING INFRASTRUCTURE                                                                                                  492                                         730
  RESIDENTIAL                                                                                                         51,662                                       65,357
  SOLID WASTE                                                                                                         15,747                                       10,960
                                                                                                                     152,528                                      180,078
  TRANSPORTATION
  WATER                                                                                                               11,960                                       17,693
  TOTAL EMISSIONS                                                                                                    312,628                                      355,956
  POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT, AND PER CAPITA A ND PER
  SERVICE AREA EMISSIO NS
  POPULATION                                                                                                          29,754                                       40,704
  EMPLOYMENT                                                                                                            7,213                                        5,831
  SERVICE AREA POPULATION (POP + EMP)                                                                                 36,967                                       46,535
  EMISSIONS PER CAPITA (MTCO E/POP)             2
                                                                                                                          10.5                                          8.7
  EMISSIONS PER SERVICE POPULATION (MTCO E/SP)                       2
                                                                                                                            8.5                                         7.6
1 Activity data includes a range of information, including annual metered electricity use, fuel consumption by type, solid waste production, and vehicle miles travelled.
Emissions factors are used to convert activity data into greenhouse gas emissions quantities.
2 The water sector uses both electricity and natural gas to collect, convey, treat, and deliver water to users, and then it uses additional energy to collect, treat, and
dispose of the resulting wastewater. This embedded energy yields both direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions.
3 Totals may be slightly off due to rounding.
Figure 3-5: Community Emissions Summary by Sector in 2010
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                                                                                | 03-18
California is the leading agriculture-producing state in the nation, and Riverside County is the leading
agriculture-producing county in Southern California. In 2002, Riverside County sold $ 1,008,273,000 in
agricultural products. Of that total, $ 268,873,000 was from sale of fruits, nuts and berries. These are
the primary types of crops grown in Coachella.20,21
As part of Riverside County, the City of Coachella’s agricultural lands are a key aspect of the county
and City’s character. Preservation of agriculture is considered integral to the City’s future. As shown by
Figure 3-, agricultural land is one of the predominant land uses within Coachella, covering
approximately 40 percent (21,840 acres) of the City’s planning area. Approximately 17 percent (3,800
acres) of the total agricultural land within the planning area is located within the City’s incorporated
area. Most of the agricultural land is located in the unincorporated areas (18,040 acres) (Coachella,
1998). The City of Coachella contained 3,405 acres of land with existing agricultural operations in
2011.
Coachella’s multiple field crops result in year-round harvesting. Some examples include mature date
palm groves, citrus groves and vineyards, which are considered of high value from both their annual
Figure 3-6: Prime Farmland and Farmland of Local Importance
20
    United States Department of Agriculture, Census of Agriculture,
http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2002/County_Profiles/California/index.asp, Accessed September 22, 2008.
21
   City of Coachella. City of Coachella General Plan 2020, 1998.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                               | 03-19

sales and revenues and from an open space and aesthetic perspective. However, Coachella has
experienced a significant loss in farmland that continues as urbanization spreads.
Water resources within the City and the surrounding area have historically been at the center of all
activity public and private, economic and domestic. Agricultural-based industry began early in the 20th
century and continues today. In those early days, artesian water was plentiful and tapping into those
natural reserves was as easy as drilling a private well on one’s own property. With the draw on
resources thanks to increased population and the growth of agriculture, water resources began to
diminish, eventually to the point that natural flowing artesian wells stopped producing. In 1918, the
Coachella Water District was formed in order to protect remaining water resources through management
and replenishment. Additional information on regional geology can be found in Appendix B, Safety
Element Technical Background Report.
Even with managed water resources, groundwater levels continued to fall as population and agricultural
operations expanded to meet market demands for agricultural products. Not until 1949, when Colorado
River water was introduced into the Valley via the Coachella Canal, did groundwater levels begin to
stabilize. Overdraft of local groundwater began again in the 1980s as scale and population overtook the
holding capacity of the water tables and the carrying capacity of the Coachella Canal. In 2009, the pilot
Dike 4 recharge facility was replaced by the Thomas E. Levy Groundwater Replenishment Facility.
Since 2009, average groundwater levels in 200 wells that CVWD monitors in the East Whitewater
River Subbasin Area of Benefit, which includes the City of Coachella, have increased 26 feet. Artesian
conditions have also returned to a large portion of this area of benefit.
The local groundwater basin encompasses most of the Coachella Valley from the San Gorgonio Pass to
the Salton Sea and has been subdivided by the Department of Water Resources (DWR) and U.S.
Geological Survey into four interrelated water-bearing sub-basins which are delineated by fault barriers
that restrict the lateral movement of groundwater. Specifically, the planning area lies within the
Whitewater River (or Indio) sub-basin that encompasses approximately 400 square miles and extends
one mile west of the intersection of State Highway 111 and Interstate 10 to the Salton Sea. Coachella is
located within the Thermal Subarea of the Whitewater Sub-basin and it is noteworthy the lower valley
basins, including the Coachella area, are overlain by a layer of clay which blocks the flow of surface
water to and from the aquifer. The City uses approximately 5.32 million gallons of water per day (mgd)
for all nonagricultural uses including residential, commercial and industrial development. This accounts
for only four % of total water usage within the planning area and the existing water supply is adequate
to serve existing and future residents.
Within the Coachella Valley, groundwater replenishment through direct precipitation is negligible due to
the small amount of annual precipitation. Percolation of water from stream flows, which originate in the
adjacent mountain areas, serves as the largest natural source of groundwater replenishment in the
Lower Coachella Valley. These stream flows develop from rain and snowmelt and are transported to the
Lower Coachella Valley, including the project area, primarily by the Whitewater River/Coachella Valley
Stormwater Channel and surrounding canyons. In addition to these naturally occurring drainages,
percolation from the Coachella serves as another source of groundwater replenishment. Additional
information on Seismic Hazards can be found in Appendix B, Safety Element Technical Background
Report.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                  | 03-20

The source of potable water for the City of
Coachella is the Coachella Valley
Groundwater Basin. The City’s groundwater
supplies are chlorinated before to distribution.
Other treatment processes are not necessary
to meet the State’s primary drinking water
standards. Furthermore, well water is
routinely monitored to ensure continued
compliance with applicable standards.
According to the EPA Safe Drinking Water
Information, Coachella has had five
monitoring and reporting violations in the last
10 years, since 2000. Although having any
violations is a concern, this is in fact a good
record, as the EPA indicates that in 2005,
the last fiscal year for which the EPA has
complete data, 24% of all water purveyors
had a reporting/monitoring violation, 6.1%
reported a MCL violation, and 1.5% reported
a treatment technique violation. During the
same period, the Coachella Valley Water
District has had no health violations, or
monitoring and reporting violations.
                                                     Figure 3-7: Coachella Valley Arsenic Levels Map
Groundwater, recently extracted east of the
Coachella Valley Storm Channel, reported elevated levels of fluoride. A high level of arsenic in the
water supply is an area concern for residents of the Coachella Valley, as well. The EPA set the arsenic
standard for drinking water at 10 parts per billion, and several areas in the Coachella Valley exceed
that standard. Figure 3-7: Coachella Valley Arsenic Levels Map shows arsenic levels that exceed the
EPA standard around the City of Coachella. Some of the mobile home parks in the vicinity are near or
at areas with unsafe levels of arsenic. Concentrations of naturally occurring arsenic have been detected
in several wells in the Coachella Valley at levels above the state-adopted Maximum Contaminant Level
(MCL) of 10 µg/L. As a result, the Coachella Valley Water District has built and is operating facilities
that reduce, via an ion-exchange process, the amount of arsenic present in those municipal water wells
that exceed the MCL.
Leaking underground storage tanks (LUSTs) are an additional source groundwater contamination,
leaking gasoline compounds and solvents. The State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) is the
lead regulatory agency in the development of regulations and policy for underground storage tanks. The
SWRCB, in cooperation with the Office of Emergency Services, maintains an inventory of LUSTs in a
statewide database called GeoTracker. The database lists 37 reported LUST cases in the Coachella
area. Of these, 30 sites have been remediated and closed, leaving seven cases still open. Because of
the relatively shallow ground water table in several parts of the Coachella area, 15 of the reported leaks
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                 | 03-21

reportedly had an impact on groundwater in aquifers used for drinking purposes, and another 11
impacted aquifers not used for drinking-water purposes.
Perchlorates are substances that are persistent in the environment and that can pose a health hazard,
especially to infants and women. Perchlorate in relatively small amounts was detected in the early
2000s in water samples from a few wells in the Coachella Valley, including one in La Quinta, one in
Palm Springs, and at least three in the Torres Martinez Indian Reservation. In February and March
2007, the U.S. Geological Survey, in cooperation with the State Water Resources Control Board,
sampled 35 wells in the Coachella Valley Study Unit as part of the Groundwater Ambient Monitoring
and Assessment (GAMA) Program. Of 35 wells sampled, 12 (34%) were found to contain perchlorate,
although in most wells, the concentration of perchlorate was less than 1 µg/L. Only two of the water
wells sampled had concentrations above the public health goal of 6.0 µg/L; one in La Quinta (9.0
µg/L), and one southwest of Mecca (6.1 µg/L) (Goldrath et al., 2009).
Other quality issues of special interest in the Coachella Valley that are being monitored, and where
necessary, remediated for, include salinity (in the form of high Total Dissolved Solids), chromium-6
(hexavalent chromium), and solvents with carcinogenic properties.
Hexavalent chromium has been detected in hundreds of wells in the Coachella Valley at levels below
the 50 µg/L for total chromium established by California in 1977. California’s drinking water
maximum contaminant level of 10 µg/L became effective July 1, 2014. Groundwater supplied for
drinking water throughout many areas of the Coachella Valley, including the City of Coachella, contains
naturally-occurring levels of hexavalent chromium above this new standard.
Nitrate and nitrite are nitrogen-oxygen combinations that occur in several organic and inorganic
compounds. Nitrates are used extensively in fertilizers and are thus found in agricultural areas and
landscaped areas where fertilizers are used extensively. Other sources of nitrates include leaks from
septic tanks and leaching fields, along with erosion of natural deposits. Drinking water with high
concentrations of nitrates can pose serious health hazards, especially to infants. Nitrate at
concentrations above the maximum contaminant level of 10 parts per million (ppm or mg/L) as
nitrogen, and 45 ppm as nitrate, has been detected in some wells in the Cove Communities area.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                | 03-22

Parks and open-space facilities are important resources for maintaining and improving health. In 2012,
Coachella maintained approximately 47 acres of parkland spread across seven different parks. The City
categorized each park by its size and role within the community.
Table 3-9 describes each municipal park in Coachella. Along with existing parks, Coachella is currently
in the process of developing Rancho Las Flores Park, which will add an additional 29 acres of
community parkland to the City’s inventory.
Table 3-9: Coachella Parks
  PARK NAME                            TYPE OF PARK                             ACRES
  BAGDOUMA PARK                        Community Park                           34
  RANCHO LAS FLORES PARK*              Community Park                           12
  DATELAND PARK                        Neighborhood Park                        5
  DE ORO PARK                          Neighborhood Park                        4
  SIERRA VISTA PARK                    Neighborhood Park                        2
  VETERANS MEMORIAL PARK               Neighborhood Park                        1.5
  SHADY LANE PARK                      Neighborhood Park                        1
  YA’ WE’ VICHEM PARK                  Pocket Park                              0.6
  AVE 53 TOT LOT                       Pocket Park                              0.21
Phase 1 of Rancho Las Flores Park is complete, with future phases planned for future expansion.
Creating new places for physical activity or improving their accessibility can increase the proportion of
residents who exercise three times a week by 25 percent. People who live within walking distance
(quarter-mile) of a park are 25 percent more likely to meet the minimum weekly exercise
recommendation of 30 minutes three times a week. In 2010, approximately 67% of Coachella’s
residents lived within a half-mile of a community, a neighborhood park or one quarter-mile of a pocket
park. Figure 3-8 shows the park service area for municipal parks.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                  | 03-23

 Figure 3-8: Park Service Area
While seemingly a high proportion of residents are near parks, these calculations do not consider
barriers that would limit access to Coachella’s parks by non-motorized means such as walking and
biking. These impediments include crossing highways SR86S and SR111, the water flood canal, streets
with posted speed limits above 40 miles per hour, and also include neighborhoods that lack sidewalks
or bicycle facilities. Thus, the percentage of residents who can safely walk to a park is lower than what
is shown above.
The Coachella General Plan area is highly diverse physically and geologically, the result of both the
youthful seismic setting of the surrounding region, and the effects of climate. Coachella is located within
the eastern portion of the Coachella Valley, defined as a low and relatively flat desert basin bounded by
mountainous terrain. The City is located south of the Little San Bernardino Mountains, southeast of the
San Gorgonio Pass, east of the San Jacinto and Santa Rosa Mountains, north of the Salton Sea at 68
feet below sea level. Interstate 10 runs the length of the Coachella Valley, connecting the City of
Coachella with nearby cities and the Southern California region. Coachella (including its SOI and
planning area) is located in a portion of Coachella Valley that ranges in elevation from 1,000 feet in the
Mecca Hills to the east, to approximately 160 feet below sea level south of Thermal. However, the
majority of the City (including its SOI and planning area) is relatively flat, gently sloping from northwest
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                    | 03-24

to southeast. Additional information on soils can be found in Appendix B, Safety Element Technical
Background Report.
The area is bisected by the Whitewater River/Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel and the Coachella
Canal, both of which traverse generally northwest to southeast. Major geographic features in the region
include the Santa Rosa Mountains to the southwest of the planning area; the Mecca Hills to the south
of the City area; and the Indio Hills to the north of the City (including its SOI and planning area). The
surrounding mountains range from 3,000 to 9,000 feet, with peaks ranging to over 11,000 feet (San
Gorgonio peak). The overall valley gradient is from northwest to the Salton Sea with a current surface
of approximately 220-feet below mean sea level. The Coachella Valley is surrounded by the Santa
Rosa Mountains (Toro Peak, 8,715 feet) approximately five miles southwest. The north and northeast
portion of the valley is defined by the Little San Bernardino Mountains (up to 5,267 feet) approximately
two miles to the northeast. There are several natural rock outcroppings in the hillside areas of the east
that provide a native desert appearance as viewed from the Valley floor. The northeastern portion of the
Study Area contains the alluvial that forms the base of the Joshua Tree National Monument and the
San Bernardino Mountains to the north (outside of the Study Area).
Geologically speaking, the valley portion of Coachella lies at the eastern edge of a broad structural
basin known as the Salton Trough (also called the Salton Sink or the Coachella Valley). Over the last
million years or so, the Salton Trough has been tectonically subsiding, and filling with sediments eroded
from adjacent mountain ranges. The eastern boundary of the basin is formed by the San Andreas fault,
a wide zone of multiple fault strands that trends northwesterly through the middle of the General Plan
area. The rise of hills in the eastern part of Coachella, as well as mountains to the east and north, are
a direct result of movement along the San Andreas fault zone.
Because the San Andreas fault passes through the area, the hazards of primary surface fault rupture
and strong ground shaking are very high. For instance, the Coachella segment of the San Andreas fault
is thought capable of generating a maximum magnitude 7.2 earthquake. Because this segment has not
ruptured since about 1680, scientists estimate there is a high probability it will break in a significant
earthquake within the next 30 years. If the entire Southern segment (a much larger section of the fault
zone that includes the Coachella segment) ruptured, an earthquake of magnitude 8.0 is conceivable.
Although the probability of this earthquake occurring is lower, it is not considered unrealistic and the
impact to the Coachella region would be considerably more severe. Furthermore, Coachella is located
near several other regional active faults – such as the San Jacinto – that have the potential to cause
strong ground shaking in the area. The nearby segments of the San Jacinto fault zone could generate
at least a magnitude 6.6 earthquake.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                    | 03-25

  Map prepared by: Earth Consultants International
 Figure 3-9: Faults and Historical (1800 - 2011) Seismicity Map
Although an earthquake can be upsetting or terrifying on its own, it is the effect of this shaking on the
built environment that can make an earthquake deadly. The interaction between earthquake-induced
ground motion and human-made structures is complex; some of the governing factors include the
structure’s height, construction quality, stiffness, architectural design, condition and age. New advances
are reflected in the most recent building codes, thus, newer structures built to these codes are
theoretically stronger and more likely to survive an earthquake. However, the main purpose of building
codes is to prevent structures from collapsing; significant damage that might cause a structure to be
uninhabitable following a large earthquake is possible and permissible. Building codes are also not
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                   | 03-26

retroactive, consequently there are older building types still in existence that do not perform well when
shaken.
This is reflected in the HazUS22 loss estimation analyses conducted for this General Plan Update
background investigation, which included two modeled scenarios on the San Andreas fault – one for the
Coachella segment earthquake, and one for the larger Southern segment earthquake. For the Coachella
segment, the analyses indicate over 24% of the buildings in the Coachella area could be at least
moderately damaged23. Single-family homes would fare best overall but the models indicate that nearly
86% of residential structures other than single-family homes (that is, multi-family residential buildings,
including duplexes, condominiums and apartments) would suffer at least moderate damage, as would
nearly half of the industrial, agricultural and commercial structures. About 30% of the school buildings
would suffer moderate damage. Higher levels of damage are expected if an earthquake occurs on the
entire Southern San Andreas fault, including a significant increase in buildings experiencing extensive or
complete damage. Additional information on flood hazards can be found in Appendix B, Safety Element
Technical Background Report.
The HazUS analyses predicts that the three hospitals located in the valley north of Coachella (there are
no hospitals in the General Plan area) will be less than 20% functional the day an earthquake on the
Coachella segment occurs, and completely non-functional immediately after the larger Southern San
Andreas earthquake. At the same time, the model predicts hundreds of people in the region will require
medical attention. Therefore it is essential that alternate medical providers, both within and outside of
Coachella, be identified.
The models indicate the potable water, wastewater and natural gas systems in Coachella will
experience moderate damage from the Coachella segment earthquake, and severe damage if an
earthquake occurs on the entire Southern San Andreas. In the worse-case scenario, pipelines will have
thousands of leaks and breaks, essentially destroying the water distribution system. Coachella
households may be without potable water for a minimum of three months, and in some areas, for six
months or longer.
Most of the local transportation system is expected to perform relatively well during the Coachella
segment earthquake, except where structures, such as Interstate 10, Dillon Road, and the Coachella
Canal cross, the fault. Primary displacement along the fault trace and secondary displacement due to
ground movement is likely to be high, not only affecting transportation, but also severing or displacing
buried utilities. Displacement of the Coachella Canal could result in flooding and loss of water
resources. An earthquake on the Southern segment could additionally result in moderate to complete
damage to 17 of the 21 bridges in the General Plan area. Damage to roads, bridges, highways and rail
lines both north and south of Coachella will also hinder response and recovery activities immediately
and for some time after the earthquake.
22
   HazUS (short for Hazards United States) is a methodology developed by the National Institute of Building Sciences with funding
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to make standardized loss estimates at a regional scale resulting from
earthquakes, floods, or hurricanes. HazUS addresses nearly all aspects of the built environment and is used in planning for disaster
loss mitigation, and emergency preparedness, response and recovery.
23 2
    The definition of moderate damage varies by building type. For mobile homes, moderate damage means that the structure
suffered major movement over its supports, resulting in damage to metal siding and stairs, and requiring resetting of the mobile
home on its supports. For precast concrete tilt-up buildings, moderate damage means that most wall surfaces exhibit diagonal
cracks; larger cracks in walls with doors or window openings; few shear walls exceeded their yield capacities as indicated by larger
diagonal cracks and concrete spalling. Some walls may have visibly pulled away from the roof. Some welded panel connections may
have been broken, as indicated by spalled concrete around the connections.
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                                            | 03-27

Seismic shaking can also cause various types of ground deformation; liquefaction and slope failure are
the most destructive of these. When liquefaction occurs, the soils that liquefy lose the ability to support
structures; buildings may sink or tilt, with the potential for extensive structural damage. The valley
portion of Coachella, west of the Whitewater River/Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel, is underlain
by soils that could liquefy during an earthquake.
Seismic shaking can cause loose, geologically young deposits to become more tightly packed, resulting
in a reduction of the soil column, and differential settlement at the ground surface. Areas at or near the
contact between alluvium and bedrock, or at the contact between artificial fill and natural soils, can be
susceptible to seismically induced differential settlement. The valley portion of Coachella is underlain by
unconsolidated, young alluvial deposits and artificial fill that may be susceptible to this hazard.
Deformation may also occur in alluvial-filled drainages within the hills, although the losses associated
with this kind of failure are anticipated to be small and geotechnical measures implemented during
development of the area can mitigate this hazard. The unconsolidated sediments are also potentially
compressible and/or collapsible.
Topographically, the eastern part of Coachella encompasses low rounded hills. The hills of Coachella
are currently in a natural state but proposed development is expanding eastward and will eventually
reach these areas. Future developments that encroach up to the base, or within the hills, will be
exposed to potential slope instability. Most slope damage in the region is likely to occur as a result of
earthquake-induced shaking or during periods of exceptional and/or prolonged rainfall. Slope damage in
this area typically consists of shallow failures involving the surficial soils, uppermost weathered bedrock
and mud or debris flows. Seismically induced slope failures can occur in the moderately steep hills and
low mountains in the General Plan area, especially in the Mecca Hills where tectonic deformation and
geologically weak clays are present. Grading cuts into these hills could also trigger slope failures and
may require remediation during construction. The more gently sloping hills that occupy most of the
hillside area are generally more stable, but highly susceptible to erosion. Ridgetop shattering may occur
locally in the hills and mountains and near Coachella.
Seiches can occur in bodies of water both near and far from the earthquake epicenter. Given that there
are canals, ponds and pools in the Coachella area, seiches as a result of ground shaking can be
expected to occur in the region. The amplitude of these waves cannot be predicted but these are
typically less than about 0.5 m (1.6 feet). Property owners down-gradient from these bodies of water
should be aware of the potential hazard to their property. Given its distance from the ocean, Coachella
does not have a tsunami hazard.
Sedimentary units in the Coachella area are a mix of water-transported (alluvial) sand, silt, clay, gravel
derived from erosion of the adjacent hills and mountains and very fine-grained ancient lake deposits.
Very young, unconsolidated alluvial sediments line the drainage courses. Consequently, the expansion
characteristics of the soils are highly variable. Fine-grained soils, such as clays and silts, in the
Coachella area are potentially expansive. The sediments in the valley areas are generally corrosive to
metallic objects such as pipelines if these come in direct contact with the soils.
The results of studies evaluating the potential for regional subsidence within the Coachella General Plan
boundary are unclear. Significant subsidence has been documented in other parts of the valley (Palm
Desert, Indian Wells and La Quinta), where the subsidence and associated ground fissuring have been
attributed to groundwater withdrawal. Recognizing that significant subsidence in the area could pose a
major environmental constraint, several agencies, including the U.S. Geological Survey, the Coachella
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                    | 03-28
Valley Water District and the City of Coachella, are currently devoting resources to the study and
mitigation of this potential hazard. Additional information on hazardous materials can be found in
Appendix B, Safety Element Technical Background Report.
Unconsolidated sediments in drainage bottoms and the valley floor, as well as the granular semi-
consolidated sediments forming the hills, are generally susceptible to erosion. Because much of the
runoff travels through the area in natural washes and gullies, and by sheet flow, sedimentation is locally
a hazard. Natural erosion processes are often accelerated by man’s activities, including the removal of
protective vegetation, modification of natural drainage patterns and construction of slopes that may be
more susceptible to erosion than the natural slope conditions. Development also reduces the surface
area available for infiltration, leading to increased flooding, erosion and downstream sedimentation.
Floods are natural and recurrent events that generally do not pose a hazard when they occur in an
undeveloped area; it is only when floods interact with the built environment, typically in the form of
structures built on the floodplain, where they obstruct floodwaters, that they become hazardous.
Unfortunately, as development in floodplains has increased, the average annual losses due to flooding
have also steadily increased.
Southern California typically has mild winters and warm, dry summers as a result of a high-pressure
area over the eastern Pacific Ocean that deflects storms to the north. However, during the winter
months, this high-pressure area can break down, allowing the jet stream to move storms along a more
southerly track. If the northern jet stream taps into the sub-tropical jet stream and then veers into
southern California, rainfall totals in the region can increase dramatically. El Niño events can also result
in increased rainfall in the area and summer monsoons occasionally cause severe weather in July and
August. Although Coachella receives on average about three inches of rain a year, actual numbers can
vary substantially from year to year.
Runoff totals in the area are also controlled by topography. Coachella is located in the lower part of the
Whitewater River basin, a regional watershed covering more than 1,000 square miles. The San Jacinto
and San Bernardino Mountains capture a significant portion of the precipitation from strong Pacific
storms that pass through, such that average rainfall in the San Jacinto Mountains is more than eight
times that in the Coachella Valley (25 inches instead of the average three inches in Coachella). The
steep mountain slopes and relatively impermeable bedrock means that most of this precipitation
becomes runoff that eventually makes it way to the Whitewater River and its tributaries. Consequently,
this drainage can convey substantial discharges even if little rain falls on the valleys floors.
There are two distinct flood sources in the Coachella Valley: 1) the Whitewater River and its tributaries
upstream from the valley, and 2) the streams entering the valley from the mountain ranges flanking the
northeast and southwest sides of the valley. The Whitewater River is the largest drainage course in the
area. Collecting runoff from the slopes and canyons of the San Bernardino and San Jacinto Mountains,
the river emerges from the mountains near the southern entrance to the San Gorgonio Pass, where it
joins and captures the San Gorgonio River, and near Palm Springs, Taquitz Creek.
Although one of the Coachella Valley Water District goals is to safely convey floodwaters from the
mountains across the valley to the Salton Sea, rain that falls directly on the valley is the responsibility
of the local cities or the county. Currently, there is not a permanent, interconnected flood control system
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                   | 03-29

in the General Plan area, nor does the City or county have a comprehensive master drainage plan.
Most stormwater passes through Coachella as surface flow (there are very few underground structures
such as storm drains) and existing local structures are not tied to the Coachella Valley Stormwater
Channel. As a consequence, the City has periodic local flooding in the downtown area. Streets in the
older part of the city have very slow drainage, causing water to pond for days after a storm.
                                              Map prepared by: Earth Consultants International
                                             Portions of the Coachella General Plan area have been
                                             analyzed through the Flood Insurance Study for Riverside
                                             County. The most recent Flood Insurance Rate Maps
                                             (FIRMs) that include the Coachella area date from 2008.
                                             The inundation limits for the 100-year and 500-year floods
  Figure 3-10: Flood Hazards                 are shown on these FIRMs; however it is important to note
                                             that not all of the General Plan area was evaluated and
the flood zones are incomplete in the eastern part of the area. Thus, there are areas outside of the
mapped flood zones that could be affected by flooding. It should be noted that FEMA is evaluating
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                               | 03-30
different technical approaches for modeling flood hazards in the vicinity of levees. As a result, the
Coachella Valley Water District has put on hold an approved Comprehensive Study of the Stormwater
Channel from Indio to the Salton Sea, pending policy changes in FEMA’s flood zone mapping. When
studies by these agencies are completed, it is likely the FEMA maps covering the Coachella area will
be revised. Furthermore, in an attempt to fill in gaps in FEMA’s mapping in the state, the California
Department of Water Resources has mapped the 100-years flood in portions of the eastern area, using
approximate methods. This mapping is broad-based and general, therefore useful only as a starting
point by local agencies for mandating more detailed studies when developments are proposed in those
areas. Refer to Figure 3-10: Flood Hazards for more information about the extent of flood hazards in
the Planning Area.
The City of Coachella and Riverside County have participated as regular members in the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) since 1980. Coachella’s most current effective FIRM maps are dated August
2008; however maps and flood elevations are amended periodically to reflect changes. Because the
City and county are participating members of the NFIP, flood insurance is available to any property
owner in the Coachella General Plan area. In fact, to secure financing to buy, build, or improve
structures in a Special Flood Hazard Zone, property owners are required to purchase flood insurance.
Lending institutions that are federally regulated, or federally insured, must determine if the structure is
located in a SFHZ and must provide written notice requiring flood insurance.
Seismically induced inundation refers to flooding that occurs when water retention structures, such as
dams or levees, fail due to an earthquake. There are no existing dams with the potential to inundate
Coachella. However, local flooding resulting from the potential failure of the Coachella Valley
Stormwater Channel levees, the Eastside Dike, or the Coachella Canal remains a risk for the people of
Coachella. The channel’s levee system, or the canal, could be affected by a severe earthquake, with
the potential for the foundation soils to fail as a result of lateral spreading. Liquefaction and lateral
spreading damaged several levees in the Imperial Valley during earthquakes in 1979 and 1987, and
more recently, as a result of the Easter Sunday (Sierra El Mayor-Cucapah) earthquake of 2010. Field
reconnaissance of the Imperial Valley canals following the 2010 earthquake showed that there was
significant slumping and lateral spreading along the canals, although none of them failed. However, this
damage was the result of an earthquake many miles to the south causing shaking-induced lateral
spreading. The canals in the General Plan area could be damaged by strong ground shaking, ground
deformation and surface fault rupture.
Within the General Plan area, the Coachella Canal is especially vulnerable to primary fault rupture, as
its alignment nearly coincides with the trace of the San Andreas fault – a condition considerably more
severe than a high-angle fault crossing. The 2008 ShakeOut Scenario by the U.S. Geological Survey
estimates that rupture by offset of the canal would likely occur in at least three places, resulting in
flooding of valley areas to the southwest. Immediate offset could be on the order of 7.2 to 15.7 feet,
with an additional afterslip of 5.9 to 10.8 feet, which is likely to hamper repairs of the damaged canal.
In anticipation of a major earthquake, the Coachella Valley Water District has a comprehensive
Emergency Response Plan in place that includes the canal system. They have also participated in
Shakeout drills that include simulated earthquake damage and practiced response to a break in the
canal. There are however, currently no engineering analyses that include potential inundation mapping
of the levees and canals in the Coachella area.
Inundation in a smaller scale can also occur if an above-ground water storage tank suffers damage as
a result of ground shaking, releasing the water. Flexible joints at the inlet/outlet connections, in addition
to bracing and baffling, can help mitigate the damage resulting from water sloshing inside the tank. The
City of Coachella has three above-ground water reservoirs in the General Plan area. The newest tank,
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                     | 03-31

located at Well 18, is the only one constructed to current seismic standards. However, all tanks have
isolation valves. The only above-ground reservoir in the Coachella General Plan area, owned by the
Coachella Valley Water District, is located in their Coachella yard. It is an older tank that has not been
retrofitted. The District is evaluating whether to upgrade or demolish the facility. Maintaining the
structural integrity of these water tanks during an earthquake is important not only to prevent flooding
and provide water to residents but also to fight any fires that may occur as a result of the earthquake.
Wildfires are a necessary part of the natural ecosystem in southern California, but they become a
hazard when they extend out of control into developed areas, with a loss of property, and sometimes,
unfortunately, injuries or deaths. The wildfire risk in the United States has increased in the last few
decades with the encroachment of residences and other structures into the wildland environment and
the increasingly larger number of people living and playing in wildland areas.
The valley portion of Coachella is located in the Colorado Desert section of the Southeastern Deserts
Bioregion, while the hilly, far eastern section of the planning area is a small outlier of the South Coast
Bioregion. The Deserts Bioregion is characterized by isolated mountain ranges separated by broad
basins blanketed with alluvial fan, dune and playa deposits. In its native state, the Colorado Desert
section is characterized by low- to mid-size riparian vegetation, with desert scrub being the predominant
vegetation. In Coachella, however, most of the acreage within the Colorado Desert section is no longer
in a natural state, as the native cover has been replaced by crops and urban development, or has been
altered to varying degrees by road construction, introduction of invasive plant species and other
stressors.
In the past 40 years, several different but related fire hazard assessment and classification systems
have been developed at the local, state and federal level for the purpose of quantifying the severity of a
fire hazard in a given area. The State Responsibility Areas system was developed and implemented by
the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection to rank fire hazards in California as moderate,
high or very high based primarily on fuel types. There are no State Responsibility Areas in the
Coachella General Plan area. However, there are several sections classified as Federal Responsibility
Areas with a moderate fire hazard, and a small section in the far northeastern corner of the planning
area is considered to have a high fire hazard. Most of the hillsides in the eastern and northeastern half
of Coachella are located within a Local Responsibility Area (LRAs) with a moderate fire hazard. The
developed areas in the valley floor do not have a wildfire hazard. Under the California Plan, most of the
Coachella planning area east of the Coachella Canal is mapped having a moderate fuel rank and
potential fire behavior, with isolated pockets of high fuel rank potential fire behavior.
Hazardous materials are used every day in industrial, commercial, medical and residential applications.
The primary concern associated with a hazardous materials release is the short- and/or long-term
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                   | 03-32
effect to the public from exposure to these substances. Compared to other cities in southern California,
Coachella has a relatively low number of sites that generate, use or store hazardous materials.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), there are no Superfund sites in the Coachella
General Plan area. There is one facility in Coachella listed in the most recent Toxics Release Inventory
database released to the public on December 2010 with data for the year 2009. This TRI facility is the
ARMTEC Defense Products Company, an ordnance and accessories manufacturer. As of May 10, 2011,
there were 21 locations in Coachella study area reported as small-quantity generators, and three as
large-quantity generators. Two of the small-quantity generators are listed as “conditionally exempt.” The
Foster-Gardner site, a company that previously manufactured pesticides, is included in the Cortese list.
There are no registered transporters of hazardous waste in the City; however, hazardous materials are
transported through the City, both by truck and rail. Refer to Figure 3- for an illustration of the location
of known sites in the City.3
                                      Map prepared by: Earth Consultants International
 Figure 3-11: Hazardous Materials Sites
EXISTING CONDITIONS                                                                                    | 03-33


This Element provides a long-term vision, goals and policies for land use and development in Coachella
over the next 20 to 30 years. Over this time, Coachella is expected to grow significantly and transform
from a small town to a medium sized city. Coachella will become a community of walkable
neighborhoods, tied together by multi-modal transportation corridors and interspersed with vibrant
districts for shopping, working, entertaining and commerce. The walkable neighborhoods will have a
diverse mix of housing and will be in close proximity to shopping and services so the majority of one’s
daily needs are a short walk away. Downtown will grow and expand to serve as the cultural and
economic hub of the City with a variety of retail, entertainment and office uses where residents of the
region may shop and play. There will also be a significant number of new jobs in industrial areas near
the airport, as well as office, and research and development space adjacent to downtown. The urban
area of the City will also be supported by a vast network of parks, trails and open spaces.
While high level of growth is desired by the residents and elected officials of Coachella, it also comes
with a unique set of challenges that includes maintaining the small-town character, paying for
infrastructure, public facilities and services and ensuring the growth improves the quality of life for
residents and the economic environment for businesses. Given the amount of development that will
occur and the large geographic area of the City, the Element balances the need for long-term flexibility
with necessary regulations to meet the City’s vision.
The goals and policies in the Land Use and Community Character Element are critical to the overall
success of the City. Thus, it goes beyond typical land use element requirements prescribed by
California. In addition to regulating land use and development intensity, the Element also regulates the
form and character of development that will occur and the connections between development projects.
There are also regulations for the provision of the necessary public facilities and services to create the
high quality of life desired by the residents of Coachella. However, the regulation of land use is highly
flexible to allow for changes in economic and demographic conditions over time. This balance of
flexibility and regulation will ensure project sponsors have a high degree of control of what is proposed
and the City develops as a network of high-quality neighborhoods, retail areas and employment centers.
The Land Use and Community Character Element is organized into the following sections:
          Our Community’s Goals: This section includes a brief summary of the overall goals and
           direction of the Element.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-1

        General Plan Designations: The General Plan Designations are one of the most important
         components of the General Plan because they identify the intended future land use,
         development intensity and development character for the entire City. The designations are
         divided into six base designations: Ranchos, Neighborhoods, Centers, Districts, Specific Plans,
         and Public. This section includes descriptions of designations, a designation map, a summary
         table of regulations and requirements and a description of the master planning process for new
         development projects.
        Subarea Descriptions: For planning purposes and to ensure the City has unique and distinct
         areas, Coachella is divided into 17 distinct subareas. Each subarea includes an overview of the
         existing conditions of the area, a vision statement for the area and specific policies that guide
         future development in the subarea.
        Goals and Policies: This section includes broad goals and policies for land use and community
         design topics that apply to the entire City.
The General Plan is designed to be a transformative vision for the future of Coachella through the year
2035 and beyond. It provides guidance not just for day-to-day planning decisions but for how these
individual decisions should move the City toward a new future.
During the General Plan update process, the citizens of Coachella, along with the City Council and
Planning Commission, provided their ideas for what Coachella should look like in the future. They
identified the unique aspects of the City as well as the vision for the growth as Coachella transforms
from a small town into a medium-sized city. As part of this process, the community identified key land
use and community design concepts, described below, which are the foundation for both the City’s
future land-use vision, the development of General Plan designations and for the specific goals and
policies contained in this Element, as well as elsewhere in the General Plan.
To achieve the community’s vision as presented in Chapter 3 of the General Plan, the Land Use and
Community Design Element is organized around the following broad goals.
        Grow into a medium sized City while preserving small town character and identity. The City
         is expected to grow from approximately 40,000 people in 2010 to upwards of 150,000 by
         2035 and more growth is envisioned for the City beyond 2035. As the City grows, there is a
         strong desire to preserve the small-town character and identity while also becoming a full-
         service city. Allowing for growth while maintaining the character of the community is a critical
         goal of the plan.
        Preserve cultural and ethnic heritage. The City is culturally diverse with a rich heritage. While
         the City will change over time, the community desires that maintaining cultural and ethnic
         diversity be a priority of the City.
        Create walkable and interconnected neighborhoods. Neighborhoods are the building blocks of
         cities and the residents of Coachella desire those that are walkable, attractive and near goods
         and services.
        Create neighborhood-oriented retail centers. Interspersed between neighborhoods should be
         retail and commercial centers that provide daily goods and services for residents within a
         walking distance of most homes. The centers should be designed to be easily accessible from
         neighborhoods and have a walkable, main street character.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-2

       Revitalize the existing City. While the City will grow and change over time, care and attention
        must be given to the current residents and businesses and the existing built environment. This
        plan calls for a revitalization and improvement of the City’s character and infrastructure. Projects
        such as streetscape improvements, attracting new uses and revitalizing the downtown and the
        major transportation corridors will enable Coachella to move toward becoming a complete city.
       Define the form and character of new development. Moving forward, the City will use urban
        design to differentiate Coachella from its neighbors. There are standards and guidelines for how
        the City – its neighborhoods, centers and districts - should look, feel and function.
       Make the City connected and multi-modal. Connectivity for pedestrians, cyclists, transit and
        vehicles is a critical component of a livable and sustainable city. While much of the plan is
        flexible and visionary, this plan includes specific standards for how areas of the City should link
        to one another and how individual development projects should be connected internally and
        externally.
       Preserve the natural beauty and scenic quality of the City. The City is located in an area of
        striking natural beauty. While the landscape will be altered with future development, the views
        of the mountains and the rural, agricultural character should be respected. In general, the
        natural topography of the hills should be maintained, some of the existing agricultural uses
        should be preserved or integrated into the landscape and views of the surrounding mountains
        should be maintained.
       Provide public facilities and services to improve the quality of life. As the City grows, it is
        essential that quality public facilities and services be provided for residents. This includes parks,
        civic buildings, community centers and programs, such as athletic leagues. Providing services at
        the time development occurs, and requiring developers pay for their fair share of the costs, is
        an important part of transforming Coachella into a full-service city.
       Revitalize and expand the Downtown. The Downtown is the heart of the City and should be
        supported, revitalized and expanded to accommodate Coachella’s growing population. Arts and
        cultural activities, civic uses and destination retail and shopping should be focused here.
        Festivals and farmers markets should occur Downtown whenever possible and the Downtown
        can be expanded to become a hub of office and economic activity for the Coachella Valley.
       Make Coachella a destination for tourism and entertainment. Coachella should expand the
        number and variety of tourism and entertainment uses as the City grows and changes over
        time. While difficult to attract, such uses could include hotels, theme parks, sports complexes,
        performing arts venues and major retail centers.
       Expand economic development opportunities. As the City’s population grows, so too should
        the number and diversity of jobs. Over time, the job base should expand considerably so
        Coachella is not just a bedroom community but is also a thriving job center and a major hub of
        commerce in the Coachella Valley. There should be a diversity of jobs that match the diversity
        and skill level of its residents. Supplementing this should be an educational system – including
        a college or university – and vocational training to improve the socio-economic conditions of
        Coachella residents.
       Improve the fiscal health of the City. As the City and its economy grows and diversifies over
        time, the fiscal health of Coachella should also improve. New development should pay its own
        way and all decisions should be made with an understanding of the overall, long-term fiscal
        health of the City.
       Allow for creativity and flexibility in development and growth. Coachella is going to grow
        considerably over time and the exact location of each use is difficult to predict. Thus, this plan
        provides for significant flexibility in the location of new uses. This will allow developers to define
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-3

         the range of new uses in their projects so long as it conforms to the overall vision of the City
         and the vision of the subarea where the project is located.
        SB 244. A description of the disadvantaged communities found in the Planning Area is in
         Chapter 3, Existing Conditions.
State law requires that General Plans identify the future intended land use in the City and the allowable
density or intensity of development. The General Plan designations are developed to provide a vision of
the organization of uses in the City and a flexible structure to allow for changes in economic conditions
and community visions. Further flexibility is added in the General Plan to account for the large amounts
of undeveloped land that may be converted into urban uses as Coachella grows from a small town to a
medium-sized city by 2035.
The General Plan designations are organized into six base designations. A description of each is below
and summarized in Table 4-1 and Table 4-2:
        Ranchos. These rural areas include space for agriculture and low density residential
         development. The preservation of agriculture in viable sizes for continued agricultural production
         is critical as the City urbanizes over time.
        Neighborhoods. Neighborhoods are the basic building block of great cities and this General
         Plan identifies a range of neighborhood types. The vision of the plan is to create complete,
         compact and connected neighborhoods that provide a high quality of life for residents.
        Centers. Centers are the primary places of commerce, neighborhood-serving retail, arts and
         culture and civic activities. There are a variety of centers ranging from walkable, mixed-use
         Neighborhood Center to Downtown to higher intensity employment areas. Centers are
         characterized by the urban and walkable character and their mix of uses.
        Districts. Districts are areas of the City that are more single use and automobile-oriented. The
         Districts include large format retail and commercial areas, industrial areas and resorts. These
         areas are critical to the overall economic prosperity of the City but have a lower level of design
         regulation and pedestrian-orientation than other areas of the City.
        Specific Plans. These areas are approved Specific Plans. In these areas, the Specific Plan
         defines the land uses and development intensity. As approved Specific Plans are updated or
         modified, they should conform to the vision and policies in this General Plan.
        Public. This category of designations is for a range of public facilities and uses including parks,
         public buildings and preserved open spaces.
Within the six base designations there are 16 General Plan character designations, each of which is
described in the next section.
In addition to the required information on allowed land use and intensity of development, the General
Plan character designations provide more detailed information on the built form and character of the
uses than is typically found in a general plan. With the exception of the Public and Specific Plan
designations (which are described more generally), each designation has policy guidance on:
        Intent and purpose. This describes the overall purpose of the land use designation.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-4

       Intended physical character. This describes the intended physical form and character that new
        development will take.
       Allowed land uses. The allowed land uses are generally described. Additional detail on specific
        land uses is provided in a separate table that follows the land use designation descriptions.
        (See Table 3-1.)
       Development intensity. The intensity of development as measured in dwelling units per acre for
        residential development and floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential development.
       Network and connectivity. This includes descriptions and metrics for ensuring a high level of
        connectivity in the transportation system.
       Street design. A description of the roadways desired in each designation is included. This
        description works in concert with the policies and street types in the Mobility Element.
       Parks and open space. This includes descriptions of the range of parks and open spaces
        desired. Additional detail on specific park types is provided in a separate table presented in the
        Sustainability and Natural Environment Element. (See Table 6-1.)
       Urban form guidelines. This includes information on the overall urban form of the designation
        including lot coverage, building frontages, parking location and access and allowed building
        types.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-5

    Ranchos                Neighborhoods                  Centers      Districts        Specific Plans  Public
     Agricultural                Suburban                 Neighborhood   Suburban                        Parks and
                                                                                           La Entrada
       Rancho                  Neighborhood                   Center    Retail District                Open Spaces
                                  General                   Downtown   Regional Retail      Coachella
    Rural Rancho                                                                                          Schools
                               Neighborhood                   Center       District         Vineyards
                                                              Urban                                        Public
                                   Urban                                  Industrial      Brandenburg
                                                           Employment                                  Facilities and
                               Neighborhood                                District          Butters
                                                              Center                                     Buildings
                                                                       Resort District     Eagle Falls
                                                                                          Shadow View
Figure 4-1: General Plan Base Designations and Character Designations.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                  | 04-6
Rural and agricultural areas are part of the history and heritage of Coachella and are important aspects
of the community’s image and identity. These land use designations are intended to preserve agriculture
in the City for economic development and aesthetic benefits. This category also allows for rural
development, both in a common pattern of homes on large parcels and in developments with homes
clustered together and surrounded by preserved open space. Based on these characteristics, the
General Plan contains two Rancho designations: Agricultural Rancho and Rural Rancho.
The Agricultural Rancho designation provides areas for productive agriculture uses in the City.
Agricultural areas provide for active uses such as date farms, field crops or grapes. In some cases, this
designation also encompasses other working lands that provide an open space benefit or are in other
ways a non-urban land use, such as mining. These rural environments – and the natural and
agricultural systems that define them – are intended to be preserved in perpetuity and may not be
converted for urban use.
Areas with this designation are undeveloped except for rural roads providing access and buildings
related agricultural production.
Allowed uses include agricultural lands and small amounts of accessory uses that support the
agricultural use. Agricultural uses include housing for farm owners and workers, equestrian stables,
barns and sheds for packaging, processing and selling produce grown on site. In certain cases, mining
is also allowed.
DU/AC = 1 unit per parcel or 1 unit per 40 acres, whichever is smaller.
Commercial = 0.01 FAR max.
“Blocks” defined by public roads through these environments are very large – in some cases 1 mile by
1 mile or ½ mile by ½ mile, in some cases transected by private roads – paved and unpaved – and by
trails to the extent necessary for access. Some dead end roads may be warranted to preserve existing
topography and/or natural environment.
Streets accessing these properties are rural in character, with:
     1. Paved and/or compact aggregate pedestrian and multi-use trails – generally separated from the
          roadway – in lieu of sidewalks.
     2. Compacted shoulders in lieu of on-street parking lanes.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-7

      3. Open drainage swales (ditches) in lieu of curb and gutter improvements.
      4. Minimal or no street lights.
This designation is intrinsically an open space designation, so no additional open-space requirements
are necessary.
      1.   Parcels are large, ranging from 40 acres to several hundred acres.
      2. Grading is strictly limited to the bare minimum necessary for access or cultivation. Buildings
           conform themselves to the natural terrain.
      3. Buildings are generally set back from roads with deep front, side and rear setbacks. Frontages
           are generally defined by rustic, open fences.
      4. Building heights are generally one to two stories and in some cases 2 ½ stories with a partial
           third floor under the roof on larger lots. In the case of agricultural barns and buildings,
           structures may be taller and the equivalent of multiple stories.
 Existing farmlands in eastern Coachella.                       Very large blocks are acceptable in Agricultural Rancho designations.
 Cultivation is an integral part of the Coachella heritage and  Buildings should be agricultural in character and design.
 economy.
Figure 4-2: Examples of Agricultural Rancho character
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                    | 04-8

The Rural Rancho designation accommodates low intensity residential development within a preserved
rural landscape. These areas are intended to serve as a buffer between Agriculture and any of the
urban designations of this Plan or as the edge of the urbanized City.
Dwellings and their accessory buildings are integrated into the natural or agricultural landscape and
don’t fundamentally alter that landscape. Residences may be distributed throughout the landscape on
large lots or may be clustered as a village.
Residential primarily, except for home occupations, and uses accessory to agricultural cultivation.
DU/AC = 0.4 (1 unit per 2.5 aces) – 1 DU/AC
FAR = n/a
“Blocks” defined by public roads through this rural environment are large, up to ¼ mile by ¼ mile, in
some cases transected by private roads – paved and unpaved. Some dead end roads may be
warranted to preserve existing topography and/or natural environment.
Streets accessing these properties are rural in character, with:
    1. Paved and/or compact aggregate pedestrian and multi-use trails – generally separated from the
         roadway – in lieu of sidewalks.
    2. Compacted shoulders in lieu of on-street parking lanes.
    3. Open drainage swales (ditches) in lieu of curb and gutter improvements.
    4. Minimal or no street lights.
    1.   Neighborhood Parks and Mini Parks, such as tot-lots, are required as part of rural development
         projects.
    2. Community Parks may be located in limited amounts throughout these areas.
    3. Areas should be connected to the urban parts of the community through multi-use trails and
         greenways.
    4. Nature, as exemplified by agriculture and open space, is acceptable, as well, when resource
         conservation is a priority at a given site.
    1.   Parcels are large with low building coverage (generally less than 10 percent), except for rural
         cluster development (where parcels are smaller and clustered in order to preserve large open
         space areas for common use, public use and/or natural preservation).
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-9

     2. Grading is strictly limited to the bare minimum necessary for access or cultivation. Buildings
          conform themselves to the natural terrain.
     3. Buildings are generally set back from roads with deep front, side and rear setbacks to maintain
          the rural character. Frontages are generally defined by rustic, open fences.
     4. Buildings are limited to single family houses, accessory second units and agricultural barns and
          sheds.
     5. Building heights are generally one to two stories and in some cases 2 ½ stories with a partial
          third floor under the roof on larger lots. In the case of agricultural barns and buildings,
          structures may be taller and the equivalent of multiple stories.
 Cluster pattern achieved through “conservation subdivision”         Rural Rancho houses have deep setbacks with rustic fencing.
 design (Source: University of Idaho Junior Design Studio).
 Clustered development allows for substantial open-space preservation (Source: Capitol Development Design).
Figure 4-3: Examples of Rural Rancho land use character.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                      | 04-10

Neighborhoods are the basic building blocks of a livable and sustainable Coachella. A Coachella
neighborhood – as defined in this Plan – mixes a variety of residential types within a walkable network
of green streets and parks, well-connected to parks, schools and neighborhood centers to serve daily
shopping needs. Almost all of Coachella’s residents live in neighborhoods, which must provide safe,
attractive and comfortable places to live and play. The neighborhood designations presented below call
for the development of such traditional neighborhoods throughout the City. The design character and
mix of residential types will vary by neighborhood and by location within town, but all neighborhoods
should have the following common characteristics:
      A diversity of housing types.
      A diversity of architectural styles.
      A variety of attractive, green, walkable streets that provide a safe environment for pedestrians,
         bicyclists and children.
      A focus on a public amenity, such as a park, school or civic or recreational center.
      Comfortable walking and biking access to a neighborhood center with basic commercial
         amenities, such as shops and restaurants.
      A street network designed to provide abundant routes within the neighborhood – and connecting
         to adjoining neighborhoods, districts and corridors – for walking, biking and short car trips.
Neighborhoods with these simple, timeless characteristics have generally proven to be the most
desirable living environments in cities throughout California over the past century, holding their value
through economic downturns and enjoying multiple cycles of reinvestment and renovation. The
conventional, automobile-oriented residential development patterns that have been prevalent in recent
years in the Coachella Valley, and Southern California at large– such as those with gated subdivisions,
cul-de-sacs, treeless walled arterial streets, and limited connectivity to adjoining neighborhoods and
amenities – do not support the active, healthy lifestyles that Coachella envisions for its future.
Based on these characteristics, the Coachella General Plan identifies three designations for the creation
of neighborhoods within the City. These are:
     1. Suburban Neighborhood. Predominantly single family residential housing types.
     2. General Neighborhoods. A mix of single-family and multi-family housing types with good non-
         motorized access to a range of civic and commercial amenities.
     3. Urban neighborhoods. Predominantly – although not exclusively – multi-family housing types
         with very good non-motorized access to a wide range of civic and commercial amenities located
         at the edges and/or within the mixed-use fabric of the neighborhood.
Many existing residential areas of Coachella do not meet the criteria identified here, and most are
valued by the residents who call them home. However, their long-term value and livability may be
further enhanced by the introduction of selected elements of this vision for Coachella’s neighborhoods
over time. Improved landscape, pedestrian and bike facilities along with enhanced access and
connections to nearby civic and commercial amenities should be considered in particular.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-11

Suburban Neighborhoods provide a lower intensity, quieter, family-living environment but are still well
connected to surrounding neighborhoods, retail areas as well as natural and agricultural open spaces.
Because Suburban Neighborhoods are less compact than General Neighborhoods, they are inherently
less walkable and amenities such as parks, schools and convenience retail are farther from most
residences. Accordingly, greater accommodation is provided to the automobile in these Neighborhoods,
and greater attention must be paid to bike routes.
Suburban Neighborhoods provide a more naturalistic, landscaped setting than General Neighborhoods,
and tend to have larger lots, larger yards, larger setbacks, more landscaping and predominantly single-
family houses.
Residential only (except for home occupations).
DU/AC = 2 – 8, with 5 DU/AC average for new projects
FAR = n/a
    1.  The street network should be well connected with walkable blocks – between 400 and 600 feet
        long in most cases. The maximum block perimeter should be 3,200 feet. Larger blocks or
        dead-end streets may be considered where the community design value of natural elements –
        such as waterways, hills or sensitive habitats – warrant compromise.
    2. Neighborhoods must be designed with at least one through street every 800 feet, unless the
        community design value of natural elements – such as waterways, hills or sensitive habitats –
        warrant compromise. Considerations warranting such compromise do not include increasing the
        number of lots or reducing the connectivity within a neighborhood or adjoining neighborhoods.
    1.  Residential streets should be as narrow as practical to encourage slow, safe driving speeds,
        with curbside parking on both sides. Recommended curb to curb dimensions range from 34 to
        36 feet, depending on expected traffic volumes.
    2. Sidewalks (minimum of six feet) should be provided on both sides of the street, separated from
        the curb by a parkway strip least six feet wide or more.
    3. Street trees should be planted approximately 30 to 40 feet apart – sometimes in uneven,
        naturalistic patterns – to provide a picturesque canopy to shade the yards and street while
        enhancing neighborhood character and identity. Broad canopied, deciduous trees are preferred
        near homes to provide shade in the summer and still allow heating and daylight from the winter
        sun.
    1.  Mini Parks and Neighborhood Parks should be integrated into the neighborhood, approximately
        a quarter-mile walk distance of at least 75 percent of the dwelling units. Other allowed park
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-12

           types include Community Parks, Plazas/Greens, Linear Parks, Special Use Parks,
           Greenways/Trails and Nature.
    1. Lot coverage generally does not exceed 40 percent.
    2. Buildings should have generous front, rear and side yards.
    3. The main entrance to the residence should be located within the front façade, accessed directly
           from the street and designed to welcome visitors.
    4. Building heights are generally one and two stories, and in some cases 2 ½ stories with a
           partial third floor under the roof on larger lots.
    5. Alleys are recommended for lots less than 60 feet wide to minimize dominating streets with
           garages. Driveways from the street should be as narrow as practical, and not more than 20%
           of the lot width within the front yard setback to minimize front yard paving.
    Typical Suburban Neighborhood land use pattern.               Architecture appropriate to the Coachella context.
    If alleys are not possible, design a frontage which minimizes Generous front yard setbacks with planter strip between
    the visual impact of the garage/driveway.                     sidewalk and roadway.
    Figure 4-4: Examples of Suburban Neighborhood pattern and character.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                      | 04-13

Figure 4-5: Illustrative land use diagram for desired character and form of Suburban Neighborhood.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-14
General Neighborhoods provide a diversity of housing that meets the needs of Coachella’s many
household sizes, incomes and lifestyle preferences. General Neighborhoods integrate a range of single-
and multi-family housing options within a green, walkable neighborhood environment that offers parks
and playgrounds for their residents and access to schools and basic shopping needs within a
comfortable walk, bike ride or short drive.
The fundamental character of these neighborhoods is defined by tree-lined streets and small blocks,
well-landscaped front yards and welcoming entries to each residence. Vehicular access and parking on
each lot should not intrude into the front yards, primarily places for children to play and neighbors to
meet. Although most of the residences are single-family detached houses, multi-family housing is also
provided in “house-form” building types – such as duplexes, garden apartments and rowhouses – that
are compatible in scale and character with houses. Large apartment buildings or complexes are not
compatible with this sort of neighborhood setting.
Residential only (except for home occupations)
DU/AC = 7 – 25 DU/AC, with 12 DU/AC average for new projects
FAR = n/a
    1.  The street network should be well interconnected with pedestrian friendly blocks – between 400
        and 500 feet long in most cases. The maximum block perimeter should be 2,400 feet. Larger
        blocks or dead-end streets may be considered where the community design value of natural
        elements – such as creeks, hills or sensitive habitats – warrant compromise.
    2. Neighborhoods must be designed with at least one through street every 800 feet, unless the
        community design value of natural elements – such as creeks, hills or sensitive habitats –
        warrant compromise. Considerations warranting such compromise do not include increasing the
        number of lots or reducing the connectivity within a neighborhood or adjoining neighborhoods.
    1.  Residential streets should be as narrow as practical to encourage slow, safe driving speeds,
        with curbside parking on both sides. Recommended curb-to-curb dimensions range from 34 to
        36 feet, depending on expected traffic volume. Narrower dimensions might be acceptable if
        approved by the city engineer and fire department.
    2. Sidewalks (minimum of six feet) should be provided on both sides of the street, separated from
        the curb by a parkway strip at least six feet wide.
    3. Trees should be planted approximately 30 to 40 feet apart to provide a canopy and shade to
        enhance neighborhood character and identity. Deciduous trees and those with broad, shading
        canopies are preferred.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-15

     1.  Mini Parks and Neighborhood Parks should be integrated into the neighborhood, within
         approximately a ¼-mile distance of at least 75 percent of the dwelling units. Other allowed park
         types include Plazas/Greens, Linear Parks, Community Parks, Special Use Parks,
         Greenways/Trails and Nature.
     1. Lot coverage generally does not exceed 50 percent.
     2. Desired building types are Single-Family Houses, Duplex/Triplex/Quadplex,
         Multiplex/Efficiency Dwelling, Rowhouse/Townhouse, Garden Apartment and Urban Apartment.
     3. Building are generally one and two stories, with some three-story buildings near a
         Neighborhood Center.
     4. Buildings – except row houses – should have front, rear and side yards.
     5. The main entrance to the residence should be located within the front façade, accessed directly
         from the street and designed to welcome visitors.
     6. Vehicular access should be provided through an alley at the rear of the lot or a driveway to the
         street. Driveways from the street should be as narrow as practical – and not more than 20% of
         the lot width – to minimize front-yard paving.
Duplexes provide a high quality street-fronting condition.     Two-story rowhouses are suitable to General Neighborhood.
Bungalow courts are appropriate for a desired density of 7-25 Alley-loaded townhouses face a narrow, residential street.
DUA.
 Figure 4-6: Examples of General Neighborhood form and character
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                      | 04-16

Figure 4-7: Illustrative land use diagram for desired character and form of General Neighborhood.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                    | 04-17
Figure 4-8: Illustrative renderings of General Neighborhood form and character (Source: Sargent Town Planning)
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                              | 04-18
Urban Neighborhoods create a high-intensity, walkable, transit-ready neighborhood with a variety of
types of housing - predominantly multi-family of various types. Urban Neighborhoods should be located
in close proximity to high quantities of commercial, civic and recreational uses. The value of the Urban
Neighborhood derives from its compactness, and the degree to which it allows a larger number of
residents to live near one another, within easy walking distance of parks, schools, shops, transit and
employment.
The design character of an urban neighborhood is defined by its buildings, with smaller setbacks and
smaller yard area per household. This compression of more building and more activity into each block
requires vehicular access, parking and services be provided primarily by alleys, to avoid degrading the
pedestrian quality of the streetscapes. The design quality of public open spaces and private frontages is
especially critical to making a comfortable living environment for neighborhood residents.
Primarily multi-family residential. Support retail, office, civic and recreational uses may be allowed in
limited quantities. Small numbers of single-family homes may be allowed.
DU/AC = 20 – 38 DU/AC with 30 DU/AC average for new projects
FAR = 0.5
     1.  The street network should be highly interconnected with pedestrian friendly blocks, between
         400 and 500 feet long in most cases. Block depths are generally 250 to 300 feet to allow
         space for alley-accessed parking at the rear of lots. The block perimeter should be no more
         than 2,400 feet
     2. Neighborhoods must be designed with at least one through street every 800 feet, unless the
         community design value of natural elements – such as waterways, hills or sensitive habitats –
         warrant compromise. Considerations warranting such compromise do not include increasing the
         number of lots or reducing the connectivity within a neighborhood or adjoining neighborhoods.
     1.  Streets should be as narrow as practical to encourage slow, safe driving speeds, with curbside
         parking on both sides. Recommended curb to curb dimensions range from 34 to 36 feet,
         depending on expected traffic volumes.
     2. Sidewalks (minimum of six feet) should be provided on both sides of the street, separated from
         the curb by a parkway strip at least six feet wide. On streets with multi-family housing, portions
         of the parkway strip may be paved to facilitate higher parking volume.
     3. Trees should be planted approximately 30 to 40 feet apart to provide a canopy and shade to
         enhance neighborhood character and identity. Deciduous trees and those with broad, shading
         canopies are preferred.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-19

     1.   Mini Parks and Neighborhood Parks should be integrated into the neighborhood, within
          approximately a quarter-mile distance of at least 75 percent of the dwelling units. Other allowed
          park types include Plazas/Greens and Greenways/Trails.
     1.   Lot coverage generally does not exceed 60 percent.
     2.   Buildings should generally have front and rear yards.
     3.   Desired building types are Rowhouse/Townhouse, Garden Apartment and Urban Apartment.
     4.   The main entrance to each building should be located within the front façade, accessed directly
          from the street and designed to welcome visitors.
     5. Building heights are generally two to three stories.
     6. Vehicular access should be provided through an alley at the rear of the lot or a driveway
          connecting to the street. Driveways from the street, when necessary, should be as narrow as
          practical – and not more than 18 feet wide.
 Three-story apartment complex with a landscaped setback.    Narrow townhouses contribute to a dense, walkable place.
 Garden multiplexes with common entrances and private yards. Three-story modern townhouses with tuck-under parking.
 Figure 4-9: Examples of Urban Neighborhood Form and Character
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                   | 04-20

Figure 4-10: Illustrative land use diagram for desired character and form of Urban Neighborhood Form.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-21
Centers are commercial areas with a compact and walkable environment and a mix of primarily non-
residential uses. Some Centers are retail and service commercial oriented and provide concentrations of
goods and services that residents of the nearby neighborhoods need for their daily lives. Others provide
concentrations of jobs, civic and cultural uses. Multi-family residences may also be integrated into
Centers, often on upper floors of buildings above ground-floor businesses.
This General Plan presents three different Centers, each with a slightly different character and non-
residential intent. Retail-oriented Centers will vary in size but are generally located on larger, cross-town
avenues, where they have the benefit of significant amounts of pass-by traffic as well as connections
back into adjoining neighborhoods. In some areas near the middle of town, Centers may extend along
major avenues in a form similar to strip commercial but with a stronger pedestrian orientation. There
can be town-scale buildings that address the avenue and neighborhood streets that provide high quality
pedestrian and bicycle connections to nearby residences. In such cases, the Centers become “corridors”
(or linear Centers) that derive value from the traffic on the avenue while buffering the flanking
neighborhoods from the busier corridor environment.
Like neighborhoods, the design character and mix of commercial types will vary by center and by
location within town but all should have the following common characteristics:
     A diversity of architectural styles.
     A variety of attractive, green, walkable streets that provide a safe environment for pedestrians,
         bicyclists and children.
     Comfortable walking and biking access to nearby neighborhoods.
     An interconnected street network designed to provide abundant routes connecting to adjoining
         neighborhoods, districts and corridors – for walking, biking and short car trips.
Based on these characteristics, the Coachella General Plan identifies three designations for the creation
of centers within the City. These are:
    1.   Neighborhood Center: Provides for a concentration of neighborhood-serving commercial
         businesses and civic amenities - often mixed with multi-family housing - within convenient
         walking or biking distance of nearby neighborhoods.
    2. Downtown Center: Serves to bring the entire community together in a one-of-a-kind Coachella
         center that is the civic heart of the City. The hallmark of Downtown Coachella is unique local
         goods, services, culture and society.
    3. Urban Employment Center: Provides for a range of employment uses to help expand and
         diversify the City’s economy and transform Coachella from a small town into a full-service city.
         These centers are the primary location for office and professional jobs, supported by retail,
         services and homes.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-22

This designation creates a concentration of commercial businesses and civic amenities—often mixed
with multi-family housing—within convenient walking or biking distance of nearby neighborhoods.
Centers provide gathering places for the residents of surrounding neighborhoods and are ideal locations
for high-quality transit stops.
Generally located at the intersection of two major roadways, Neighborhood Centers balance the need to
provide convenient access and parking for passing motorists with the need to provide a comfortable,
walkable environment for shoppers and diners. Buildings face public streets (either the primary roadway
or new internal streets) with attractive shopfronts designed to display merchandise, dining rooms,, patios
and signage to passersby. Streets connect the center to adjacent neighborhoods and to the urban
corridor(s), providing convenient access on foot or by bike from residences to retail amenities and to
transit.
Primarily neighborhood-serving retail and services, with
residential uses on upper floors of mixed-use buildings           While Coachella’s Neighborhood Centers
and in multi-family buildings at the edge of the center           are envisioned as shopping centers and
where it transitions to the adjoining neighborhood.               centers of social life – as well as
                                                                  possessing physical design characteristics
                                                                  particular to Coachella – the close
DU/AC = 15 – 40                                                   parallel among the center types defined
FAR = 0.5 – 1.5                                                   by the International Council of Shopping
                                                                  Centers (ICSC) would be the eponymous
                                                                  Neighborhood Center, providing a super
                                                                  market and other shops and restaurants
     1.  Blocks may be large, up to 800 by 800 feet to            to meet the daily and weekly shopping
         accommodate parking required for such                    needs of residents.
         commercial centers. These blocks should be
         subdivided into smaller “virtual blocks” with
         dimensions in the 400- to 500- foot range by major driveways or internal streets that include
         sidewalks on at least one side, detailed as small streets within individual projects. The streets
         flanking the blocks and the drives that transect them should connect to neighborhood streets to
         provide convenient access for nearby residents as well as motorists.
     2. Block perimeters should be no more than 3,200 feet and Neighborhood Centers must be
         connected to adjacent neighborhoods and other areas at least every 600 feet, except where
         connections cannot be made because of physical obstacles, such as prior platting of property,
         construction of existing buildings or other barriers, slopes over 20%, water bodies, railroad and
         utility rights-of-way, existing limited access motor vehicle rights-of-way and existing parks and
         dedicated open space.
     1.  New internal streets should be designed for pedestrians and vehicles with comfortable sidewalks
         and vehicle lanes that are 10 feet wide in most cases, and up to 12 feet to accommodate
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-23

         back-out movements from angled parking spaces. Parallel parking lanes should typically be 8
         feet wide.
     2. Sidewalks 10 to 18 feet wide should be provided on both sides of the street, with trees planted
         in grates or landscaped planters approximately 30 feet on center.
     3. High-branching deciduous trees with relatively open canopy structure are recommended to
         increase the visibility of buildings and signage.
     4. Streets along major roadways may be wider but should be designed to be comfortable and safe
         for pedestrians and cyclists while also accommodating the needs of vehicles.
     1.  Open spaces in Centers generally take the form of Plazas and Greens and should be flanked
         by active ground floor retail or restaurant uses and in some cases ground-floor residences. Mini
         Parks with playgrounds could also be utilized as a park type within Centers.
     1.  A variety of building types are allowed, ranging from Rowhouse/Townhouse to Main
         Street/Mixed-Use.
     2. Building entrances are direct from the sidewalk, generally via shopfronts.
     3. Building heights are generally one to three stories.
     4. Vehicular access is provided to parking lots via common drives detailed as small streets and by
         alleys. Services and trash should be located behind the buildings in alleys.
Neighborhood-serving commercial with a mix of upper-floor  Two-story corner building with flats above storefronts.
uses.
Figure 4-11: Examples of Neighborhood Center Form and Character
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                  | 04-24
Figure 4-12: Illustrative land use diagram for desired character and form of Neighborhood Center.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                    | 04-25
Figure 4-13: Examples of Neighborhood Center form and character. (Source: Sargent Town Planning)
 LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                  | 04-26
As Neighborhood Centers bring residents of surrounding neighborhoods together by providing a
convenient and congenial environment for everyday shopping and dining, the Downtown brings the
entire community together in a one-of-a-kind Coachella center that is the civic heart of the City.
While many of Coachella’s other Centers and Districts are focused on bringing goods and services from
around the region and the world to the residents of the City, the hallmark of Downtown Coachella is
unique local goods, services, culture and society.
Downtown should integrate the seat of city              “PUEBLO VIEJO IS THE CIVIC AND CULTURAL HEART
government, include a higher educational institution    OF COACHELLA . T HE COMMUNITY IS PROUD OF THE
and provide a variety of space for local startup        HISTORIC CHARM , LOCALLY ‐OWNED BUSINESSES AND
businesses, local theater and entertainment,            VIBRANT CIVIC CENTER . A S YOU ENTER THROUGH THE
boutiques and studios focused on local goods, arts      ATTRACTIVE GATEWAYS ON SIXTH STREET , YOU ARE
and crafts and restaurants featuring fresh local foods  IMMERSED IN A LIVELY STREET SCENE OFFERING
and produce. Most importantly, the Downtown is a        SHADY WALKWAYS , COOLING WATER FOUNTAINS ,
place that belongs to all of the people of Coachella    OUTDOOR DINING AND UNIQUE SHOPPING . O NCE
and provides a space where they can meet and            EMPTY LOTS ARE NOW FILLED WITH MIXED ‐ USE
greet one another as they enjoy the life of their       BUILDINGS THAT RESPECT THE HERITAGE , CLIMATE
town.                                                   AND COMMUNITY VALUES . F AMILY ‐ FRIENDLY EVENTS
                                                        AND FESTIVALS FILL THE STREETS AND PUBLIC SPACES .
                                                        AS YOU RELAX IN THE CLEAN, WELL -MAINTAINED
Every Downtown street is designed as an outdoor         CIVIC CENTER CORE , YOU KNOW . . . YOU HAVE
room, defined by active building facades and            ARRIVED IN P UEBLO V IEJO !”
frontages that provide valuable addresses for shops,
restaurants, hotels, residences and community           PUEBLO VIEJO REVITALIZATION PLAN (MARCH 2010)
facilities of many kinds. Plazas and squares
punctuate the network of streets, providing larger,
comfortable spaces for formal and informal
gatherings, outdoor dining, public markets and
special events.
                                                        While Coachella’s Downtown is envisioned as
Buildings define the public realm with arcades,         much more than a shopping center, to the
galleries and awnings that provide welcome shade        extent that a concentration of retail businesses
for pedestrians. Large trees offer shade on hot days    can be attracted to and organized within the
and moderate winds make open spaces more                Downtown, the closest parallel among the
inviting.                                               center types defined by the International
                                                        Council of Shopping Centers (ICSC) would be
                                                        the Theme or Festival Center, as it emphasizes
A diverse mix of commercial, civic, and residential     a unique theme (Coachella and the Coachella
uses focused primarily on retail, office, residential,  Valley) along with restaurants and
civic and recreation.                                   entertainment.
DU/AC = 20 – 65
FAR = 0. 5 – 3.0
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-27

    1.  Blocks are 300 by 400 feet (the approximate size of the existing blocks in Downtown
        Coachella). Mid-block paseos are recommended to provide pedestrian connections from the
        streets to parking facilities within the blocks. Selected blocks may be larger if necessary to
        accommodate special uses such as theaters, college facilities or major municipal parking
        structures but multiple paseos should be provided in such blocks to ensure a high degree of
        connectivity and amenities for pedestrians.
    1.  Downtown streets should be designed for slow driving speeds, convenient curbside parking and
        easy and safe pedestrian movement. Large delivery or emergency vehicles must be
        accommodated but the geometry of intersections and crosswalks should favor the pedestrian in
        all cases.
    2. Vehicular lanes should be 10 feet wide in most cases, and up to 12 feet to accommodate back-
        out movements from angled parking spaces. Parallel parking lanes should typically be eight feet
        wide, although seven feet is sufficient along residential frontages.
    3. Sidewalks of 14 to 20 feet wide should be provided on both sides of the street, with trees
        planted in grates or landscaped planters approximately 30 feet on center.
    4. High-branching deciduous trees with relatively open canopy structure are recommended to
        increase the visibility of buildings and signage. Palms can provide vertical accents in selected
        locations but should generally be used sparingly in combination with canopy trees that provide
        shade.
    1.  Open spaces in the Downtown will generally take the form of Plazas, Squares, Courtyards and
        Paseos. In limited instances, Mini Parks and Neighborhood Parks would also be acceptable.
    1.  An overall diversity of building types is allowed and encouraged. The allowed types are:
        Rowhouse/Townhouse; Garden Apartment; Urban Apartment and Main Street/Mixed Use.
    2.  Building entrances are direct from the sidewalk, via shopfronts, arcades, galleries and forecourts
        for shops and restaurants, and via stoops, dooryards or porches for residences.
    3.  Building heights are generally two to five stories, with taller buildings toward the Downtown
        core.
    4.  Vehicle access is designed to minimize impact on the pedestrian environment. Parking lots are
        located internally to blocks and accessed via side streets, alleys or with a minimal number of
        intrusions in the sidewalk.
    5.  Buildings made of, or emulating, heavy masonry are generally recommended in the Downtown
        subarea.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-28
                                                            Pedestrian-scaled frontages.
Main street shopping corridor with mid-block paseo.
                                                            High-quality streetscape.
Two-story of residential above ground floor shops.
                                                            Open space in Downtown Coachella.
Mixed-use apartment building with pedestrian arcade.        Pedestrian zone.
Figure 4-14: Examples of Downtown Center form and character
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                | 04-29
This General Plan designation provides space for a range of employment uses to help expand and
diversify the City’s economy and transform Coachella from a small town to a full-service city. The
desired employment uses are office and research and development rather than industrial uses such as
manufacturing, distribution and warehouse. The employment uses are supported by retail, service and
similar uses. Residential uses are allowed in residential-only buildings or in a mixed-use configuration
with ground-floor retail. Also allowed are higher education uses (such as a college or university)
designed in urban setting.
The buildings are configured in an urban format of walkable blocks, attractive streetscapes and buildings
at or near the sidewalk edge. There is limited surface parking and minimal landscaping between the
buildings and the sidewalk, typical of office or business parks in the Coachella Valley and Western
Riverside County.
Office, research and development, live-work, multi-family residential, and support retail.
DU/AC = 30 – 65
FAR = 0.5 – 2.0
     1.  Blocks should be approximately 400-500 feet in length with a block perimeter of no more than
         2,400 feet.
     2. Pedestrian connectivity within these centers—and connecting them to adjoining neighborhoods
         and the Downtown system—are top priorities as that is what will differentiate these centers from
         the more auto-oriented industrial district closer to the airport. Mid-block paseos are
         recommended to provide pedestrian connections from the streets to parking facilities within the
         blocks.
     1.  Streets should be designed for slow speeds, convenient curbside parking and easy and safe
         pedestrian crossing. Large delivery or emergency vehicles must be accommodated but the
         geometry of intersections and crosswalks should favor the pedestrian.
     2.  Vehicular lanes should be 10 to 12 feet wide and parallel parking lanes typically eight feet wide,
         although seven feet is sufficient along residential frontages.
     3.  Sidewalks 10 to 16 feet wide should be provided on both sides of the street, with trees planted
         in grates or landscaped planters at approximately 30-40 feet on center.
     4.  High-branching deciduous trees with relatively open canopy structure are recommended to
         increase the visibility of buildings and signage. Palms can provide vertical accents in selected
         locations but should generally be used in combination with canopy trees that provide welcome
         shade.
     5.  In some areas—and particularly in order to attract a large employer to locate in these center—it
         may be appropriate for several blocks to be joined together as a campus environment with
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-30

        pedestrian-only paths that connect to the streets of the surrounding district and neighborhoods.
        This configuration should not be used for speculative building development but reserved as a
        potential enticement to a large user offering significant employment opportunities.
    1.  Open spaces in the Urban Employment Centers will generally take the form of public
        Plazas/Greens, Mini Parks and perhaps a Neighborhood Park. Greenways/Trails may also be
        used to connect open spaces throughout the area and provide connectivity to adjacent areas.
    1.  The primary building types allowed should be Office/R&D and Mixed Use/Main Street. Other
        allowed building types are Garden Apartment and Urban Apartment. Rowhouses/Townhouses
        may be allowed in limited circumstances to serve as a transition to lower density residential
        uses.
    2.  Buildings with ground-floor shopfronts are generally built to the sidewalk and office or R&D
        buildings may be set back behind shallow front yards or forecourts.
    3.  Building entrances are directly from the sidewalk, via forecourts, shopfronts, dooryards, stoops
        and porches.
    4.  Building heights are generally two to five stories.
    5.  Vehicular access is provided to parking lots or structures by alleys and driveways. Services and
        trash should be located behind the buildings in alleys or rear parking areas.
    6.  Buildings made of, or emulating, heavy masonry are generally recommended in the Downtown
        subarea. Concrete buildings—including good quality tilt-up buildings designed with appropriate
        urban facades—as well as buildings clad with metal are appropriate except in the Downtown
        subarea.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-31

                                                          Cluster of office buildings.
Office building with special corner treatment.            Typical two-story office building.
“Corporate campus”style development pattern which attracts larger employers by virtue of the enhanced public realm.
Figure 4-15: Examples of Urban Employment Center form and character. (Source: Sargent Town Planning)
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                      | 04-32

Figure 4-16: Illustrative land use diagram for desired character and form of Urban Employment District.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-33
Districts are areas of the City that generally have a single or limited number of uses and are more
automobile-oriented. They differ from Neighborhoods and Centers in that the most important physical
characteristics are the connectivity through the area and the way the districts adjoin (and potentially
impacts) adjacent uses. Districts play an important role in the City since they are the primary retail and
entertainment areas (Suburban Retail District and Regional Retail District), and provide jobs and
economic development opportunities (Industrial District). The Resort District also provides an opportunity
for the City to capitalize on the part-time living and hospitality economic sectors.
The Suburban Retail District provides concentration of retail businesses—including "big box" and "large
format" retailers—in a setting that accommodates the parking requirements of such businesses. it also
provides good pedestrian connectivity and town scale buildings adjacent to corridor frontages, bringing
shopping amenities and fiscal resources to Coachella without unreasonably disrupting its small-town
character.
Located on major crosstown corridors, retail districts balance the need to provide convenient access and
parking for motorists while also providing an attractive shopping environment. Buildings face the street
or internal sidewalks with attractive shop fronts. Neighborhood streets connect the center to adjacent
neighborhoods and urban corridor(s), providing convenient access on foot or by bike from residences to
retail amenities and to transit.
Primarily retail and services, sometimes with                  Coachella’s Suburban Shopping Districts –
commercial uses on upper floors.                               integrating concentrations of larger format
                                                               retail businesses with Coachella’s family-
                                                               oriented neighborhoods – are expected to
DU/AC = n/a                                                    be similar in retail tenant mix and
FAR = 0.35 – 1.0                                               functional format to the Community Center
                                                               type as defined by ICSC. These generally
                                                               include two or more anchor tenants, and
     1.  Blocks – as defined by public streets – may be        occupy sites between 10 and 30 acres in
         very large, up to 1,000 by 1,000 feet to              size.
         accommodate the parking required for such
         commercial centers. These blocks should be subdivided into smaller “virtual blocks” with
         dimensions in the 400- to 500- foot range by major drives that include sidewalks on at least
         one side, detailed as small streets. The streets flanking the blocks and the drives that transect
         them should connect to neighborhood streets to provide convenient access for nearby residents
         as well as motorists.
     2. The internal streets should result in block perimeters that are no more than 3,200 feet.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-34

    3. To ensure connectivity with adjacent areas, there must be a vehicle or pedestrian connection at
        the project boundary every 800 feet.
    1.  New internal streets and drive aisles should be designed for slower speeds and provide access
        to the retail areas. Recommended lane widths are 10 to 12 feet, and curbside parking lanes, if
        any, should be eight feet wide.
    2. Sidewalks of six to eight feet wide should be provided on at least one side of the private
        streets, and 12 to 18 feet wide along the shop front side of private drives.
    3. Rows of high-branching deciduous trees with relatively open canopy structure are recommended
        along the private streets, in order to provide shade and spatially define those streets.
    1.  Open spaces in Suburban Retail Districts should generally be Plazas/Greens to provide
        sufficient gathering space for shoppers and visitors. Mini Parks may be appropriate as
        supporting open space. Greenways/Parkways may be acceptable to link open spaces together.
    2. Parking lots should be defined by rows of high-branching deciduous trees to provide shade and
        improve the visual appearance. The location of trees should be balanced with the desire to
        provide visibility from the major thoroughfare.
    3. Drainage swales planted with drought tolerant native species are recommended between parking
        rows to manage storm water flow, improve stormwater quality and provide locations for planting
        trees.
    1.  Lot coverage generally does not exceed 30 percent and building heights are generally one and
        two stories.
    2. The allowed building types for this District are Suburban Retail and Main Street/Mixed Use.
    3. Buildings with ground-floor shop fronts are generally built to the sidewalk or walkway and are
        generally attached, with no side yards. Service functions (loading and trash pickup) should
        occur at the rear, where employee parking may also be provided to reduce the required size of
        front parking lots to the minimum needed for customers.
    4. Vehicular access is provided to parking lots via private streets (a.k.a. common drives detailed
        as small streets) by driveways from adjacent neighborhood streets and by service alleys.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                    | 04-35
Figure 4-17:Illustrative
Figure 3-9:   Illustrativeland
                            landuse
                                 usediagram
                                     diagramfor
                                             fordesired
                                                 desiredcharacter
                                                         characterand
                                                                   andform
                                                                       formofofSuburban
                                                                                SuburbanRetail
                                                                                         RetailDistrict.
                                                                                                District.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                            | 04-36
Gateway feature at entrance to suburban retail center.              Typical façade rhythm for retail center.
Retail center that provides pedestrian speed table in front.        Parking lots may be located in front, below or on top of retail.
Retail center composed of scattered one to two-story buildings, with high visibility signage.
Figure 4-18: Examples of Suburban Retail District form and character. (Source: Sargent Town Planning)
  LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                           | 04-37

This designation provides opportunities for a wide range of shopping and entertainment in a variety of
urban and suburban formats. These include regional shopping centers, mixed destination centers or
similar uses. The uses allowed in this designation will cater to regional clientele and provide a unique
amenity to all residents of the Coachella Valley and an important revenue source for the City. The
primary purpose of the District is to provide for commercial opportunities, with residential uses
supporting the retail environment.
Like the other Centers and Districts of Coachella, the Regional Retail District is organized into blocks by
a combination of public and private streets that provide addresses for the businesses and organize
access and parking for them. The blocks of this District may be the largest in Coachella, with buildings,
landscape and signage similarly scaled up in size, but not neglecting the importance of creating a
comfortable and attractive pedestrian environment for shoppers.
A wide range of retail, lodging, entertainment and residential uses.
DU/ac = 10 – 15
FAR = 0.35 – 2.0
                                                           Among other uses, Coachella’s Regional Retail
                                                           District will allow shopping environments similar
                                                           to a number of the ICSC Center Types,
    1.   The block size will vary depending on the
                                                           including Regional Center, Superregional
         type of uses. The majority of retail,
                                                           Center, Power Center and Outlet Center. As
         residential and commercial uses should
                                                           Coachella is able to attract significant new
         strive for blocks of no more than 1,000 feet
                                                           retail and entertainment businesses, careful
         in length with a block perimeter of no more
                                                           and strategic consideration should be given to
         than 4,000 feet.
                                                           their location within the City. Ideally, tenants
    2. Where large blocks exist, pedestrian and
                                                           with a very large trade area should be
         bicycle connections, which could be realized
         as sidewalks, bicycle paths and multi-use         allocated to the Regional Retail District tenants
                                                           with a trade area focused more on Coachella
         paths, should ideally occur as frequently as
                                                           and neighboring towns to the Suburban Retail
         every 400 to 500 feet. Also, in pedestrian-
         oriented retail and residential environments,     District, and smaller scale tenants focused on
                                                           food and entertainment to the Downtown.
         these blocks should be subdivided into
         smaller “virtual blocks” with lengths in the
         400- to 500- foot range by major drives
         that include sidewalks on at least one side, detailed as small streets. The streets flanking the
         blocks and the drives that transect them should connect to neighborhood streets to provide
         convenient access for nearby residents as well as motorists.
    1.   Street widths may vary depending on the adjacent uses, with some streets carrying high traffic
         volumes.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-38

    2. All streets should create safe and comfortable pedestrian accommodations with sidewalks, trees
        and safe pedestrian crossings. Sidewalks six to eight feet wide should be provided on at least
        one side of the private streets, and 12 to 18 feet in front of retail projects. On other major
        roadways, sidewalks shall be at least eight feet and separated from the vehicle travel lanes
        planting strips and by on-street parking or street trees. Soundwalls and other similar barriers
        should be avoided, except adjacent to freeways.
    3. Rows of high-branching deciduous trees with relatively open canopy structure are recommended
        along the pedestrian-oriented streets, to provide shade, to spatially define those streets and the
        parking lots they organize, while providing visibility of buildings and signage.
    1.  A variety of open spaces allowed depending on the uses. These include Mini Parks, Community
        Parks, Plazas/Greens and Greenway/Trails.
    1.  The primary building type envisioned for this designation is Suburban Retail. Other building
        types allowed include Main Street/Mixed Use, Urban Apartment and Rowhouse/Townhouse.
    2.  Building heights are generally one and two stories but may be up to four stories, particularly for
        mixed use projects. Exceptions may be made in special circumstances such as hotels, iconic
        buildings or structures.
    3.  The District—including its streets, buildings, parking fields and signage—should be designed for
        the comfort and wayfinding of shoppers within the District, while projecting a unique and
        compelling image from the adjoining highways to entice passersby to become shoppers.
    4.  Buildings with ground-floor shopfronts are generally built to the sidewalk and are generally
        attached, with no side yards. Service functions such as loading and trash pickup should occur
        at the rear, where employee parking may also be provided to reduce the required size of front
        parking lots to the minimum needed for customers.
    5.  Vehicular access is provided to parking lots via public and private streets (e.g., common drives
        detailed as small streets) by driveways from adjacent neighborhood streets, by service alleys
        and from the primary roadway.
    6.  Drainage swales planted with drought tolerant native species are recommended between parking
        rows to manage stormwater flow, improve stormwater quality, and provide locations for planting
        trees.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-39

Figure 4-19: Illustrative land use diagram for desired character and form of Regional Retail District.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-40
Though most customers arrive by car, a regional retail district can still provide a walkable experience.
 Large, nationally recognized anchors occupy significant square footage at a Regional Retail District.
Vast parking lots are necessary to serve regional retailers but facades can still front onto internal streets rather than the lots.
Figure 4-20: Examples of Regional Retail District form and pattern
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                                | 04-41
This designation accommodates a range of light and heavy commercial and industrial businesses that
provide employment and generate more noise, light, odors or truck traffic than would be appropriate in
the Urban Employment District.
Coachella’s Industrial District is characterized by larger blocks, lots and buildings that would be
incompatible with the scale and character of Coachella’s neighborhoods and centers. This District
accommodates higher concentrations of heavy business activity. Nonetheless, the streetscapes of this
District are well landscaped and include good quality pedestrian and bicycle routes so employees and
visitors may conveniently arrive by bicycle or transit, while safely and comfortably walk to restaurants
and service businesses in the course of their workday.
Industrial and research and development uses, with support retail and office uses.
DU/ac = n/a
FAR = 0.1 – 2.0
     1.  Blocks – as defined by public streets – may be very large, up to 1,200 by 1,200 feet to
         accommodate the large buildings, truck loading and outdoor storage functions required for such
         industrial districts. Whenever practical, these blocks should be subdivided into smaller “virtual
         blocks” or provide non-motorized through connections with dimensions in the 400- to 600- foot
         range by major drives that include sidewalks on at least one side, detailed as small streets,
         organizing large parking areas and providing addresses for buildings within multi-building
         complexes or campuses.
     2. External connections from individual development to adjacent areas shall occur at least every
         1,200 feet.
     1.  Streets are generally wider than those elsewhere in Coachella in order to accommodate higher
         volumes of large vehicle traffic. Curb to curb widths range from 40 to 60 feet, with curbside
         parking generally provided on both sides for employees and visitors and center turn lanes
         where appropriate. Vehicular lanes should generally be 12 feet wide and parallel parking lanes
         should be a minimum of eight feet wide.
     2. Within multi-building complexes or campuses – whether designed for large users or as a multi-
         tenant industrial development – the major drives should be designed as small streets, defined
         by rows of “street trees” to project the image of valuable business addresses.
     3. Sidewalks of six to eight feet wide should be provided on all public streets and on at least one
         side of private streets and major drives aisles to improve the visitor/customer experience while
         encouraging employees to commute by transit.
     4. Rows of deciduous trees are recommended along the private streets and within the parking
         fields to provide shade.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-42

    1.  Open spaces in the District will generally take the form of small private or public
        Plazas/Greens to provide comfortable locations for employee breaks, dining areas for District
        restaurants and play areas for day-care facilities.
    2. Neighborhood Parks, with athletic facilities and passive open spaces, are allowed in order to
        serve employees and visitors.
    3. Greenways/Trails are also encouraged to increase non-motorized connectivity through the area.
    1.  Lot coverage is generally in the 25- to 50- percent range but may be lower for uses with
        significant outdoor operations and higher for uses requiring only small amounts of parking.
    2.  Buildings should face the street with simple, attractive facades with main entries and windows,
        welcoming visitors, providing light and view for the occupants and animating the architecture.
    3.  Buildings may be set back from the street with appropriate landscaping to provide an attractive
        visual buffer.
    4.  Allowed building types are Office/R&D, Industrial and Suburban Retail.
    5.  Building heights are generally one and two stories but office buildings may be up to three
        stories. Higher height limits may be allowed if necessitated by specific uses and industries so
        long as there is no negative impact on health, welfare or the economic development opportunity
        of other properties in the District or nearby areas.
    6.  Office functions and activity areas – such as lunchrooms – should be organized at the frontage
        when feasible to provide a human scale and sense of activity along the streetscapes.
    7.  Loading functions should be located toward the rear of the property. Employee parking lots
        should also be located beside or behind buildings when possible rather than in front.
    8.  Simple modern masonry and concrete architecture is recommended. Large buildings should be
        organized into multiple simple masses and articulated with fenestration. Galleries, arcades, and
        projecting sunscreens are recommended architectural elements, providing valuable shade and
        visual depth to the architecture.
    9.  Natural masonry, concrete and metal materials that weather and age with grace, are
        recommended.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-43

Typical two-story industrial/R&D warehouse style building.
Utilitarian architecture is appropriate for industrial districts.      Industrial building with well landscaped pedestrian path.
Large industrial manufacturing facility provides head of household jobs but should be distant from residential districts.
Figure 4-21: Examples of Industrial District form and character
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                             | 04-44
This designation creates a neighborhood organized around a recreational, entertainment or vacation
destination, providing a range of residential options, neighborhood-serving retail, service and restaurant
amenities, and, in some cases, lodging. This designation also allows a range of entertainment and
destination uses not allowed in other areas, such as theme parks, that require large amounts of land
and that draw visitors to the City.
The design of resorts will vary, depending upon the core amenities or intended market niche. However,
a resort by its nature must be a place where visitors will go out of their way to spend time, thus must
present a cohesive, comfortable and attractive vacation environment. In general, there is significant
flexibility on the internal design of resorts. Critical to the City is visual appearance of the outside of the
resort so its location does not affect the overall connectivity, and the economic development benefits
that result for the City. This designation also provides for flexibility for certain uses, such as theme
parks or large entertainment venues, which may not be able to meet the urban and pedestrian-oriented
standards of other designations.
Residential, lodging, recreational and support retail and commercial services. Theme parks, sports
venues and specialized entertainment uses are also allowed within this designation.
DU/AC = up to 81
FAR = 0.10 max, exceptions may be made for certain entertainment uses such as theme parks.
     1.    An internal street network is not defined for resorts. However, residential resorts with a variety
           of housing types should follow the same general design principles as the Neighborhood General
           destination.
     2. Resorts, by reduced vehicular connectivity, should be located and designed to not unreasonably
           disrupt the overall connectivity of Coachella. Accordingly, it is recommended they be located
           adjacent to elements that inherently impede such connectivity, such as the highways, the canal,
           and the river. Properties abutting the southerly/westerly edge of the canal are particularly
           suitable for resorts, being adjacent to the open space of the canal and connecting to the linear
           park and trails that will flank the canal, which should be designed to accommodate pedestrians,
           bicycles and horses. External connections around and through the resort should be at minimum
1
  Within Resorts, the distinction between lodging and vacation rentals may become blurred. A mix of
houses, casitas, small multi-family buildings and larger hotels could be mixed within a single resort,
making dwelling units per acre an inadequate metric. Such facilities should occupy buildings from one to
four stories, having a town scale and Coachella character, which will be determined on a case-by-case
basis.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-45
         every quarter-mile but exceptions may be made depending on the location and the proposed
         uses.
    3. Resorts may be gated and provide limited public access.
    1.   Streets internal to resorts may be designed according to the specifications of the resort
         developer. However, residential resorts with a variety of housing types should follow the same
         general design principles as the Neighborhood General destination.
    2. Streets on the perimeter of the resort may vary based on location but all streets should provide
         comfortable pedestrian amenities such as sidewalks (of at least five feet in width), street trees
         (planted approximate every 40 feet) and safe pedestrian crossings.
    1.   Parks should be integrated into the resort design in the form of Plazas/Greens, Mini Parks,
         Special Use Parks and Greenways/Trails. Parks internal to the resort may be private, however
         public parks outside of the project must be provided to meet City standards.
    1.   A range of building types are allowed to suit the needs of the resort developer and expected
         clientele and types other than these are allowed so long as there is no negative visual or
         aesthetic impact to areas outside of the resort.
    2. Building heights should generally be between one and four stories but higher limits may be
         allowed in certain circumstances such as larger hotels or other structures.
Roundabout circulation entrance is acceptable for resorts.  Tall vertical landscaping elements mark entrance to a resort.
Figure 4-22: Examples of Resort District form and character
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                    | 04-46
This designation provides unique projects the City entitles under a Specific Plan. State legislation
provides for the preparation and use of Specific Plans as focused implementation tools for individual
developments in a defined area. In the future, the City may see fit to process and entitle special
projects that may not be easily described by this General Plan and a Specific Plan would be an
acceptable approach for approving such a project. If a Specific Plan is approved, that document
defines the parameters of the land uses and character. However, under this General Plan designation,
should an area of land be designated as “Specific Plan” and a Specific Plan be prepared for the area,
the Specific Plan must conform to the Vision, Goals, and Polices of this General Plan. Additionally,
when possible, the General Plan designation presented here should be used by any future Specific
Plans.
At the time of this General Plan update, the City had numerous approved Specific Plans in place for
various areas of the City. Given the change in the housing market and other economic and
demographic changes, many of the City’s Specific Plans are undergoing revisions or expected to
undergo revisions. Following The following, is a brief summary of the nature and status of the City’s
larger Specific Plans.
The La Entrada Specific Plan provides for approximately 2,200 acres on the eastern edge of the City,
providing for approximately 7,800 residential units, 135 acres of mixed-use, elementary schools, 343.8
acres of parks, multi-purpose trails and 556.9 acres of open space.
The Coachella Vineyard Specific Plan provides for 807 units in the southeastern area of the City.
The Brandenburg Butters project provides for 71.5 acres of commercial uses and 1,381 dwelling units.
The Eagle Falls is a Specific Plan that is within the boundaries of Coachella (60 acres) and Indio (30
acres) on a 90-acre site with plans for 295 units, of which 202 units will be within the City of
Coachella. The Specific Plan provides for a gated golf course community and is included as a part of
the Cabazon Band of Mission Indians Fantasy Springs Master Plan.
The Shadow View Specific Plan provides for a single-family residential community consisting of 1,600
dwelling units on 380 acres, a mixed-use commercial center on 100 acres, and a 37-acre park. The
commercial site has a residential overlay that provides an option to construct up to 1,000 high-density
residential units.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-47

This category of General Plan designations is intended for a variety of public uses including parks,
schools, public buildings and other similar uses. These areas host community services and/or
educational, cultural, administrative and recreational facilities often located within a well-landscaped
setting. These areas provide a public function and often include a significant amount of parking to
accommodate users of the facilities. It should be noted many of the public uses are also allowed and
located in other General Plan Designations.
Parks and Open Spaces provide for the preservation, continued growth and enhancement of
Coachella’s parklands, recreational areas and surrounding open spaces. Open spaces are areas
intended to remain essentially open with limited or no development. This includes spaces used for
passive recreation, resource protection and/or hazard avoidance. Parks include greenways, developed
parks and other areas primarily used for recreation. Typically, these areas are characterized by a high
degree of open area and a limited number of buildings. Parks frequently include sports fields,
playground equipment, picnic areas, sitting areas, concession businesses, open turf, natural areas, trails
and public golf courses.
The following describes the variety of Parks and Open Space types included in the General Plan and
additional details can be found in Table 6-1, Parks Classification Standards, within the Sustainability
and Natural Environment Element:
Mini Parks. Mini Parks are spaces that exist primarily in residential areas or adjacent to light business
zones and have features such as grass, shade, trees, passive areas, green space, shelters, native plant
life, playgrounds and play structures. Use is limited to the local neighborhood. They may be realized in
“tot-lot” configurations that provide secure recreational space for small children and typically include
equipment such as swings, slides, ‘monkey bars’ and sandboxes while leaving sufficient room for
people to sit and enjoy the space. The size of Mini Parks varies but should be up to 1.5 acres in size
and are intended to serve a population within a walking or short biking distance.
Plazas/Greens. Plazas and Greens have the widest variety and the most intense activities of all open
spaces. Plazas and Greens serve as formal or informal community gathering spaces. Plazas are
unique to the City of Coachella and represent a connection to the culture of the community. These park
types are often shaped primarily by building frontages. Plazas are shaped primarily by building
frontages, primarily hardscape with occasional landscape in planters or containers. Greens are
landscaped open areas located at the center of a community. Features may include gazebos, water
features, trees, shade, performance areas, public artwork and other similar features. Plazas and Greens
vary in size but are typically no larger than two acres.
Neighborhood Parks. Neighborhood Parks are larger than Mini Parks and provide large unobstructed
areas for passive or active recreation throughout neighborhoods. Neighborhood Parks often contain
community gardens and playgrounds and are primarily landscaped. Neighborhood parks are between
approximately 1.5 acres and 15 acres in size. These parks provide features such as grass, trees,
restrooms, tot-lots, picnic and shade shelters, grills, playground equipment, open fields, informal sport
areas, swimming pools and neighborhood/community centers. Neighborhood Parks have a service area
of about a 2.5-mile radius.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-48

Community Parks. Community Parks are larger than Neighborhood Parks and the largest of formal
(non-natural) open spaces for the purpose of providing regionally-oriented areas for passive or active
recreation. Community Parks may contain large grass areas, large picnic and shelter areas, restrooms,
on-site parking, swimming pool, community centers, sports arenas/complexes, entertainment areas and
special features such as skateboard areas, outdoor theaters, disc golf, exercise stations, ponds and
water features. Community parks are approximately between 10 and 45 acres in size (but may be
larger under special circumstances) and have a service area of greater than 2.5 miles in radius.
Special Use Parks. Special Use Parks are not located in residential areas. Features might include large
scale sports complex, special events site (such as fairs and festivals), gardens, concessions, trails,
natural/open space, lakes and animal uses.
Nature/Open Space. Nature areas are generally free from development and respect the natural
environmental characteristics that serve as preservation of natural, cultural and archeological resources.
Specific uses include natural parks, habitat, floodplains and areas with permanent open-space
easements. In some cases, Open Space also includes working lands such as farming, ranching and
mining.
Greenway/Trails. Greenways and Trails are community- and regionally-oriented, active and passive
open spaces. Greenways and Trails traverse or define multiple neighborhoods and can have natural or
identified paths and trails. Greenways may be opportunistic such as the reclaiming of areas within
overhead utility easements or may be in response to natural conditions such as an existing natural
feature such as a river, canal or seismic hazard area.
Linear Parks. Linear parks are a special type whose primary purpose is to connect parks, entry ways
and transportation routes with unique features. These parks and the trails may be concrete, asphalt, or
crusher fine, among other options.
This designation is intended for public schools, including elementary, middle and high schools and
colleges and universities within the City of Coachella. Public K through 12 schools will vary in size but
all new schools should be located within or adjacent to neighborhoods to enable students to walk and
bike to school. Schools should not be designed as fenced and walled-off campuses. Colleges and
universities should be encouraged to integrate uses such as residential, retail, services and other public
facilities in and around their campuses to augment the economic vitality of the neighborhood. They
should ensure other public enhancements that contribute to a greater quality of life in Coachella, such
as arts, culture, athletics, public lectures and/or medical facilities are accessible to the community.
This designation provides for governmental buildings and facilities to ensure a high quality of life for
residents of Coachella. A wide range of public uses in this designation include city hall, libraries,
community centers, senior centers, fire stations, police stations, corporate yards and similar uses. Given
the activities that occur in public facilities and buildings, the urban design will vary greatly from use to
use. The majority of public facilities and buildings should be located in Downtown, Neighborhood
Centers or integrated within neighborhoods to ensure they are central to the residents they intend to
serve. Locating city office in remote, auto-oriented areas shall be discouraged.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-49
All complete cities have a wide variety of types of buildings that vary depending on the use, location
and intended intensity of development. While there are a large number of building types, the following
are the types that will help implement the City’s vision. The information below provides a general
description of the building type and general rules of thumb on the density and lot size for each type.
These summaries are meant to be guides rather than standards. Other types may be used as long as
they conform to the vision and character defined in this General Plan.
A building surrounded on all four sides by setbacks and may
contain one dwelling unit and/or commercial use as allowed by the
zone. On-site open space is provided through a rear yard. The
intensity range varies from very low density rural settings of one unit
per 40 acres or large to upwards of eight units per acre. Lot areas
are a minimum of 5,000 square feet.
A building with two or more dwellings surrounded on all four sides
by setbacks and may contain dwelling units and/or commercial
uses as allowed by the zone. Onsite open space is provided
through a rear yard for all the dwellings or through individual yards
for each dwelling. The density range depends on location but is
generally between eight and 18 units per acre. Lot areas are
generally between 5,000 and 15,000 square feet.
A building with the appearance of a large house containing up to
eight dwelling units or congregate living facilities. The building has a
central lobby that provides access to individual units. On-site open
space is provided by a rear yard for all the dwellings. The building
may accommodate commercial uses allowed by the General Plan.
The density of Mansion buildings is generally between 15 and 20
units per acre. Lot areas are generally between 10,000 and 15,000
square feet.
A building of attached dwellings arranged side by side, with above
grade to provide rooms and unit access from the street. The
building is located at the front of the property, with the garage at
the rear, ideally separated by a rear yard. The density range for
Rowhouses/Townhouses is between 15 and 22 units per acre.
The lot area is generally 2,000 to 2,500 square feet per unit.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-50

A group of attached dwellings arranged to share one or more
common courtyards with pedestrian access to the building’s
entrances from the courtyard and/or fronting street. Courtyard
buildings may accommodate commercial/flex uses as allowed by
the General Plan. The density range for Courtyard Buildings is
between 25 and 35 units per acre and the lot area is generally
between 15,000 and 60,000 square feet.
A building with multiple stories of dwellings that is arranged on a
large open space such as a park or along a street. The building
has a central lobby or multiple lobbies that provide access to
individual dwellings. The ground floor may accommodate
commercial/ flex uses as allowed by the General Plan. The
dwelling unit range is between 30 and 65 units per acre and the
lot area is generally between 20,000 and 60,000 square feet.
(Note that this intensity may be increased for affordable and senior
housing where smaller units and/or less on-site parking is
provided.)
A building designed for occupancy by retail, service and/or office
uses on the ground floor with upper floors configured for retail,
service, office and/or dwellings with occupancy fronting on streets.
Upper units may be directly accessed from the street through a
stair or street level lobby. Residential densities range between 30
to 65 units per acre and non-residential intensities vary by General
Plan Designation. The lot area is as small as 5,000 and as large
as 125,000 square feet.
A building designed for occupancy by commercial service or retail
uses on the ground floor, with upper floors configured for the same
uses. The building is located away from the street typically with
parking between the street and the building. Non-residential
intensities vary by General Plan Designation and the minimum lot
areas is 10,000 square feet.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                       | 04-51

A building designed for occupancy by office and
laboratory-type space on the ground floor, with
upper floors configured for the same uses. Ground
floors may accommodate commercial uses as
allowed by the General Plan. Non-residential
intensities vary by General Plan Designation and lot
areas have a vast range from 10,000 to 250,000
square feet.
A building designed for occupancy by industrial,
commercial service or retail uses on the ground
floor, with upper floors configured for service or
industrial uses. The building is located anywhere on
the lot to accommodate outdoor industrial activity.
Non-residential intensities vary by General Plan
Designation and the minimum lot size is 5,000
square feet; however parcels are usually much
larger to accommodate industrial uses.
The following table, Table 3-1, further defines the range of allowed land uses expected within each
General Plan Designation. The table includes three categories. The first is the primary use or uses
expected within the designation. There may be more than one “primary” use in a designation. The next
category is the secondary use (shown with an “S” in the table). The secondary uses are support uses
that are allowed but shall not be the primary use. The last category is for uses that are not allowed
within the designation. These uses are marked with the following symbol: “—“. In addition, some of the
uses have annotations to further explain the vision for the use within the designation. This table of
compatible uses is not the complete range of possible uses and the allowable uses will be further
refined in the zoning code. Table 4-2: General Plan Designations Summary provides a summary of the
development characteristics for each General Plan Designation.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-52

Table 4-1: General Plan Designations Compatible Uses
                                    RANCHOS                       NEIGHBORHOODS                                           CENTERS                                 DISTRICTS
                                                                                                                                                         URBAN     SUBURBAN
                                                                      SUBURBAN           GENERAL              URBAN        NEIGHBORHOOD   DOWNTOWN                              REGIONAL     INDUSTRIAL
                                     AGRICULTURAL       RURAL                                                                                          EMPLOYMENT    RETAIL                             RESORT
                                                                    NEIGHBORHOOD      NEIGHBORHOOD      NEIGHBORHOOD           CENTER        CENTER                          RETAIL DISTRICT  DISTRICT
                                                                                                                                                         CENTER     DISTRICT
                                                                                                         RANGE OF COMPATIBLE LAND USES
          SINGLE FAMILY                   S                P               P                P                   S                 --            --         --          --           --           --       P
          MULTI-FAMILY*                   --               --              --               P                   P                 S             P           S          --           S            --       P
       MOBILE HOME PARK                   --               S               --               S                   --                --            --         --          --           --           --       --
      ENTERTAINMENT AND
                                          --               --              --               --                  S                 S             P           S          P            P            --       P
           RECREATION
          GOLF COURSE                     --               S               S                --                  --                --            --         --          --           --           --       P
 LODGING (HOTEL, MOTEL, B&B)           B&B only            S               --               --            S (no motel)            S       S (no motel)      S          S            P            --       P
     AUTOMOTIVE (INCL GAS                                                                                                      S (with
                                          --               --              --               --                  --                              --         --          P            S            S        --
             STATION)                                                                                                        limitations)
           RESTAURANT                                                                                        S (with
                                          --               --              --               --                                    P             P           S          P            S            S        S
                                                                                                           limitations)
  DRIVE THROUGH RESTAURANT                --               --              --               --                  --                --            --         --          P            P            S        S
         RETAIL <10,000 SF                                                                                   S (with
                                          --               S               --               --                                    P             P           P          P            P            S        S
                                                                                                           limitations)
        RETAIL > 10,000 SF                --               --              --               --                  --                P             P          --          P            P            --       S
        RETAIL > 35,000 SF                                                                                                                   S (with
                                          --               --              --               --                  --                --                       --          P            P            --       --
                                                                                                                                          limitations)
  PERSONAL SERVICES (e.g., dry
                                          --               --              --               --                  S                 P             P           S          P            S            S        S
     cleaner, travel agent, etc.)
         MEDICAL OFFICE                   --               --              --               --                  S                 S             S           P          P            S            --       --
       OFFICE/RESEARCH &
                                          --               --              --               --                  --                S             S           P          S            --           S        --
          DEVELOPMENT
          AGRICULTURE                     P                P          S (interim)           --                  --                --            --         --          --           --           --       S
   INDUSTRIAL/DISTRIBUTION                --               --              --               --                  --                --            --          S          --           --           P        --
       HOSPITAL / AIRPORT*                --            Airport            --               --                  --                --        Hospital        P          --           --           P        --
    CIVIC AND GOVERNMENT                  --               S               S                S                   S                 S             P           S          S            S            S        --
     RESOURCE EXTRACTION                               S (with
                                          S                                --               --                  --                --            --         --          --           --           --       --
                                                     limitations)
         P= Primary use                     S = Secondary Use                     - = Not allowed
         * See additional land use regulations for non-residential development and hospitals near airport (Policies 10.9 and 10.10).
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                                                                                                               | 04-53
                               Page intentionally left blank.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                | 04-54
Table 4-2: General Plan Designations Summary
                                      RANCHOS                             NEIGHBORHOODS                                          CENTERS                                            DISTRICTS
                                                                                                                                                                        URBAN         SUBURBAN       REGIONAL
                                                                              SUBURBAN          GENERAL               URBAN       NEIGHBORHOOD       DOWNTOWN                                                      INDUSTRIAL
                                       AGRICULTURAL          RURAL                                                                                                  EMPLOYMENT          RETAIL        RETAIL                        RESORT
                                                                           NEIGHBORHOOD      NEIGHBORHOOD        NEIGHBORHOOD         CENTER           CENTER                                                       DISTRICT
                                                                                                                                                                        CENTER         DISTRICT      DISTRICT
                                                                                                            DEVELOPMENT CHARACTERISTICS
 DU/AC (RANGE AND AVERAGE) *                                                                7-25 DU/ac with
                                                                          2 – 8 DU/ac with                        20 – 35 DU/ac
 (Density varies depending on           1 DU per 40    1 DU/2.5 acres to                        12 DU/ac
                                                                          5 DU/ac average                       with 30 average    15-40 DU/ac      20 - 65 DU/ac    30-65 DU/ac          n/a      10-15 DU/ac          n/a      Up to 8 DU/ac
 building type)                            acres            1 DU/ac                         average for new
                                                                          for new projects                      for new projects
                                                                                                 projects
 FAR                                        0.01              n/a                n/a               n/a                  0.5          0.5 – 1.5         0.5 – 2.0       0.5 – 2.0      0.35 – 1.0     0.35 – 2.0      0.1 – 2.0      0.1 max
                                                                                                       STREET DESIGN, NETWORK AND CONNECTIVITY
 BLOCK PERIMETER
                                                                                              2400 ft. max         2400 ft. max    1600 ft. max      2000 ft. max
 Note: exceptions apply for natural         n/a               n/a            3200 ft. max                                                                            2400 ft. max    3200 ft. max  4000 ft. max   4,800 ft. max       n/a
 and man-made barriers
 BLOCK LENGTHS (DESIRED)
 Note: exceptions apply for natural         n/a               n/a             400-500 ft.      400-500 ft.          400-500 ft.     400-500 ft.       300-500 ft.     300-500 ft.   Up to 1000 ft. Up to 1000 ft. Up to 1200 ft.      n/a
 and man-made barriers
 EXTERNAL CONNECTIVITY                                                                                                                                   Min 1                          Min 1          Min 1          Min 1          Min 1
                                                                          Min 1 connection  Min 1 connection    Min 1 connection Min 1 connection                  Min 1 connection
 (project or neighborhood                   n/a            ¼ mi. min                                                                                 connection                      connection     connection     connection     connection
                                                                             every 800 ft.    every 800 ft.        every 800 ft.   every 600 ft.                     every 600 ft.
 boundary)                                                                                                                                           every 600 ft.                   every 800 ft. every 1000 ft. every 1200 ft.  every ¼ mi.
 GATED RESIDENTIAL AREAS                     --                Y                  --                --                   --              --                --              --             n/a           n/a             n/a             Y
                                                                                                                 PARKS AND OPEN SPACE
 MINI PARK                                   --                --                 Y                 Y                    Y               Y                 Y               Y               Y             Y               Y              Y
 NEIGHBORHOOD PARK                           --                Y                  Y                 Y                    Y               --                Y               --              --            --              Y             --
 COMMUNITY PARK                              Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    --              --                --              --              --            Y               --             Y
 PLAZA/GREEN                                 --                --                 Y                 Y                    Y               Y                 Y               Y               Y             Y               --            --
 GREENWAY/PARKWAY                            Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y               Y                 Y               Y               Y             Y               Y              Y
 SPECIAL USE                                 --                --                 Y                 Y                    --              --                --              --              --            --              --            --
 NATURE/OPEN SPACE                           Y                 Y                  Y                 Y                    --              --                --              Y               --            --              --             Y
 LINEAR PARK                                 --                Y                  Y                 Y                    --              --                --              --              --            --              --             Y
         * See additional density restrictions and potential development regulations for new residential developments near airport (Policies 10.4 and 10.8).
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 04-55

                               Page intentionally left blank.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                | 04-56
This section presents the General Plan Designation Map for the City of Coachella. While the General
Plan Designations are applied directly to each parcel, the General Plan provides for some flexibility in
the ultimate range and distribution of uses for subareas 5 through 17. The ranges of appropriate uses
for each of these subareas are defined in the Subarea Descriptions. It is expected that the final mix
and distribution of appropriate uses would be defined for each through the City’s Master Planning
process. Figure 4-23: General Plan Designation Map shows the General Plan Designation map and
Figure 4-24: General Plan Subareas Map, shows the extent of the various subareas.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-57

                               Page intentionally left blank.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                | 04-58
Figure 4-23: General Plan Designation Map
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER            | 04-59
                               Page intentionally left blank.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                | 04-60
Figure 4-24: General Plan Subareas Map
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER         | 04-61
                               Page intentionally left blank.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                | 04-62
For parcels in Subareas 5 through 17, project sponsors must use the following system during the
project application process. The purpose of this section is to enable incremental development of vacant
parcels while generating interconnected neighborhoods and employment areas of the City. Before
preparing a subdivision map, the applicant is required to prepare a Specific Plan or similar master
planning document (Master Plan) for City review and comment per the following requirements.
    1. Identify the location of the site in neighborhood and review General Plan policies.
             o    Project sponsors must first identify the project site and the subarea where the project
                  site is located.
             o    The project sponsor must then review the General Plan vision and policies for the
                  subarea and the range of allowed General Plan designations. As part of this process,
                  the project sponsor should understand the requirements for preserving open space,
                  development of parks and public facilities and the specific network connectivity
                  requirements in the General Plan.
    2. Meet with City staff.
             o    Once the materials have been reviewed, the project sponsor should meet with the City
                  to determine if any other Master Plans have been created for the subarea.
             o    For land controlled by others, those owners are to be invited to participate in the
                  master planning process. The requirements for land not controlled by the applicant are
                  focused on minimum connectivity and adjacencies.
    3. Identify non-buildable land.
             o    For all land within the subarea, the project sponsors should identify and map the
                  general extent of existing and potential future land not buildable because of
                  environmental constraints such as soils, drainage, seismic conditions, endangered
                  species or other factors. This may require reviewing existing technical studies or
                  working with resource agencies.
             o    A detailed parcel-by-parcel assessment and major technical studies are not required at
                  this point in the process and the information should be more detailed within the project
                  site than outside of the project site.
             o    This analysis should also include consideration of projects within the subarea that are
                  built or in the development pipeline.
    4. Identify City-wide transportation network.
             o    Once the major non-buildable land is identified, the project applicant should identify the
                  major transportation network through the entire subarea, if this has not already been
                  created by a previous project or the City.
             o    The project sponsor should map this network (which is assumed to be approximately
                  every quarter-mile) and show connections to the project site.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-63
    5. Identify street network and blocks for land controlled by applicant.
            o   The next step is to develop the internal transportation network for the project site.
                Requirements in the General Plan designations shall be followed to understand the
                intersection spacing.
            o   Connections to existing roadways adjacent to the site should be, wherever feasible,
                continued into the site and the project should plan for connections to adjacent
                undeveloped areas. The point of this critical step is to ensure that isolated subdivisions
                are not created and new neighborhoods, centers and districts connect to one another
                throughout the City.
            o   This process will result in both a transportation network and block pattern within the
                project site.
    6. Apply General Plan Designations, parks and building types to blocks.
            o   For each block, the project applicant should then apply the allowed General Plan
                designations and identify the approximate location and amount of various types of parks
                to be located within the project site. While the General Plan has a map of designations,
                it is understood that in large, undeveloped areas the designations may change as long
                as the vision of the General Plan and subareas is met. The policy guidance for each
                subarea provides a range of designations allowable.
            o   As part of this step, the project sponsor should further identify the potential building
                types by block to more precisely define the form and character of their development.
    7. Identify net development yield.
            o   Using the information in the previous step, the project sponsor should create a block-
                by-block development program table that calculates the various building types, number
                of units, non-residential square footage and other site conditions.
    8. Prepare Master Plan for review by City staff.
            o   The project sponsor shall prepare a master plan for site review by City staff. The
                Master Plan should have the following components:
                        Land not controlled by project sponsor:
                                Subarea map with project site identified.
                                Undevelopable land due to environmental or other constraints
                                 (generalized if specific data is not available).
                                Existing streets in the subarea.
                                Planned major streets at approximately quarter-mile intervals
                                Existing planned and approved projects in the subarea
                        Land controlled by project sponsor:
                                Site boundary map.
                                Undevelopable land due to environmental or other constraints (must be
                                 more detailed than land not controlled by project sponsor).
                                Existing streets in the project site.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-64

                               Planned streets and network connections within and external to the
                                project site
                               Blocks for development (based on the street network requirements).
                               Required park locations, types and acreages.
                               Map of General Plan designations applied to blocks (or portions of
                                blocks).
                               Map of building types applied to blocks (or portions of blocks).
                               Development program table calculating net development yield and the
                                amounts of other uses (such as parks, roads, open space, etc.).
    9. Receive City comment and direction.
            o  Present Master Plan to the City for review and comment. At its discretion, the City may
               retain an outside consultant such as a “town planner” to provide guidance on
               compliance with the vision and the policies. Additionally, the Planning Commission or
               the City Council may provide input or guidance on compliance with the vision and
               policies.
            o  Upon receiving direction from the Planning Commission, the applicant may proceed with
               preparing a subdivision map.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                   | 04-65

For planning purposes, the City of Coachella is divided into 17 unique subareas and every parcel in the
City is located in one of these areas. Figure 4-24: General Plan Subareas Map, shows the subareas.
The purpose of the subareas is to define an overall vision and specific policy direction that supplements
the General Plan Designations and the citywide goals and policies.
The West Coachella neighborhoods are located west, south and east
of downtown and encompass most of the urbanized area in 2010.
The area is predominantly single-family homes but also contains
various types of retail uses, apartments, schools and parks. The area
was built over a long period with a significant number of homes and
retail centers built in the past 20 years. While there are some areas
that are highly walkable and built on a traditional street grid, a
significant amount of the area is in conventional subdivisions characterized by cul-de-sacs, sound walls
and automobile-oriented roadways. The development pattern has resulted in a lack of connectivity,
between both residential subdivisions and residential and commercial areas along with a limited amount
of parks space.
The West Coachella Neighborhoods will evolve over time with new development and improvements to
existing neighborhoods to create a block and street network that links existing and new development
into a coherent town. West Coachella will provide much needed housing that ranges from single-family
houses to house-scale multi-family buildings. New development will occur as infill development
completes and repairs the neighborhood fabric of West Coachella. The discontinuous street networks
are retrofitted to interconnect with all new areas fully connected, providing easy access to shopping and
jobs located within adjacent areas. Streets are pedestrian friendly with on-street parking, sidewalks
shaded by trees and safe crosswalks.
     1.  Encourage the infill of vacant and underutilized parcels with neighborhood patterns that support
         walkability, exemplify great urban neighborhoods as described by the General Plan designations
         and expand the range of housing available.
     2. Retrofit existing neighborhoods with a variety of improvements including improved connections
         to adjacent neighborhoods and commercial districts, pedestrian-friendly streets, parks and open
         spaces.
     3. Pursue the transformation of automobile-oriented strip commercial areas into walkable
         Neighborhood Centers that are physically connected with the adjacent neighborhoods.
     4. Retrofit existing streets to be more pedestrian friendly, including trees, safe crossings, road
         diets, and traffic calming.
     5. Encourage and facilitate the development of new parks and related recreational opportunities.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-66
     6. Balance the development of new homes and the preservation of existing residences to realize a
         dynamic mix of housing vintages.
     7. Pursue the creation of new and improved physical connections to Downtown and the Harrison
         Street corridor from adjacent neighborhoods.
The Downtown subarea of Coachella is diverse and dynamic, containing
historic homes, shops, and numerous civic uses, housing City Hall, the Post
Office, churches, schools and parks. The Downtown is an original railroad town
and is laid out in a walkable, small-block pattern west of the railroad tracks.
Harrison Street also runs through the Downtown Subarea, providing a variety of
new and old commercial uses and a fairly auto-focused transportation system.
Downtown will continue as the physical, civic and cultural heart of Coachella.
As the City grows, new civic uses, cultural facilities, housing and retail will be located in Downtown to
enhance its role as the central meeting and gathering place for Coachella residents. Sixth Street, the
central spine of Downtown, will continue to evolve as a lively, mixed-use street offering shady
walkways, cooling water fountains, outdoor dining and unique shopping. New mixed-use, town-scale
buildings that respect the heritage and community values of Coachella will be built to expand the retail,
commercial and cultural offerings. The existing residential areas north and south of the central core will
evolve over time as existing homes are upgraded and new housing added. As Coachella grows into a
large city, the Downtown area will grow, expanding into the area east of the railroad with additional
specialty and local-serving retail, civic uses, restaurants, services, arts, and cultural opportunities and
diverse employment opportunities (See subarea 3).
     1.  Actively facilitate the implementation of the Pueblo Viejo Plan through appropriate new
         development approvals and targeted public investments.
     2. Ensure new development does not conflict with the Pueblo Viejo Plan. If there are
         inconsistencies between the Pueblo Viejo Plan and this General Plan, the General Plan shall
         govern.
     3. Recognizing that Downtown is the heart of the City, encourage development there.
     4. Focus a variety of cultural arts and cultural uses in the Downtown.
     5. Improve Sixth Street as the “main street” of Downtown with a pedestrian-oriented environment
         and a diverse mix of retail and commercial activity.
     6. Maintain a strong civic focus and ensure that City Hall remains in the area.
     7. Pursue mixed-use development on vacant parcels and create a new gateway to Downtown at
         the intersection of Sixth Street and Harrison Street.
     8. Improve residential neighborhoods adjacent to Downtown by upgrading existing housing and
         infilling vacant and underutilized parcels with a diverse mix of housing types.
     9. Conduct streetscape improvements throughout Downtown to make the area safe and inviting for
         pedestrians.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-67

     10. Develop a plan to provide for the evolution of Downtown and its expansion east across the
         railroad tracks into an active, livable civic core, appropriate for a large city.
     11. Seek to construct multiple, safe connections across the railroad tracks from Downtown to the
         Downtown Expansion subarea.
     12. Work with local and regional transit and transportation agencies to establish a transportation
         center in Downtown provides for bus and rail transit to the City.
     13. Work with State and regional agencies to bring high frequency, regional transit to the
         Downtown.
     14. Allow the re-zoning of certain residential block faces where existing bungalows can be
         converted to office and/or professional uses.
The Van Buren Corridor extends from approximately 50th to 53rd
Avenues along Van Buren. Existing uses along the corridor include
single-family, retail, schools and vacant land. The Van Buren Corridor
is at a key location between Indio, Coachella, and La Quinta and much
of the land through the corridor is still available for quality
development, providing Coachella with a great opportunity to create a
strong neighborhood center and regional shopping district.
The Van Buren Corridor will transform into a major sub-regional retail destination that will provide a
wide variety of goods and services for Coachella residents, as well as neighboring communities. The
large format, regional-serving retail will be built in a fashion so it coexists with existing and future
neighborhood development in and around the Van Buren Corridor. The new commercial development
will promote walkability with a mix of appropriately scaled buildings fronting the streets and large, block-
scale buildings throughout. While walkable, the retail area will also provide ample parking for visitors.
The commercial development will be connected to the surrounding new and existing residential areas,
allowing a high degree of access and balancing the impact of traffic on the community.
     1.  Pursue a diverse mix of retail and services along the Van Buren Corridor to capitalize on the
         area’s strategic location.
     2. Allow large format, auto-oriented retail and commercial uses to locate along the corridor.
     3. Ensure appropriate and well-designed transition between retail and commercial development
         along the corridor and the adjacent residential neighborhoods.
     4. Physically connect the development along Van Buren with adjacent areas with frequent streets
         and pedestrian connections to ensure easy pedestrian, bicycle and automobile access.
     5. Require new development include wide sidewalks, trees, pedestrian furniture, safe pedestrian
         crossings and direct connections to the front entrances of retail and services.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-68

The Harrison Street corridor extends from approximately 54th Avenue
north to the intersection of Harrison Street and SR111 (at
approximately 49th Avenue). Presently, the corridor is an automobile
oriented roadway with shopping centers, large surface parking lots and
limited pedestrian facilities.
Over time, the Harrison Street Corridor will become a pedestrian-oriented mixed-use corridor with a
diverse mix of retail, commercial and residential uses. New development will be more urban in design
with buildings that frame the street and parking located back of the buildings. While transformed over
time, the corridor will continue to serve as a major thoroughfare and a major retail street for the City,
focusing on goods and services that meet the daily needs of residents.
1. Require new development to follow the vision and design direction presented in the 2011 report
     titled “Improving Neighborhood Connections along Coachella’s Harrison Street Corridor.” If there are
     inconsistencies between the report and this General Plan, the General Plan shall govern.
2. Pursue the revitalization of the Harrison Street Corridor as proposed by the Harrison Street Corridor
     Plan through:
     Transforming the Harrison Street Corridor into a pedestrian friendly neighborhood commercial area
     that is integrated with the Downtown and surrounding neighborhoods.
     Conducting a series of roadway improvements to Harrison Street that:
                 Improve safety for everyone on the street.
                 Reduce vehicle speeds.
                 Reduce unsafe turns in and out of driveways.
                 Reduce crashes.
                 Reduce crash severity.
                 Shorten crosswalk distance to improve pedestrian safety.
                 Improve sidewalks where they are insufficient or missing.
                 Provide space dedicated to bicyclists.
                 Beautify the streets.
3. Creating gateways to the City at Harrison Street and SR111 and at Harrison Street and 54th
     Avenue. Create a new gateway to the Downtown at Sixth Street.
4. Allowing mixed use and pedestrian-oriented retail along the corridor.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-69

This area of the City contains a variety of industrial uses, very low
density residential development and agricultural uses. Generally bounded
by Harrison Street on the west, Airport Boulevard on the south and
SR111 on the east, the area has exceptional regional highway and airport
access and a significant amount of vacant parcels.
The Airport District will continue to evolve into one of the primary industrial areas of the City. Proximity
to the airport and access to regional highways provides an excellent location for manufacturing,
logistics, and agricultural support uses. The area will be built with large buildings, lots and block sizes
to accommodate the large areas needed for a variety of industrial activities. Visitor and service retail is
allowed along Harrison Street and Grapefruit Boulevard, serving the employees of the District, as well
as the traffic traveling these roads.
     1.  Encourage the development of a variety of industrial and manufacturing uses within this
         subarea.
     2. Target new uses to this area that take advantage of the proximity to the Jacqueline Cochran
         Airport.
     3. Ensure new development is compliant with airport safety standards and the Airport Land Use
         Compatibility Plan.
     4. Ensure new uses are compatible with, and appropriately transition, from nearby residential and
         commercial uses and focus objectionable uses near the airport.
     5. Allow a variety of retail and commercial activities to locate along SR111 and Harrison Street to
         take advantage of through traffic along these roadways.
     6. Limit heavy industrial to vicinity of Grapefruit Avenue and 54th Street.
     7. Prohibit the annexation of additional land adjacent to this subarea into the City limits unless
         other areas that allow industrial development are significantly built out or unless there is a major
         industrial development that produces new jobs and economic development opportunities for the
         City.
     8. Final designation mix should be:
                 70 to 90 percent Industrial District
                 Up to 20 percent Suburban Retail District
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-70

The Downtown Expansion area is located on the east side of SR111 and
the railroad tracks and is bordered by 50th Avenue to the north, Tyler
Street to the east and Bagdad Avenue to the South. The area is currently
primarily agricultural uses with fields and processing facilities.
Over time, this area will serve as the expansion of Downtown Coachella
and it is envisioned to have a wide diversity of employment and civic uses. The area is envisioned as
having small, walkable blocks with office, R&D and supporting retail and services. Multi-family
residential uses may be located on the edges of this area and adjacent to existing residential
development, such as the area east of Tyler Street. This area would also be an ideal location for a
college or university that could benefit from the proximity to Downtown and expected office and R&D
uses and an orientation towards walkable, university campus-style development.
     2. Design the Downtown Expansion area as a series of walkable blocks (between approximately
         300 and 500 feet in length).
     3. Pursue a variety of office and R&D uses to anchor the area.
     4. Require all new developments are pedestrian-oriented with buildings fronting the street with
         minimal setbacks and parking located internal to blocks. Prohibit new projects designed in a
         typical automobile-oriented business-park format.
     5. Seek out and recruit a college or university to locate in this subarea.
     6. Encourage the creation and incubation of new businesses and research and development
         operations.
     7. Increase connectivity between this subarea and the Downtown subarea with additional
         pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle connections across SR111 and the railroad tracks.
     8. Encourage the creation of a riverfront promenade and park that incorporates the regional
         Whitewater River multi-use trail.
     9. Final designation mix should be:
                 Up to 10 percent General Neighborhood
                 10 to 50 percent Urban Neighborhood
                 Up to 50 percent Downtown Center
                 20 to 35 percent Urban Employment Center
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                    | 04-71

The South Employment District contains a variety of industrial uses, a
significant amount of vacant land, limited single-family residential uses,
and a school. The area is bounded by the railroad and SR111 on the west
and by the Whitewater River and SR86S on the east.
This area will transform over time into an employment district that
contains a diversity of job-producing uses. Toward the northern end of the subarea, the uses should
focus on office and research and development while to the south the uses should be more industrial,
warehouse and distribution. The subarea should capitalize on the proximity to the airport and the
railroad corridor. Residential development should be allowed in limited locations and in situations that do
not interfere with the expansion of jobs and employment uses. Connecting this area over the Union
Pacific Railroad and SR86S should be a priority as development occurs.
     1.  Require most of the area be developed with employment uses and prohibit the conversion of
         this subarea to residential uses.
     2. Pursue uses that capitalize on the subarea’s location adjacent to the railroad and SR86S.
     3. Require new industrial development to locate in this subarea (or adjacent subareas 5 and 8)
         before additional annexation of land into the City limits.
     4. The area south of 52nd Avenue, west of Polk, and north of 54th should remain light industrial.
     5. Limit heavy industrial to the SR-86 corridor.
     6. Discourage significant residential development and only locate new residential uses in ways that
         do not inhibit the employment generating uses.
     7. Allow support retail and services in this subarea that support the employment uses. Such uses
         would include restaurants, dry cleaners, cafés and small markets.
     8. Pursue an auto mall or auto dealers adjacent to SR86S.
     9. Final designation mix should be:
                 Up to 15 percent General Neighborhood
                 Up to 10 percent Downtown Center
                 20 to 80 percent Urban Employment Center
                 50 to 75 percent Industrial District
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-72

The East Industrial District is located east of the Whitewater River,
west of Fillmore and between Airport Boulevard and 52nd Avenue.
Approximately two-thirds of the subarea is within the City limits and
the other one-third is located in the Sphere of Influence. The area is
topographically flat and contains agricultural uses.
This subarea will transform over time into an employment district that
contains a variety of industrial and office uses. The area should take advantage of the SR86S that runs
along the eastern side of the subarea. Development along 52nd Avenue could also be for retail and
office development as this corridor transforms into a major east-west thoroughfare.
     1.  Require that the majority of land area be developed with employment uses and prohibit the
         conversion of this subarea to residential development.
     2. Encourage uses that take advantage of the area’s location adjacent to the railroad and SR86S.
     3. Encourage new industrial development to locate in subarea the City limits (or adjacent subareas
         5 and 7) before additional annexation of land. However, given the location, this subarea could
         be completely annexed into the City before 2035.
     4. Encourage a collaborative planning effort with the Rancho California Vineyards Specific Plan in
         Subarea 15 in order to achieve a critical mass of development that will help facilitate the
         extension of infrastructure to this area of the City.
     5. Limit heavy industrial to the SR-86 corridor.
     6. Capitalize on the transformation of 52nd Avenue into a major thoroughfare and allow a range of
         retail, commercial and office uses.
     7. Ensure well designed, effective transitions between the employment uses in this subarea and
         residential uses that are expected to occur in subareas 9 and 15 so as to minimize impacts
         and encourage connectivity between areas.
     8. Encourage support retail and services in this subarea that support employment uses. Such uses
         would include restaurants, dry cleaners, cafés and small markets.
     9. Pursue an auto mall or auto dealers adjacent to SR86S.
     10. Final designation mix should be:
                  Up to 10 percent General Neighborhood
                  30 to 60 percent Urban Employment Center
                  Five to 10 percent Suburban Retail District
                  50 to 90 percent Industrial District
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-73

The area is bounded by the Whitewater River on the west and the
Coachella Canal on the east, Avenue 52 on the south and Avenue 49
on the north. The area is primarily used for agricultural production, with a
combination of cultivated row crops, orchards and natural open space.
The area also hosts limited rural homes, including unpermitted informal
mobile home parks.
Central Coachella is a priority expansion area, envisioned as a series of vibrant, sustainable, healthy,
walkable, interconnected neighborhoods, each with its own unique character and amenities. Housing is
the dominant use of Coachella’s neighborhoods – and single family houses the prevalent housing type
– but most neighborhoods also include additional amenities that enrich the life of the neighborhood,
including neighborhood-scale retail and services, neighborhood parks and playgrounds, schools and
other civic facilities. To promote choice, livability and economic viability, multi-family housing is also
present in most neighborhoods in modest amounts, designed so as to be integrated into the fabric of
the neighborhood. In some cases this will be in house-scale buildings interspersed with houses and in
other cases built along cross-town corridors and in mixed-use centers at key crossroads with good
access to transit. Multi-family uses will be more often found near neighborhood commercial nodes in
order to better promote transit viability. Most neighborhoods should be within walking distance of
neighborhood services, a school or park and open space, including regional multi-use trails on the
Whitewater River and Coachella Canal. Neighborhoods should emphasize residential living but include
non-residential along the edges and at key locations. The public realm will be beautiful and comfortable,
with diverse and finely-grained streets, parks and plazas. The street networks will be highly
interconnected, providing multiple paths for pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists.
     1.  As the City grows, prioritize new residential development in this subarea over subareas to the
         east.
     2. Require a variety of neighborhood types throughout the central Coachella Neighborhoods
         subarea.
     3. Ensure neighborhoods are tied together with pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle connections and
         not treated as separate subdivisions surrounded by sound walls or other barriers.
     4. Prohibit gated subdivisions in this subarea.
     5. Prohibit sound walls along major thoroughfares.
     6. Capitalize on Avenues 50 and 52 as major east-west thoroughfares and promote the
         development of retail, goods and services along these corridors.
     7. Create a diversity of parks and open spaces that are connected by green streets and a multi-
         use trail network and strive for a majority of residents to be within a quarter-mile walking
         distance of a park or open space.
     8. Locate Neighborhood Centers at major intersections so the majority of residents are within a
         short walk of retail, goods and services.
     9. Allow higher intensity, non-residential uses in the western portion of the subarea in order to
         complements and support the Downtown and nearby employment centers.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-74

     10. Require primary boulevards to be designed, constructed and operated as multi-modal, not wide,
          auto-oriented arterials.
     11. Pursue an auto mall or auto dealers adjacent to SR86S.
     12. Final designation mix should be:
                  Up to 35 percent Suburban Neighborhood
                  40 to 70 percent General Neighborhood
                  Up to 15 percent Urban Neighborhood
                  Five to 15 percent Neighborhood Center
                  Up to 10 percent Suburban Retail District
The North Employment District is used primarily for agricultural
activities, but also includes some industrial and residential uses. The
area is bounded by the 50th Avenue on the south, Grapefruit
Boulevard and the Union Pacific Railroad on the west, Whitewater
River on the east and the city limit on the north. Given its location,
regional access to the area is relatively poor with limited roadway
access. Additionally, most of the area is Native American tribal land,
thus limiting the amount of new development that can be controlled
by the City.
While much of this area is under tribal governance and subject to their land use and development
decisions, the North Employment District is intended to become an employment center with industrial
and, to a lesser degree, office jobs and residential uses. The North Employment district allows for a
mixture of office and light fabrication in a block structure and building fabric compatible with a mixture
of urban commercial and residential uses, becoming a jobs center that hosts a wide variety of
employment opportunities. Limited residential uses could be near the Whitewater River on the east and
multi-family residential is also found on the south of the area, in a mixed-use configuration that
supports the Downtown Expansion Subarea with nearby residents.
     1.   Work with the Native American Tribes to develop the area in a way that supports the vision for
          Coachella and this Subarea.
     2. Develop the subarea in a way that supports Downtown by locating more intense and active
          uses closest to the Downtown Expansion subarea, allowing industrial uses to occur in the
          northern portion of the subarea.
     3. Require the development of pedestrian-appropriate building designs, with loading activities sited
          behind buildings.
     4. Require a mix of retail to provide adequate services for the daytime employment population.
     5. Allow residential development adjacent to the Whitewater River.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-75

     6. Allow residential development adjacent to the Downtown Expansion Subarea when residential
         uses are a secondary use in mixed-use buildings.
     7. Encourage areas immediately adjacent to the Interstate 10 interchange to develop visitor
         serving, auto-oriented uses.
     8. Allow recycling and wrecking yard uses to continue in the vicinity of 48th and Harrison Street.
     9. Final designation mix should be:
                  Up to 10 percent Suburban Neighborhood
                  Up to 15 percent General Neighborhood
                  Up to 10 percent Urban Neighborhood
                  Up to 10 percent Neighborhood Center
                  20 to 60 percent Urban Employment Center
                  Up to 10 percent Suburban Retail District
                  20 to 50 percent Industrial District
The Commercial Entertainment District is located at the junction of
Interstate 10 and SR86S, an area with exceptional regional
accessibility. It is in close proximity to tribal lands and Spotlight 29
Casino. The area is mostly agricultural uses and limited residential and
commercial uses.
The Commercial Entertainment District will contain much of the new
development that attracts visitors to Coachella, including destination retail, hotels and resorts, and
entertainment uses. This subarea will capitalize on its location at the junction of Coachella’s major
freeways, making it easy for people to reach these unique, visitor-serving destinations from other parts
of the region. Special attention to design will be paid in the development of the area to ensure that it is
visually attractive to motorists traveling the adjacent highways. This is a highly unusual area and it will
have special and unique developments in the area. A range of residential densities and building types
should be encouraged in this subarea, provided they are designed to integrate with the high intensity
commercial uses planned for the area. The subarea must also exhibit strong, fine-grained connections
to the surrounding neighborhoods of the subarea and the adjacent subareas, allowing community
members easy access to shopping and entertainment.
     1.  Encourage a wide variety of entertainment, commercial and mixed use projects and focus
         commercial uses in the area west of Tyler and north of Avenue 48.
     2. Act with strong discretion when approving projects, seeking unique, destination-oriented and
         visitor-serving entertainment and retail uses that would be enhanced by the subarea’s location
         and exceptional regional access.
     3. Allow resort developments along the eastern edge of the subarea adjacent to the canal.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-76

    4. Pursue a large scale destination retail complex (that could include multi-family housing) in this
        subarea.
    5. Require new development buildings and signage visible from Interstate 10 and SR86S to be
        attractive to passing motorists.
    6. Allow a range of hospitality uses including hotels and motels.
    7. Work with the tribal government to pursue development of regionally unique entertainment.
    8. Allow development of walkable neighborhoods with a mix of housing types within the subarea
        provided it does not inhibit the primary goal of developing regionally unique retail and
        entertainment uses and provided such development is connected and integrated with the
        intense, regional uses.
    9. Require new developments to incorporate design features that facilitate pedestrian, bicycle and
        vehicular connections throughout the subarea.
    10. Encourage areas immediately adjacent to the I-10 interchange to develop visitor serving, auto-
        oriented uses.
    11. Require an amendment to portions of the Shadow View Specific Plan in general, conceptual
        conformance with the site plan concept shown in Figure 3-25. With this modification, and
        notwithstanding the percentages set forth in Policy Directive No. 12, the remaining components
        of the Shadow View Specific Plan, as shown on Exhibit 3-4, Land Use Master Plan, of the
        approved Specific Plan, including the single family residential development, is determined to be
        consistent with the goals and policies of the Commercial Entertainment District.
    12. Consider Urban Neighborhood as a substitute for Regional Commercial so long as the walkable
        character intended for the subarea is still achieved and so long as the opportunity for viable
        Regional Retail is not lost.
    13. Final designation mix should be:
                Up to 25 percent Suburban Neighborhood
                Up to 50 percent General Neighborhood
                Up to 25 percent Urban Neighborhood
                Up to 15 percent Neighborhood Center
                Up to 15 percent Urban Employment Center
                Up to 15 percent Suburban Retail District
                30 to 60 percent Regional Retail District
                Up to 50 percent Resort
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-77

 Figure 4-25: Conceptual Amendments to Shadow View Specific Plan
The North Dillon Road Area is largely undeveloped, but does contain
some limited residential, recreational and commercial development.
The area is adjacent to Interstate 10 and situated with particularly
rich and interesting natural amenities. The site has excellent views of
the nearby mountains, is adjacent to the Coachella Canal and is
adjacent to the San Andreas fault zone. The area is bounded by
Interstate 10 to the south, the Coachella Canal to the east and the
City limits to the north and west.
With excellent regional access and unique natural attributes, this area has great entertainment,
recreation and service retail potential. The North Dillon Road area is intended to develop as a regional
visitor-serving area with uses that complement the regional Commercial Entertainment District to its
south. Lodging, entertainment and large-scale service and fueling stations can all be found in this area
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                    | 04-78
along Interstate 10 and the uses are arranged in a highly logical way that builds value and minimizes
use incompatibilities.
    1.   Seek out and encourage uses that complement the vision of the Commercial Entertainment
         District and ensure proposed uses do not conflict with those planned for the Commercial
         Entertainment area.
    2. Capitalize on the access to the freeway and seek out and encourage freeway oriented uses,
         large format retail, truck stops, lodging and regional entertainment and recreational uses that
         benefit from easy regional access.
    3. Work closely with nearby tribes to ensure compatibility of uses with planned development on
         nearby tribal land.
    4. Allow resorts and lower density residential development within this subarea, particularly along
         the Coachella Canal and the northern edge of the subarea.
    5. Consider a range of entertainment uses for this subarea including amphitheaters, sports
         complexes, golf courses and similar uses.
    6. Final designation mix should be:
                 Up to 10 percent Neighborhood Center
                 15 to 40 percent Suburban Retail District
                 Up to 25 percent Regional Retail District
                 Up to 25 percent Resort
Desert Lakes is an environmentally diverse and rich area of the City. It
is part of the Mecca Hills that serve as a scenic backdrop to Coachella
and is bounded on the south by Interstate 10 and on the west by the
San Andreas Fault and Coachella Canal. The area is a very
environmentally sensitive and constrained area, with desert washes and
100 year floodplains, active faults and potentially sensitive habitat.
Access to the area is very limited.
As a very sensitive area with limited access and a need for substantial infrastructure investment, this
area of the City is envisioned, but not required, to remain undeveloped during the planning horizon of
the General Plan. When development does occur, the vision for this area is to have low density resorts,
rural residential development and some suburban neighborhoods and suburban retail. Until this is
developed, this subarea will contribute to the visual identity and aesthetic beauty of Coachella.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-79

     1.  Maintain Resort and Open Space General Plan designations for this subarea.
     2. Facilitate good roadway connectivity to Dillon Road. The network illustrated by Figure 4-1 could
         be adjusted to account for topography and physical constraints as long as the envisioned
         connectivity is maintained.
     3. Prior to development, prepare a single conceptual Specific Plan for the subarea that establishes
         a long-term vision, land uses and an implementation program. Separate implementing project-
         level specific plans may be prepared for individual projects.
     4. Minimize grading of the subarea and follow the natural topographic features during the planning
         and development process.
     5. Require that public facilities and services be provided concurrent with the development to
         ensure a high quality of life for residents.
     6. Require rural and clustered development in steeper and topographically constrained areas.
     7. Require new developments be designed for, and provided with, adequate public services and
         infrastructure to be self-sufficient in the event of a large earthquake.
     8. Require the primary boulevards to be designed, constructed and operated as multi-modal
         boulevards, not wide high-speed streets.
     9. Limit all resort development to a density of no more than 4 DU/AC.
     10. Final designation mix should be:
                 20 to 30 percent Open Space
                 Up to 25 percent Agricultural Rancho and Open Space
                 Up to 50 percent Rural Rancho
                 Up to 10 percent General Neighborhood
                 Up to 3 percent Suburban Retail District
                 Up to five percent Neighborhood Center
                 Up to 60 percent Resort
The La Entrada subarea is an environmentally rich area of the City
with rugged topography. It is part of the Mecca Hills that serve as a
scenic backdrop of the City and is bounded on the north by
Interstate 10 and on the west by the San Andreas Fault and The
Coachella Canal. The area is currently undeveloped and access to
the subarea is limited.
La Entrada is envisioned with a diversity of neighborhoods and commercial services. Regional
Commercial and Mixed-Use Development will be located in the western portion of the subarea along
50th Avenue that is being realigned to allow for a new interchange with I-10. The subarea will contain a
diversity of residential neighborhoods that may include retirement communities and more traditional
walkable neighborhoods. The rugged natural topography shall be maintained with lower density
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                    | 04-80

residential and open space. The area will have a well-defined open-space network with multi-use trails
connecting neighborhoods, parks and natural open spaces. While some distance from Downtown, La
Entrada will be directly connected to Central Coachella, Downtown and West Coachella via Avenues 50
and 52, which are broad four-six-lane boulevards with frequent pedestrian crossings and pleasant tree-
lined sidewalks.
     1.  Prepare and maintain two Specific Plans for the subarea that establish a long-term vision, land
         uses and an implementation program; one for the La Entrada project and one for the Phillips
         Ranch project.
     2. To the greatest extent feasible, preserve the natural topographic features during the planning
         and development process.
     3. Require public facilities and services be provided concurrent with the development to ensure a
         high quality of life for residents.
     4. Require all new development within this subarea conform to the vision and design parameters
         of the General Plan Designations.
     5. Strive for a high level of connectivity of residents to neighborhood services through site design,
         open space linkages, and bicycle facilities. Strive for 75 percent of residents (except for the
         rural residential and resorts) to be within a half-mile walk distance of retail and neighborhood
         services.
     6. Require the 90 percent of residents be within quarter-mile walk distances of a dedicated park,
         school, or multi-use trail.
     7. Require new development be designed as high quality neighborhoods that provide multiple
         amenities, a beautiful public realm and are consistent with the City’s vision for complete
         neighborhoods.
     8. Require rural neighborhoods and clustered development in steeper and topographically
         constrained areas and use these development types to preserve the significant natural
         amenities.
     9. Require new developments be designed for and provided with adequate public services and
         infrastructure to be self-sufficient in the event of a large earthquake.
     10. Require the primary boulevards to be designed, constructed and operated as multi-modal
         boulevards, not wide high-speed streets.
     11. Follow the block size and connectivity standards for new development found in this General
         Plan.
     12. Require development of grading guidelines and standards as part of a Specific Plan for the
         Phillips Ranch project.
     13. Require clustered single family and multifamily development in less constrained portions of
         Phillips Ranch, transferring density from areas constrained by seismic, drainage, rights of way,
         or other conditions based on technical studies. Assumed gross density would be 4 du/acre.
     14. Consider annexation as a logical extension of the City boundaries as neighboring properties are
         annexed and adjacent properties are developed.
     15. The final designation mix should be determined through the preparation of Specific Plans.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-81

This area is primarily used for agricultural production, with a
combination of cultivated row crops, orchards and natural open space.
The area is bounded by the Whitewater River on the west, Fillmore
on the east, 52nd Avenue to the north and Airport Avenue to the
south. The area is generally flat with a slight increase in elevation
toward the east. The majority of the subarea is located outside of the
City limits and within the Sphere of Influence.
This subarea is identified as a long-term urban expansion area that is not expected to develop during
the time horizon of the General Plan. Through 2035, uses are envisioned as agriculture and open
space. Over the long term, this area may be urbanized with a diversity of residential neighborhoods
supported by Neighborhood Centers and Suburban Retail Districts.
    1.   Prohibit the annexation of new land into the City limits in this subarea unless 60 percent of the
         land within subareas 9, 11 and 14 are developed with urban uses.
    2. Allow the annexation land for public uses such as parks.
    3. For areas outside of the City limits, maintain the county’s land-use designations until the land is
         annexed to the City.
    4. Prioritize and actively support near and mid-term activities and uses that focus on agriculture
         and natural open space.
    5. When it becomes appropriate to transition to urban uses, require new development be designed
         as traditional neighborhoods with a mix of housing types and densities, an interconnected street
         network and access to a diversity of commercial and public uses.
    6. Allow resorts in the eastern portion of the subarea and prohibit resort development on the
         western side or anywhere that resorts could harm network connectivity.
    7. Allow rural residential development in the eastern portion of the subarea.
    8. Final designation mix should be:
                 Ten to 20 percent Open Space
                 Up to 25 percent Agricultural Rancho
                 Up to 20 percent Rural Rancho
                 Up to 50 percent Suburban Neighborhood
                 Up to 25 percent General Neighborhood
                 Up to five percent Urban Neighborhood
                 Up to five percent Neighborhood Center
                 Up to five percent Suburban Retail District
                 Up to five percent Regional Retail District
                 Up to five percent Industrial District
                 Up to 40 percent Resort
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-82

This area is primarily used for agricultural production, with a
combination of cultivated row crops, orchards and natural open space.
The area is bounded by SR86S on the west, the Coachella Canal on
the east, Airport Boulevard on the north and 60th Avenue on the
south.
This subarea is identified as long-term urban expansion, not expected
to develop during the time horizon of the General Plan. Through 2035, uses are envisioned as
agriculture and open space. Over the long term, this area may be urbanized with a diversity of
residential neighborhoods supported by Neighborhood Centers and Suburban Retail Districts.
    1.   Prohibit the annexation of new land into the City limits in the subarea unless 60 percent of the
         land within subareas 9, 11, 14 and 15 are developed with urban uses.
    2. For areas outside of the City limits, maintain the county’s land use designations until such a
         time as it is annexed to the City.
    3. Prioritize and actively support near and mid-term activities and uses that focus on agriculture
         and natural open space.
    4. When it becomes appropriate to transition to urban uses, require new development be designed
         as traditional neighborhoods with a mix of housing types and densities, an interconnected street
         network and access to a diversity of commercial and public uses.
    5. Allow resorts in the eastern portion of the subarea and prohibit resort development on the
         western side or anywhere that resorts could harm network connectivity.
    6. Allow rural residential development in the eastern portion of the subarea.
    7. Work with the College of the Desert to encourage their growth and expansion to occur adjacent
         to the Downtown (in subarea 6) as opposed to this area. If the College of the Desert does
         pursue expansion plans in this subarea, encourage the campus to be located in Subarea 6 as
         an urban campus rather than an auto-oriented suburban complex.
    8. Final designation mix should be:
                 Up to 100 percent Agricultural Rancho
                 Up to 50 percent Rural Rancho
                 Up to 60 percent Suburban Neighborhood
                 Up to 20 percent General Neighborhood
                 Up to five percent Urban Neighborhood
                 Up to five percent Neighborhood Center
                 Up to five percent Suburban Retail District
                 Up to five percent Regional Retail District
                 Up to five percent Industrial District
                 Up to 40 percent Resort
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-83

The Eastern Coachella area is environmentally diverse and rich. It
is part of the Mecca Hills that serve as a scenic backdrop of the
City. The area is bounded on the southwest by the San Andreas
Fault and Coachella Canal, bisected by Interstate 10. The area is
a very environmentally sensitive and constrained area, with desert
washes and 100 year floodplains, active faults and sensitive
habitat and nearly all of the area has been set aside for
conservation. Access to the area is limited due to the topography
and location.
This area of the City should continue to be mostly undeveloped open space that defines the eastern
edge of Coachella and provides a beautiful visual backdrop to the City. The urban development that
does occur should be rural residential with minimal impact to the natural landscape from roads and
homes.
    1.   Investigate and consider the de-annexation of the subarea from the City’s jurisdiction since the
         majority of the land is set aside for conservation or only allows very low density residential
         development.
    2. Limit uses to Rural Residential and passive open space.
    3. Prohibit grading to the minimum necessary to construct rural roadways and the allowed Rural
         Residential development.
    4. As feasible, construct multi-use trails along the Coachella Canal either inside, or adjacent to,
         this subarea.
    5. Final designation mix should be:
                  Ten to 40 percent Agricultural Rancho
                  Up to 100 percent Rural Rancho
                  25 to 100 percent Open Space
Goal 1.        Development Regulations. A land development and regulatory system that
               reinforces the City’s desire to grow from a small town to a medium sized city
               in a sustainable and orderly manner.
               Policies
               1.1    City limits. Establish and maintain a city limit for Coachella that allows for a realistic
                      amount of future growth.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-84

             1.2   Annexation. Allow the annexation of new land into the City when at least 60 percent
                   of the land within the city limits is built with urban uses or permanently preserved
                   open space.
             1.3   Sphere of influence. Establish and maintain a Sphere of Influence that identifies the
                   long-term growth plans of the City. The Sphere of Influence may encompass an
                   area that accommodates more growth than the time horizon of the General Plan.
             1.4   Planning area. Establish and maintain a Planning Area that allows Coachella to
                   communicate to adjacent jurisdictions about potential the impact of Growth on the
                   City.
             1.5   Subareas. Establish and utilize a system of subareas to efficiently plan and manage
                   the City’s growth. Each area of the City and Sphere of Influence shall be included in
                   a subarea. All development and policy decisions shall conform to the vision and
                   policies for that planning area, in addition to the citywide goals and policies. See
                   Figure 3-24 for a map of the City’s subareas.
             1.6   General plan designations. Establish and maintain a system of General Plan
                   designations that:
                        Provides flexibility for land developers to determine the best use of their land within
                         the bounds of the vision for the subarea, particularly in undeveloped areas of the
                         City.
                        Regulates the form and character of new development to ensure the development
                         that does occur is complete with a diversity of uses so residents don’t have to drive
                         long distances to access goods and services, connected to the Downtown and other
                         parts of the City via multiple modes of transportation, and compact so that areas
                         are walkable and pedestrian-friendly. The exception to the above shall be Resort
                         developments which may be developed as isolated projects separate from the rest
                         of the City.
                        Uses the development process to enhance the charterer and identity of Coachella.
             1.7   Specific Plans. Utilize specific plans as strategic entitlement tools when considering
                   unique projects that bring exceptional value to the community. Periodically review
                   existing, un-built specific plans for relevance and the potential for needed updates.
Goal 2.      Growth and Development. The successful transformation of Coachella from a
             small town into a medium-sized, full-service City that is a major economic
             center for the Coachella Valley.
             Policies
             2.1   Population and employment growth. Allow the City to grow from its current
                   population of approximately 40,000 and 5,800 jobs to a maximum of 135,000 and
                   32,000 jobs by 2035.
             2.2   Character and identity. Strive to maintain Coachella’s existing small-town character,
                   identity and cultural diversity as development occurs in the future.
             2.3   Urban design as identity. Recognize the City can differentiate itself from other
                   Coachella Valley cities through urban design practices such as the development of
                   complete neighborhoods, preservation of agriculture and open space, pedestrian-
                   oriented design and sustainable development practices.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                           | 04-85

             2.4  Natural context. Retain the City’s natural infrastructure and visual character derived
                  from topography, farmlands and waterway corridors.
             2.5  High quality construction and architecture. Require high-quality and long-lasting
                  building materials on all new development projects in the City. Encourage innovative
                  and quality architecture in the City with all new public and private projects.
             2.6  Architectural diversity. A diversity of architectural styles is encouraged, particularly
                  those that have their roots in the heritage of Southern California and the Desert
                  Southwest.
             2.7  Climate-appropriate design. Require architecture, building materials and landscape
                  design to respect and relate to the local climate, topography, history, and building
                  practices.
             2.8  Growth and development evaluation. Every five years, review and adjust, as
                  needed, the General Plan’s population and employment capacities to meet changes
                  in economic and demographic conditions.
             2.9  Infill development. Promote and provide development incentives for infill
                  development and redevelopment of existing properties.
             2.10 Contiguous development pattern. Encourage and incentivize development to occur
                  contiguous to, or proximate to, existing built areas to facilitate delivery of City
                  services and minimize “leapfrog” development not connected to existing urbanized
                  areas.
             2.11 New growth. Continue to plan for future expansion and new growth on previously
                  undeveloped areas.
             2.12 High priority development areas. Identify subareas 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 as
                  Priority Growth Areas to be targeted for growth through City policies and actions and
                  to receive priority for funding, community facilities and services.
             2.13 Growth expansion areas. Identify subareas 12 and 14 as future Growth Expansion
                  Areas. During the time horizon of the General Plan, growth that occurs in these
                  areas shall conform to the following criteria and characteristics.
                        Minimum size of proposed development projects must be over 100 acres
                        Residential areas must be developed as one or more complete neighborhoods that
                         contain a mix of housing types, sufficient parks and open spaces, necessary
                         community facilities and services with access to retail and other goods and
                         services.
                        Development must be connected to the existing City via a network of multi-modal
                         streets and non-motorized trails.
                        All infrastructure connecting the new development to the existing City must be paid
                         by the project sponsor using the City’s infrastructure specifications.
                        Financing plans for on-going operation and maintenance of streets, roads, parks
                         and other community facilities and services that do not increase taxes or reduce
                         services for existing residents must be approved and in place.
             2.14 Reserve development areas. Subareas 13, 15 and 16 shall be maintained as
                  reserve development areas. These areas shall maintain their current land or
                  agricultural use until the identified High Priority Development Areas and Growth
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-86

                    Expansion Areas are at least 60 percent developed with urban uses or preserved
                    open spaces.
             2.15   Steep slopes. Limit development and grading in areas with slopes greater than 20
                    percent and limit the density and intensity of development in areas with slopes of
                    between 10 and 19 percent.
             2.16   Range of uses. Through Specific Plans, Planned Developments, or other similar
                    master planning processes, allow the designations shown on the General Plan
                    Designation Map to be adjusted within the ranges set forth for each policy area in
                    large, undeveloped areas of the City so long as the visions of the General Plan and
                    the applicable subarea is met.
             2.17   Parks and open space. Establish parks and open space as allowed uses within all
                    General Plan Designations.
             2.18   Open space conservation. Establish mechanisms to provide for the conservation of
                    resource land that is not yet conserved if it falls within one of the following
                    categories:
                        Flood plain, including Special Flood Hazard Areas.
                        Open Space to be acquired.
                        Wildlife corridors.
                        Legacy farmland.
                        Riparian areas.
                        Areas of cultural significance.
                        Seismic or geological hazard areas.
                        Legacy viewsheds.
             2.19   Community Amenities. Encourage the provision of a high-level of neighborhood and
                    community amenities and design features as a way of balancing increased density,
                    recognizing that the General Plan increases the average planned density by several
                    times and specifies a desire for a very high quality, amenity-rich, livable community.
Goal 3.      Healthy Community Design. Development patterns and urban design
             comprised of complete, walkable, attractive, family-friendly neighborhoods,
             districts and corridors that support healthy and active lifestyles.
             Policies
             3.1    Physical plan. Facilitate the construction of a built environment that supports a
                    healthy physical and social environment for new and existing neighborhoods.
             3.2    Walkable streets. Regulate new development to ensure new blocks encourage
                    walkability by maximizing connectivity and route choice, create reasonable block
                    lengths to encourage more walking and physical activity and improve the walkability
                    of existing neighborhood streets.
             3.3    Pedestrian barriers. Discourage physical barriers to walking and bicycling between
                    and within neighborhoods and neighborhood centers. If physical barriers are
                    unavoidable, provide safe and comfortable crossings for pedestrians and cyclists.
                    Physical barriers may include arterial streets with speed limits above 35 mph, transit
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-87

                  or utility rights-of-way, very long blocks without through-streets, and sound walls,
                  among others.
             3.4  Shared driveways. Allow and encourage new commercial and residential
                  developments to have common driveways serving multiple units, to minimize the
                  number of curb cuts along any given block to improve pedestrian safety.
             3.5  Health in Developments. Evaluate the health impact and benefits of new
                  development projects in the early planning phases to maximize its contribution to the
                  vision for a healthier Coachella.
             3.6  Family-friendly community. Strive to create multi-generational family-friendly public
                  spaces and affordable family-friendly neighborhoods through the following measures:
                      The provision of family-friendly amenities, such as libraries, recreation centers and
                       parks in residential neighborhoods.
                      Encouraging child-care and schools near employment centers and housing and vice
                       versa.
                      Set a minimum proportion or number of two-, and three-bedroom units in multi-
                       family and rental housing development.
                      Allow family child care in residential units by right.
                      Provide child care at public meetings.
                      Encourage youth participation in the planning process.
             3.7  Culture and entertainment hub. Create opportunities for leisure/cultural activities in
                  Coachella such as a movie theater, music and dancing venue, museum/gallery,
                  cafe, or bowling alley, among many other facilities to ensure teens and young adults
                  have safe ways to enrich their social lives.
Goal 4.      Rural Areas. A strong, preserved rural and agricultural heritage and
             character that preserves the natural beauty and context of the City.
             4.1  Agricultural land preservation. Provide for the protection and preservation of
                  agricultural land as a major industry for Coachella and sufficient to maintain the rural
                  character of the City. Explore and allow a variety of methods of preserving land in
                  sizes that are viable economic units for continuing agricultural activities including:
                      Density transfers to allow a greater portion of proposed development on other in
                       order to allow productive sites to remain in agricultural production.
                      Use of the Williamson Act.
                      Implementation of a “right-to-farm” ordinance.
                      Adopting a farmland protection program.
             4.2  Agricultural land conversion. Actively discourage the urbanization of agricultural land
                  when other land not in agricultural use within the city limits is available for
                  development.
             4.3  Agricultural elements in urban landscape. Where feasible, incorporate existing
                  agricultural elements, such as date farms, vineyards and citrus trees into the urban
                  landscape as part of development projects. This preservation will enable the
                  agricultural history of the City to remain visible and provide unique urban landscape
                  features that can distinguish Coachella from other cities in the Coachella Valley.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-88

             4.4   Agricultural land in sphere of influence. Preserve existing agricultural land in the
                   Sphere of Influence and limit the annexation of active agricultural land, unless it is
                   part of a development project.
             4.5   Rural residential. Allow rural residential with homes on lots of up to 2.5 acres in
                   size in limited areas of the City. These areas shall serve as buffers between more
                   urban development and permanently undeveloped areas of the City. The Rural areas
                   may serve as part of the City’s greenbelt.
             4.6   Conservation subdivisions. Provide for, and encourage, conservation subdivisions
                   that cluster development on a site as a way of preserving valuable natural resources
                   such as agricultural lands.
             4.7   City Greenbelt. Strive to create an undeveloped or rural greenbelt around the City
                   comprised of rural residential, preserved parks and open space, and agricultural
                   lands.
Goal 5.      Neighborhoods. Neighborhoods that provide a variety of housing types,
             densities, designs and mix of uses and services that reflect the diversity and
             identity of Coachella, provide for diverse needs of residents of all ages,
             ethnicities, socio-economic groups and abilities, and support healthy and
             active lifestyles. (The following policies apply to all locations with a
             “Neighborhood” General Plan Designation.)
             Policies
             5.1   Complete neighborhoods. Through the development entitlement process, ensure that
                   all new Neighborhoods (areas with a “Neighborhood” General Plan Designation) are
                   complete and well-structured such that the physical layout and land use mix promote
                   walking to services, biking and transit use; develop community identity and pride, are
                   family friendly and address the needs of multiple ages and physical abilities. New
                   neighborhoods should have the following characteristics:
                       Be approximately 125 acres in size and approximately half-mile in diameter
                       Contain short, walkable block lengths.
                       Have a grid or modified grid street network (except where topography necessitates
                        another street network layout).
                       Contain a high level of connectivity for pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles (except
                        where existing development or natural features prohibit connectivity).
                       Have homes with entries and windows facing the street.
                       Contain a diversity of housing types, where possible.
                       Provide a diversity of architectural styles.
                       Have goods and services within a short walking distance.
                       Are organized around a central focal point such as a park, school, civic building or
                        neighborhood retail such that most homes are no more than one quarter-mile from
                        this focal point.
             5.2   Conventional neighborhood design. Discourage the construction of new residential
                   neighborhoods that are characterized by cul-de-sacs, soundwalls, long block lengths,
                   single building and housing types and lack of access to goods and services.
             5.3   Variety of types of neighborhoods. Promote a variety of neighborhoods within the
                   City and ensure that neighborhood types are dispersed throughout the City.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-89

             5.4  Balanced neighborhoods. Within the allowed densities and housing types, promote a
                  range of housing and price levels within each neighborhood in order to
                  accommodate diverse ages and incomes. For development projects larger than five
                  acres, require that a diversity of housing types be provided and that these housing
                  types be mixed rather than segregated by unit type.
             5.5  Housing affordability. Ensure affordable housing is distributed throughout the City to
                  avoid concentrations of poverty and be accessible to jobs.
             5.6  Senior housing. Encourage the development of senior housing in neighborhoods that
                  are accessible to public transit, commercial services and health and community
                  facilities.
             5.7  Walkable neighborhoods. Require that all new neighborhoods are designed and
                  constructed to be pedestrian friendly and include features such as short blocks, wide
                  sidewalks, tree-shaded streets, buildings that define and are oriented to streets or
                  public spaces, traffic-calming features, convenient pedestrian street crossings, and
                  safe streets that are designed for pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles.
             5.8  Provision of sidewalks. Except within designated rural areas, require sidewalks of at
                  least six feet in width on both sides of streets in neighborhoods.
             5.9  Street network. Except where infeasible because of topographic conditions, require
                  new Neighborhoods to be designed with a traditional grid pattern and block sizes
                  ranging from 300 to 600 feet, depending on the General Plan Designations.
             5.10 Street layout. Design streets and lot layouts to provide a majority of lots within 20
                  degrees of a north-south orientation for increased energy conservation.
             5.11 Connections to key destinations. Require direct pedestrian connections between
                  residential areas and nearby commercial areas.
             5.12 Hillside connectivity. Allow street patterns to follow natural topography and open
                  spaces as long as connectivity and sense of place is maintained.
             5.13 Tree-lined streets. Design and build Neighborhoods to provide trees on both sides
                  of at least 60 percent of new and existing streets within the project and on the
                  project’s side of bordering streets, between the vehicle travel way and walkway at
                  intervals averaging no more than 50 feet (excluding driveways and utility vaults).
                  This standard shall apply whenever new streets are constructed or when existing
                  streets and sidewalks are significantly rehabilitated with existing neighborhoods.
             5.14 Shaded sidewalks. Strive to design and build neighborhoods to provide shade over
                  at least 30 percent of the length of sidewalks on streets within the project. Trees
                  must provide shade within 10 years of landscape installation and should be as water
                  efficient as possible.
             5.15 Access to daily activities. Strive to create development patterns such that the
                  majority of residents are within one-half mile walking distance to a variety of
                  neighborhood goods and services, such as supermarkets, restaurants, churches,
                  cafes, dry cleaners, laundromats, farmers markets, banks, hair care, pharmacies and
                  similar uses.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                     | 04-90

             5.16  Access to parks and open spaces. Design new neighborhoods and, where feasible,
                   retrofit existing neighborhoods, so that 60 percent of dwelling units are within a one-
                   third mile walk distance of a usable open space such as a tot-lot, neighborhood
                   park, community park or plaza/green.
             5.17  Neighborhood transitions. Require that new neighborhoods provide appropriate
                   transitions in scale, building type and density between different General Plan
                   designations.
             5.18  Gated communities. Prohibit the construction of new gated communities except in
                   the Rural or Resort General Plan Designations. As an alternative, consider gates
                   around individual properties.
             5.19  Gated blocks. Allow small groups of homes up to one block to be gated as an
                   alternative to gated communities so long as it does not impact community
                   connectivity.
             5.20  Soundwalls. Allow the use of soundwalls to buffer new Neighborhoods from existing
                   sources of noise pollution such as railroads and limited access roadways. Prohibit
                   the use of soundwalls to buffer residential areas from arterial or collector streets.
                   Instead design approaches such as building setbacks, landscaping and other
                   techniques shall be used.
             5.21  Subdivision gateways. Discourage the use of signs to distinguish one residential
                   project from another. Strive for neighborhoods to blend seamlessly into one another.
             5.22  Green neighborhoods. Encourage new developments to build to a green
                   neighborhood rating standard and apply for certification from a program such as
                   LEED for Neighborhood Development or LEED for Homes.
             5.23  Neighborhood preservation. Preserve and enhance the character of existing
                   residential neighborhoods.
             5.24  Infill neighborhoods. In existing developed areas of the City, encourage repair-
                   oriented development that creates complete neighborhoods (as defined above). Such
                   activities include:
                         Enhancing connectivity and reducing block size, including reasonable and related
                          improvements in off-site locations.
                         Completing abandoned subdivisions with building types identified in this General
                          Plan.
                         Making pedestrian-oriented blocks out of large scale superblocks through the
                          addition of new streets.
Goal 6.      Centers. A variety of mixed use, urban centers throughout the City that
             provides opportunities for shopping, recreation, commerce, employment and
             arts and culture.
             Policies
             6.1   Downtown. Facilitate the development of the Downtown as a vibrant, active
                   downtown that is the civic and cultural heart of the community and as the regional
                   center of the Coachella Valley for commerce, culture and government.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-91

             6.2   Downtown implementation. Follow the Pueblo Viejo Revitalization Plan for the
                   Downtown adopted by the City Council in 2009.
             6.3   Arts and culture. Focus arts and cultural activities in and around the Downtown.
             6.4   Diverse centers. Encourage the development of local and city-wide centers that
                   address different community needs and market sectors. The centers shall
                   complement and be integrated with surrounding neighborhoods.
             6.5   Access to transit. Promote the development of commercial and mixed use centers
                   that are located on existing or planned transit stops in order to facilitate and take
                   advantage of transit service, reduce vehicle trips and allow residents without private
                   vehicles to access services.
             6.6   Redevelopment of existing retail into neighborhood centers. Provide incentives to
                   transform existing, auto-dominated suburban centers into neighborhood destinations
                   by adding a diversity of uses, providing new pedestrian connections to adjacent
                   residential areas, reducing the visual prominence of parking lots, making the centers
                   more pedestrian-friendly and enhance the definition and character of street frontage
                   and associated streetscapes.
             6.7   New neighborhood centers. Create a series of new neighborhood centers
                   throughout Coachella so the majority of dwelling units in each Neighborhood are no
                   more than one-half mile from any neighborhood center.
             6.8   Neighborhood center location. Locate new Neighborhood Centers at the
                   intersections of major roadways such as collectors and arterials.
             6.9   Neighborhood center design. Design new neighborhood centers to be walkable and
                   pedestrian-friendly with buildings that front internal streets and public sidewalks and
                   with buildings facing major roadways. No more than 50 percent of the frontage on
                   streets may be parking lots.
             6.10  New urban employment centers. Strive to create a series of new Urban
                   Employment Centers in strategic locations in Coachella. The primary locations for
                   this use are subareas 6, 7 and 10.
             6.11  Design of urban employment centers. Design Urban Employment Centers to be
                   urban in character with compact buildings sited at or near front lot lines, a high
                   percentage of lot coverage, and building facades and entrances directly addressing
                   the street and with a high degree of transparency. Parking lots and large setbacks
                   shall not dominate the frontage of the Urban Employment Centers.
Goal 7.      Districts. A series of unique, destination-oriented districts throughout
             Coachella that provide space for large-format retail, industrial and resort
             uses in order to increase access to jobs, provide amenities for residents and
             improve the fiscal stability of the City.
             Policies
             7.1   Higher education. Actively seek the location and establishment of higher education
                   facilities, such as colleges or universities, within the City, ideally located adjacent to
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                         | 04-92
                  the Downtown in subarea 6. The colleges and universities should be integrated with
                  the urban fabric and not designed as an isolated campus.
             7.2  Industrial expansion. Actively seek to expand the amount of industrial uses in
                  Coachella as a source of jobs and economic development. Industrial uses should be
                  focused in subareas 5, 7 and 8.
             7.3  Heavy industry. Locate heavy industrial uses in locations that do not affect sensitive
                  uses.
             7.4  Impact of industrial development. Require new development within the City’s
                  industrial districts be designed for compatibility with surrounding uses to minimize
                  impact and cultivate connectivity with each district.
             7.5  Industrial compatibility. Where industrial uses are near existing and planned
                  residential development, require industrial projects be designed to limit the impact of
                  truck traffic on residential areas.
             7.6  New suburban retail districts. Allow Suburban Retail Districts to locate along major
                  roadways throughout the City.
             7.7  Suburban retail district design. Allow Suburban Retail Districts to have an
                  automobile-oriented design with surface parking lots with landscaping, buildings set
                  back from the street and relatively low floor area ratios. Freestanding retail pads are
                  encouraged. Ensure that the design also allows for pedestrian and bicycle access to
                  and through the site.
             7.8  Regional retail districts. Establish major regional serving commercial centers that
                  provide a mix of uses in a pedestrian oriented format and become vibrant
                  destinations for people to live, work, shop and congregate. Allow a wide variety of
                  uses to locate in Regional Retail Districts including destination retail centers, mixed-
                  use town centers, theme parks, sports venues, entertainment complexes and hotels,
                  among other uses.
             7.9  Regional retail district design. Allow for significant flexibility in the design of
                  Regional Retail Districts so long as city-wide and project-level connectivity standards
                  are met, the uses do not adversely affect adjacent uses and accommodations are
                  made for pedestrians, bicycle and transit users.
             7.10 Resorts. Actively pursue the establishment of multiple resort complexes in Coachella.
                  Locate resorts in areas of the City where city-wide connectivity will not be negatively
                  affected by the design of the project. Such locations include adjacent to hillsides, on
                  the edge of the Sphere of Influence and city limit where additional annexation is not
                  expected to occur and adjacent to rivers and canals.
             7.11 Resort design and connectivity. Allow resorts to be designed as isolated and gated
                  developments as long as through traffic and external connectivity occurs at distances
                  of no greater than 1,300 feet. Exceptions to this may be made where external
                  connection is not possible because of steep slopes, natural or man-made barriers
                  such as limited access roadways or rivers.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-93

Goal 8.      Public Facilities and Buildings. A variety of public facilities and buildings
             throughout the City that improves the quality of life for residents and
             maintains a high-level of public services.
             Policies
             8.1   Equitable distribution of facilities and services. Strive to equitably distribute public
                   facilities, improvements and services throughout Coachella, with priority given to
                   remedying existing deficiencies in blighted or underserved areas of the City.
             8.2   Phasing of public facilities. Require new parks, open spaces and public facilities be
                   constructed concurrent with, or prior to, the development of each Neighborhood. All
                   required parks, open spaces and public facilities should be constructed before 75
                   percent of the dwelling units are constructed.
             8.3   School location and design. Work with school districts to size, design and locate
                   schools to better enable students to walk or bicycle to them.
             8.4   Parks and open space. Establish a range of parks and open spaces, including tot
                   lots, neighborhood parks, community parks, plazas/greens and/or
                   greenways/parkways within all new Neighborhoods, Centers and Districts.
             8.5   Civic and institutional uses. Locate civic and institutional uses in Downtown and
                   neighborhood centers and avoid locating these uses in remote, single-use
                   complexes.
             8.6   Civic identity. Encourage civic buildings and public gathering places to be designed
                   to provide locations that reinforce community identity and support self-government.
             8.7   Role of civic buildings. Require civic buildings be distinctive and appropriate to a
                   role more important than the other buildings that constitute the fabric of the City.
Goal 9.      Corridors and Connectivity. A network of transportation and open space
             corridors throughout the City that provides a high level of connectivity for
             vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians.
             Policies
             9.1   City-wide connectivity. Establish and preserve a Citywide street network throughout
                   the City where through roads occur approximately every one-quarter mile, except
                   where connections cannot be made because of previous large development projects
                   or physical constraints. Physical constraints shall be canals, railroads, water, steep
                   slopes, limited access roadways and similar natural and man-made barriers.
             9.2   Subarea connectivity. Ensure a high-level of connectivity in all Neighborhoods,
                   Centers and Districts throughout the City. The connectivity shall be measured as
                   block perimeter and in external connectivity on the perimeter of a new development
                   project.
             9.3   Connections between development projects. Require the continuation of the street
                   network between adjacent development projects and discourage the use of cul-de-
                   sacs except where necessary because connections cannot be made due to existing
                   development, topographic conditions or limited access to transportation systems.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-94
             9.4   Transportation corridors. Plan and reserve transportation corridors in coordination
                   with land use.
                        Van Buren Corridor. Facilitate the development of the Van Buren Corridor into a
                         beautiful, shaded, pedestrian-friendly avenue that provides regional retail
                         commercial and serves to repair the edges of existing neighborhoods of the
                         surrounding area.
                        Harrison Street. Require development along Harrison Street conform to
                         recommendations of the Harrison Street Study to realize a town-scale Main Street
                         environment that supports pedestrian activity and local serving commerce.
                        Avenues 50 and 52. Establish Avenues 50 and 52 as important cross-town
                         corridors that connect Coachella, serve as transitions between neighborhoods,
                         provide opportunities for local-serving retail and balance the needs of multiple
                         transport modes.
                        Grapefruit Avenue. Facilitate the development of Grapefruit Avenue as major cross-
                         town corridor that balances intercity automobile needs with pedestrian, bicycle and
                         transit.
             9.5   Green/open space network. Establish an interconnected open space network
                   throughout Coachella that serves as a network for active transportation, recreation
                   and scenic beauty and connects all existing and future areas of the City. In
                   particular, connections should be made between preserved open spaces, parks, the
                   Downtown, Neighborhood Centers and other destinations within the City. Consider
                   the following components when designing and implementing the green/open space
                   network:
                        Preserved open space areas.
                        Greenways and parkways along fault lines, the Whitewater River and the Coachella
                         Canal.
                        Roadways with significant landscaping and pedestrian and bicycle amenities.
                        Community and neighborhood parks.
                        Multi-use trails and non-motorized rights-of-way.
             9.6   Trip Chaining. Prioritize complementary land uses to encourage trip chaining and
                   reduce automobile use.
             9.7   Unbundled parking. Allow and encourage developers of residential, mixed-use and
                   multi-tenant commercial projects to unbundle parking costs from unit sale and rental
                   costs in denser, mixed-use areas to give tenants and owners the opportunity to save
                   money by using fewer parking spaces.
Goal 10. Development requirements. A fair, understandable and predictable approach
             that ensures new development does not impose a fiscal burden on the City,
             conforms to regional airport and railroad safety practices, and requires new
             projects to provide adequate public facilities and services as part of the
             overall process.
             Policies
             10.1  Required contents of Specific Plans and Planned Developments that implement
                   the subarea Master Plans. Require that all Specific Plans, Planned Developments,
                   Master Plans and other master-planned community implementation tools include:
                        A plan for the phasing of all off-site infrastructure.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-95

                       A performance schedule for the issuance of building permits based on the
                        concurrent availability of public services and amenities, including parks, schools and
                        other public facilities identified in the entitlement documents.
                       A clear statement of the minimum public improvements that will be required as part
                        of the first phase of development.
                       A statement of the financing mechanisms that will provide for the ongoing funding
                        and financing of the public facilities of the project. These financing tools should be
                        presented and discussed in the entitlement document implementation plan.
             10.2 Concurrency. Prohibit the issuance of precise grading plans and building permits
                  unless the City has made a determination that adequate stormwater facilities,
                  parks, solid waste, water, sewer and transportation facilities are operating to serve
                  each phase of development.
             10.3 Phasing of project site improvements. Require that new subdivisions complete the
                  public improvements before occupancy inspections unless a development agreement
                  is implemented.
             10.4 Airport compatibility. Require new development in the vicinity of Jacqueline Cochran
                  Airport to conform to the County’s airport land use and safety plans. Notwithstanding
                  the allowable land use intensities and densities set forth by this Land Use and
                  Community Character Element, there may be more restrictive density and intensity
                  limitations on land use and development parameters, as set forth by the Airport Land
                  Use and Compatibility Plan. Additionally, per the Airport Land Use Plan, there may
                  be additional limits, restrictions, and requirements, such as aviation easements,
                  height limits, occupancy limits, and deed restrictions, required of new developments
                  within the vicinity of the airport
             10.5 Wildlife Hazards Study. New developments proposing golf course or significant open
                  space and/or water features shall prepare a wildlife hazard study if the site is within
                  the Airport Influence Area.
             10.6 Airport Land Use Commission Review. Before the adoption or amendment of this
                  General Plan, any specific plan, the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance
                  or building regulation within the planning boundary of the airport land use
                  compatibility plan, the City shall refer proposed actions for review, determination and
                  processing by the Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission as provided by
                  the Airport Land Use Law. The City shall notify the Airport Land Use Commission
                  office and send a Request for Agency Comments for all new projects, and projects
                  proposing added floor area or change in building occupancy type within 2 miles of
                  the airport.
             10.7 Federal Aviation Administration Review. Projects that require an FAA notice and
                  review will be conditioned accordingly by the City to obtain an FAA Determination of
                  No Hazard to Air Navigation prior to issuance of any building permits.
             10.8 Residential Development near airport. New residential development
                  within Airport Compatibility Zone D shall have a net density of at least five dwelling
                  units per acre. New dwelling units should not be permitted as secondary uses of
                  the Urban Employment Center General Plan Designation within Airport Compatibility
                  Zone C.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                          | 04-96

             10.9  Nonresidential Development near airport. The land use intensity of nonresidential
                   structures within Airport Compatibility Zones B1, C, and D shall be limited as set
                   forth by Table 2A of the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
             10.10 Hospitals near airport: Hospitals shall be prohibited within Airport Compatibility
                   Zones B1 and C and discouraged in Airport Compatibility Zone D.
             10.11 Regional coordination. Promote coordinated long-range planning between the City,
                   airport authorities, businesses and the public to meet the region's aviation needs.
             10.12 Railroad Safety. When considering development adjacent to the railroad right-of-
                   way, work to minimize potential safety issues associated with railroad adjacency.
Goal 11. Economic Development. A broad-based and long-term economic development
             environment for Coachella that is supportive of existing businesses and will
             attract new business and tourism.
             Policies
             11.1  Long-term economic development. Support the development and implementation of
                   long-term economic development strategies that seek to establish and keep new
                   businesses and a strong-middle class in Coachella over the decades to come.
             11.2  Regional presence. Encourage economic development strategies that will cause
                   Coachella to become a major city in the Coachella Valley and a driving force behind
                   the area’s economy.
             11.3  Regional jobs center. Encourage economic development strategies that will cause
                   Coachella to become a jobs center for the Coachella Valley.
             11.4  Diversified economy. Encourage economic development strategies that allow the
                   City to move beyond reliance on its two main industries – agriculture and resort
                   services – and transform itself to a mature mix of economic activity and job
                   opportunities.
             11.5  Jobs-housing balance. Strive to improve the jobs-housing balance in the City by
                   actively pursuing employment uses to the City.
             11.6  Jobs-housing match. To the extent feasible, attract new employment uses to
                   Coachella that match the skill and educational levels of existing and future residents.
             11.7  Job training. Expand job training opportunities for Coachella residents.
             11.8  Development incentives. Consider incentives for new development that provides a
                   substantial economic benefit to the community such as retail sales taxes, transient
                   occupancy taxes or higher-paying jobs. Prohibit the provision of incentives that
                   outweigh the direct benefits from the use.
             11.9  Business support. Support the Chamber of Commerce, retailers, tourist service
                   businesses, artists, resort operators and other agencies to develop an aggressive
                   marketing strategy with implementation procedures.
             11.10 Revitalization incentives. Develop and provide incentives to assist developers in
                   revitalization and rehabilitation of existing structures, uses and properties through
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                        | 04-97

                   improvement programs, innovative development standards, specific plans and
                   assessment districts.
             11.11 Joint-use. Promote joint use of public and private facilities for community use,
                   tourism, conference, convention and cultural uses.
             11.12 State and Federal assistance. Utilize state and federal economic development
                   assistance programs when appropriate and develop additional local financing
                   programs. Work with the California Office of Tourism to develop the area’s
                   recognition as a major area for state recreational opportunities and cultural
                   development.
             11.13 Natural environment. Maintain and enhance the natural environment as critical to
                   the attraction of tourists and ensure that new development does not adversely affect
                   the natural environment as a tourist draw.
             11.14 Recreational amenities. Strategically utilize City recreational investments to create
                   and enhance development opportunities.
             11.15 Creative Economy. Prioritize strategies that will create an economy full of diverse
                   talents, trades and goods for the City. For long lasting economic success, a range of
                   services, arts, music, entertainment and retail should be supported on all scales of
                   the City’s economy.
             11.16 Special events. Actively recruit seasonal and special events, such as festivals and
                   concerts and develop mitigation strategies that will offset the impact of such events
                   in the City on community members and neighborhoods.
Goal 12. Diversity of uses for economic development. Non-residential uses that
             creates a complete city and diversifies the local economy.
             Policies
             12.1  Airport. Encourage activities and developments that capitalize on Jacqueline Cochran
                   Airport as an asset.
             12.2  Office/R&D. Actively attract and expand the number of and development (R&D)
                   uses in Coachella.
             12.3  Agriculture. Recognize and maintain agriculture and related uses as a key
                   component of the City’s long-term economic development strategy. Prioritize the
                   preservation of date groves, citrus groves and vineyards.
             12.4  Entertainment and tourist attractions. Pursue one or more major entertainment
                   destinations for Coachella residents and to draw visitors from around the region.
                   Such entertainment uses could include theme parks, water parks, theme-oriented
                   retail destinations, sports facilities, performance venues and other similar uses. Strive
                   to locate these uses near regional transportation infrastructure and in subareas 9, 11,
                   and 12.
             12.5  Arts and culture. Pursue one or more arts and cultural facilities in Coachella as an
                   economic development strategy. Such uses could include museums, theaters,
                   performing arts centers and similar uses. Strive to locate these uses in or around
                   Downtown.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-98

             12.6  Casinos. Support the existing casinos around Coachella due to their ability to attract
                   visitors to the region. Strive to capitalize on the casinos to expand destinations
                   within Coachella.
             12.7  Hospitality. Expand the number and variety of hospitality options with Coachella as a
                   means of providing jobs for residents and expanding the local tax base.
             12.8  Convention/retreat center. Pursue the development of one or more convention and
                   retreat centers for the City over the long-term. To the extent feasible, locate these
                   uses close to existing hospitality uses and/or the Downtown.
             12.9  Retail base. Encourage economic development of all scales of retail development
                   within Coachella in order to create a stronger tax base and increase the City’s tax
                   revenue.
Goal 13. Fiscal Stability. A City with thorough economic development strategies and
             reasoned decisions based on sound fiscal policies.
             Policies
             13.1  Fiscal impact assessment. For all major development projects, including but not
                   limited to specific plans, annexations and changes in General Plan designations for
                   areas over 20 acres in size, require a fiscal impact assessment to determine
                   possible fiscal impact of the development project and use the information to
                   formulate conditions of approval for the project.
             13.2  Development fees. Implement a series of development fees needed to maintain the
                   fiscal health of the City and ensure high quality public facilities and services.
                   Annually review and, as needed, update the impact fees to keep pace with changing
                   economic conditions and community needs. Adopt and update the City’s authority for
                   collection of development fees within the full extent allowed under state law.
             13.3  Efficient growth. Manage growth in a manner that is fiscally sustainable and protects
                   and/or enhances community values.
             13.4  Diverse tax base. Provide a fiscally sound City with a sustainable tax base and user
                   fees including property tax, sales tax, transient occupancy tax, utilities user tax and
                   user fees that pay for cost of services.
             13.5  Rural-town transformation. Manage infrastructure investments and growth to
                   efficiently manage the transformation of Coachella from a rural area to a midsize
                   town, and to an eventual large city.
             13.6  Growth costs. Prioritize short-term and long-term fiscal sustainability to grow in a
                   way that does not cost the City money.
             13.7  Fiscal impacts of infrastructure. When considering new development proposals,
                   discourage developments that require the construction of new infrastructure across
                   large expanses of the City’s undeveloped areas.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                       | 04-99

Goal 14. Regional Collaboration. A leader and partner in the region.
             Policies
             14.1  Sustainable development leadership. Establish the City as a regional leader in
                   sustainable development and encourage compact, higher-density development that
                   conserves land resources, protects habitat, supports transit, reduces vehicle trips,
                   improves air quality, conserves energy and water and diversifies the housing stock in
                   the Coachella Valley.
             14.2  Relationships with adjacent jurisdictions. Maintain strong relationships with adjacent
                   jurisdictions and work together on projects of mutual interest and concern.
             14.3  Regional transportation and infrastructure decisions. Actively support regional
                   transportation decisions that benefit the City and the region.
             14.4  Regional governance. Plan an active role in the Coachella Valley Association of
                   Governments, the Southern California Association of Governments and other regional
                   agencies to protect and promote the interests of the City.
Goal 15. Governance. Fair, predictable and transparent governance.
             Policies
             15.1  Development decisions. Strive to conduct the development review process in a
                   consistent and predictable manner.
             15.2  Regulations. Establish clear, unambiguous regulations and policies to clearly
                   communicate the City’s expectations for new development.
             15.3  Long-term considerations. Prioritize decisions that provide long-term community
                   benefit and discourage decisions that provide short-term community benefit but
                   reduce long-term opportunities.
             15.4  Clear decision making. Provide for clear development standards, rules and
                   procedures that will guide the implementation of the City’s Vision.
             15.5  Universal outreach. Utilize diverse methods of outreach that promote public
                   participation and ensure Coachella events are communicated to all communities,
                   especially to linguistically isolated households, households without internet access
                   along with senior and low-income residents.
             15.6  Universal outreach guidelines. Establish parameters and guidelines to ensure public
                   participation is promoted through diverse methods.
             15.7  Civic policy and leadership academy. Support the development of a local academy
                   that teaches community members about local government functions and processes
                   and encourages community participation in civic efforts.
LAND USE + COMMUNITY CHARACTER                                                                      | 04-100

A robust and interconnected transportation system is a key contributor to the economic and social
health of a Community. This Element provides Goals and Policies related to the development,
monitoring, and maintenance of such a transportation system. This Element addresses both automobile
travel as well as the movement of bicycles, pedestrians, and transit users. Rather than prioritize one
mode of travel as compared to another, the Goals and Policies outlined are focused on creating a
balanced transportation system in which all modes of travel are treated equally.
Coachella will have a balanced, multi-modal transportation system with a high degree of bicycle,
pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. In terms of connectivity, the City should seek to overcome the
many northwest-to-southeast barriers that exist – SR111, the Union Pacific Railway, SR86S and even
the Coachella Canal. New east-west and north-south roadways and grade-separated crossings may
help achieve the existing barriers. Additionally, the future roadway network should be planned to
encourage dispersed road access with many route choices across the City, instead of concentrating
traffic on a few major arterials. This means that direct east-west and north-south roadways should be
spaced every quarter or eighth of a mile and that all development projects – residential and non-
residential – should be planned to encourage connectivity through the project.
Given that the City will grow from a small town into a medium sized city, plans should be made now for
a comprehensive network of transit, bicycle paths and other non-driving options. This will ensure access
and mobility for all age and income levels, more active lifestyles and will address the growing concern
over global climate change. To pursue this, the City should build a transit center, probably near the
downtown area. It will build multi-modal streets with context-sensitive design. These should be planned
to accommodate future bus rapid transit, will contain cycling amenities where appropriate, and will be
pleasant to walk along. Walking and cycling amenities will be organized in a highly connected network.
Achieving this vision of a robust and interconnected transportation system represents a significant
challenge for the City. To achieve the community’s vision as presented in Chapter 3 of the General
Plan, the Mobility Element is organized around the following broad goals.
         A balanced transportation system. A balanced transportation system that accommodates all
          modes of travel safely and efficiently without prioritizing automobile travel. Many communities
          have developed transportation systems that move automobiles quickly and easily which makes it
          difficult for persons to walk or use bicycles. Transit users are also often negatively impacted as
          well. Since it is often difficult for a city to retrofit a transportation system to move away from an
          auto-centric focus, it is essential for Coachella to plan and implement a transportation system
          before the City further expands.
MOBILITY                                                                                                    | 05-1

        Mitigated transportation impacts. A transportation system that limits negative impacts from
         vehicular travel on residents and workers. There are many negative consequences associated
         with vehicular travel including speeding and collisions. A key goal for the City is find ways
         through policies and physical improvements to limit these negative effects.
        Pedestrian connectivity. A safe pedestrian network that provides direct connections between
         residences, employment, shopping and civic uses. Walking is a key aspect of travel which is
         often neglected at the expense of automobiles. Higher levels of walking contribute to increased
         physical activity, which in turn can lead to improved health outcomes like reductions. Providing
         facilities for pedestrians also accommodate persons who are unable to drive such as children,
         the elderly, and other persons who lack access to automobiles.
        Multi-use trail network. A bicycle and multi-use trail network that facilitates bicycling for
         commuting, school, shopping and recreational trips. Bicycling serves an important role within the
         larger transportation system by serving intermediate distance trips which are not easily served
         by walking. Cycling is also an activity that includes persons of all ages including both children
         and adults who may use bicycles to travel to/from work, school, and other trips.
        Transit supportive development patterns. An integrated land use and transportation network
         that supports transit ridership. Transit is an important aspect of travel in the Coachella Valley
         where City residents rely heavily on transit for travel to work, shopping, and other destinations.
         Many residents who might otherwise use transit do not do so because of limitations in the
         existing transit service patterns, the lack of connections to transit stops, and land use patterns
         which do not support transit usage.
        Fiscally sustainable transportation system. A sustainable transportation system that can be
         built, operated, and maintained within the City’s existing and future resource limitations. Cities
         have historically focused more on the construction costs associated with transportation
         infrastructure as compared to the costs of operating and maintaining a system. With further
         funding constraints likely, it is essential that Coachella develop a transportation system that both
         serves the needs of their residents and is one the City can afford.
        Transportation management system. An ongoing monitoring system that allows the City to
         evaluate the performance of the transportation system. Few cities actively monitor the
         performance of their transportation system except in limited instances where such monitoring is
         dictated by an outside agency. As such, addressing potential problems often occurs reactively
         rather than proactively after small issues become significant problems. Monitoring the
         performance of all aspects of the transportation system will allow Coachella to identify problems
         with the transportation system and move to quickly correct these issues.
        Regional connectivity. A transportation system that provides an appropriate level of regional
         connectivity for residents and businesses through vehicular, freight, transit and non-motorized
         connections. The City of Coachella exists within a larger regional system that provides access
         for the movement of people and goods. Maintaining the integrity of these regional connections
         is an important element in the continued well-being of the City.
The General Plan provides for a network of interconnected network of transportation facilities. The
following street typologies are proposed for implementation within the General Plan.
MOBILITY                                                                                                | 05-2

Table 5-1: Street Typologies
                                                                                                             TRAVEL                    BIKE        PRIORITIZED
                                                                                                                       SIDEWALK
    STREET TYPE                                     DESCRIPTION                          CROSS-SECTION ROW    LANE                    LANE
                                                                                                                          WIDTH
                                                                                                             WIDTH                   WIDTH     PED BIKE  BUS   AUTO
                         Two-lane roadways designed to carry traffic through rural
                         areas of the City. It is designed for higher speeds and a
                                                                                                         50  12 to 15                   Not
  COUNTRY ROAD           variety of vehicles including cars, large trucks, and                                         Not Present              N   N     N      Y
                                                                                                        feet   feet                  Present
                         agricultural equipment as necessary. Limited bicycle and
                         pedestrian usage is anticipated.
                         These facilities provide for all modes of travel, but they
                         acknowledge that the arterial is a primary link in the City’s
         MAJOR                                                                                          108  11 to 12                   Not
                         vehicular transportation system. Major arterials have six                                    6 feet or more            N   N      Y     Y
       ARTERIAL                                                                                         feet   feet                  Present
                         travel lanes and can have ROW up to 120 feet. Travel lanes
                         can vary from 11 to 12 feet.
         MAJOR           These facilities provide for all modes of travel, but they
   ARTERIAL WITH         acknowledge that the arterial is a primary link in the City’s
                                                                                                        118  11 to 12                5 feet or
     ENHANCED            vehicular transportation system. Major arterials have six                                    6 feet or more            Y    Y     Y     Y
                                                                                                        feet   feet                   more
       BICYCLE           travel lanes and can have ROW up to 132 feet. Travel lanes
      FACILITIES         can vary from 11 to 12 feet.
                         These facilities provide for all modes of travel, but they
                         acknowledge that the arterial is a primary link in the City’s
       PRIMARY                                                                                           84  11 to 12                   Not
                         vehicular transportation system. Major arterials have four                                   6 feet or more            N   N      Y     Y
       ARTERIAL                                                                                         feet   feet                  present
                         travel lanes and can have ROW up to 110 feet. Travel lanes
                         can vary from 11 to 12 feet.
                         These facilities provide superior accommodations for
 PRIMARY ARTERIAL
                         bicyclists as compared to regular arterials. In-street Bicycle
  WITH ENHANCED                                                                                          94  11 to 12                5 feet or
                         lanes (Class II) facilities are provided. The bicycle lanes can                              6 feet or more            Y    Y     Y     Y
       BICYCLE                                                                                          feet   feet                   more
                         vary from 5 to 6 feet. The travel lanes can vary from 11 to 12
      FACILITIES
                         feet.
MOBILITY                                                                                                                                                         | 05-3

                                                                                                     TRAVEL                    BIKE        PRIORITIZED
                                                                                                               SIDEWALK
    STREET TYPE                             DESCRIPTION                          CROSS-SECTION ROW    LANE                    LANE
                                                                                                                  WIDTH
                                                                                                     WIDTH                    WIDTH    PED BIKE  BUS   AUTO
                  Collectors are meant to serve as intermediate facilities,
                  connecting local areas to regional mobility corridors.
                  Collectors will prioritize bicycles and pedestrians through
                                                                                                 80  11 to 12                   Not
     COLLECTOR    facility design and speed management. Bus and shuttle                                       6 feet or more            N   N     N      Y
                                                                                                feet   feet                  provided
                  transit services can be provided on collectors, and vehicles
                  will use them for accessibility (but these modes are not
                  prioritized in the corridor).
 COLLECTOR WITH
     ENHANCED     These facilities are similar to other collectors but have in-                  90  11 to 12                5 feet or
                                                                                                              6 feet or more            Y    Y     Y     Y
       BICYCLE    street bicycle lanes.                                                         feet   feet                    more
      FACILITIES
                  These are local streets intended to serve adjacent residential
      SUBURBAN    properties in suburban neighborhoods. These roadways
                                                                                                 56  10 to 11                   Not
 RESIDENTIAL WITH provide direct access to residences with on-street parking                                  6 feet or more            Y   N     N      Y
                                                                                                feet   feet                  provided
       PARKING    and connect to collectors and secondary arterials. They
                  carry limited through traffic
                  These local streets are intended to serve residential areas in
         URBAN
                  the more urban areas of the City, near the downtown core.                      54                             Not
 RESIDENTIAL WITH                                                                                     10 feet 6 feet or more            Y   N     N      Y
                  The travel and parking lanes are reduced from the typical                     feet                         provided
       PARKING
                  suburban residential streets.
MOBILITY                                                                                                                                                 | 05-4
                                                                                                    TRAVEL                       BIKE        PRIORITIZED
                                                                                                                SIDEWALK
    STREET TYPE                          DESCRIPTION                            CROSS-SECTION ROW    LANE                       LANE
                                                                                                                   WIDTH
                                                                                                    WIDTH                       WIDTH    PED BIKE  BUS   AUTO
                These are local streets intended to serve adjacent industrial
         LOCAL  properties. These roadways provide direct access to
                                                                                                74                                Not
     INDUSTRIAL industrial buildings and connect to collectors and secondary                         12 feet   6 feet or more             N   N     N      Y
                                                                                               feet                            provided
        STREET  arterials. They carry limited through traffic but are wide
                enough to support heavy vehicles.
                These facilities are primarily provided to serve thriving
                industrial development within the City. They provide for all
     INDUSTRIAL modes of travel, but their primary purpose (and design) is to                   80                                Not
                                                                                                     12 feet   6 feet or more             N   N     N      Y
     COLLECTOR  connect industrial uses to the regional transportation system.                 feet                            provided
                These collectors are designed such that heavy vehicles can
                access the area.
                Urban facilities provide access to key activity centers within
                the City. They focus on linking people to the place they are                                   6 feet or more
   URBAN STREET visiting; thus, they should be complete streets that prioritize                 70  10 to 11 (could be as wide 5 feet or
                                                                                                                                          Y    Y    N     N
         2-LANE the human scale (walkability and bike ability). Urban streets                  feet   feet      as 20 feet in    more
                also provide parking, either through angled or parallel                                       selected areas)
                parking.
                Urban facilities provide access to key activity centers within
                the City. They focus on linking people to the place they are                                   6 feet or more
   URBAN STREET visiting; thus, they should be complete streets that prioritize                 92  10 to 11 (could be as wide 5 feet or
                                                                                                                                          Y    Y     Y     Y
         4-LANE the human scale (walkability and bike ability). Urban streets                  feet   feet      as 20 feet in    more
                also provide parking, either through angled or parallel                                       selected areas)
                parking.
MOBILITY                                                                                                                                                   | 05-5
         Page intentionally left blank.
MOBILITY                                | 05-6
The following map, Figure 5-1, shows the City’s intended future roadway network. The location and
extent of the Street Typologies are presented here. Together, the Street Network and Street Typologies
comprise the standards to be used for future development.
         Figure 5-1: Future Roadway Network
MOBILITY                                                                                          | 05-7

Goals 1. Complete Streets. A balanced transportation system that accommodates
         all modes of travel safely and efficiently without prioritizing automobile
         travel at the expense of other modes.
         Policies
         1.1 Complete streets for new construction. Require that the planning, design and
              construction of all new transportation projects consider the needs of all modes of
              travel to create safe, livable and inviting environments for pedestrians, bicyclists,
              motorists and public transit users of all ages and abilities.
         1.2 Complete streets for existing roadways. Require that the planning, design and
              reconstruction of any existing transportation projects consider the needs of all travel
              modes to the extent feasible.
         1.3 Transportation system impacts. Evaluate impacts to all modes of travel when
              considering transportation system performance.
         1.4 Development performance measures for roadway segments and intersections that
              consider all modes of travel. When developing these performance measures, allow
              the following roadway segments to have levels of vehicular congestion that are
              worse relative to other roadways in the City:
                 Grapefruit Boulevard (South of Avenue 48)
                 Grapefruit Boulevard (North of Harrison)
                 Harrison Street (North of Avenue 52)
                 Harrison Street (South of Avenue 52)
         1.5 Transportation improvements. Require that the City consider improvements to add
              roadway capacity only after considering improvements to other modes of travel.
         1.6 Pedestrian and cyclist safety. Balance the safety concerns of pedestrians and cyclists
              with motor vehicles and emergency response to ensure that the safety of all users of
              the transportation system is considered.
         1.7 Street Beautification: Require that the City maintain consistency among landscape
              and streetscape elements along roadway projects to create a more uniform approach
              to these items throughout the City.
         1.8 City Gateways. Coordinate with Riverside County and other jurisdictions to maintain
              consistent landscape and streetscape elements along major roadways connecting to
              the City from other jurisdictions.
         1.9 Low Speed Electric Vehicles. Support the use of low speed electric vehicles on City
              roadways, consistent with regional planning document, the requirements of the
              California Vehicle Code, and other regulations as appropriate.
MOBILITY                                                                                            | 05-8

Goals 2. Traffic Calming. A transportation system that limits negative impacts from
         vehicular travel on residents and workers.
         Policies
         2.1 Traffic calming for existing streets. Develop traffic calming policies for selecting
             targeted existing neighborhoods to include: clearly marked bike and pedestrian zones,
             bike boulevards, bulb outs, median islands, speed humps, traffic circles, speed tables,
             center island narrowings, raised crosswalks, blinking crosswalks, chicanes, chokers,
             raised intersections, realigned intersections, and textured pavements, among other
             effective enhancements.
         2.2 Traffic calming for future streets. Apply traffic calming techniques to future residential
             streets to limit cut-through traffic and speeding on these roadway streets. Potential
             traffic calming applications can include clearly marked bike and pedestrian zones, bike
             boulevards, bulb outs, median islands, speed humps, traffic circles, speed tables,
             center island narrowings, raised crosswalks, blinking crosswalks, chicanes, chokers,
             raised intersections, realigned intersections, and textured pavements, among other
             effective enhancements.
         2.3 Designated truck routes. Identify, implement, and maintain a system of truck routes
             within the City that minimizing negative impacts on local roads and sensitive land
             uses including residents, schools, parks, recreation facilities and other similar land
             uses.
         2.4 Truck route monitoring. Periodically review and update designated truck routes to
             ensure efficiency and limit negative impacts on residential areas and other sensitive
             land uses.
         2.5 Parking and loading. Encourage business owners to schedule deliveries during off-
             peak periods to limit freight impacts on other modes of travel.
         2.6 Truck idling. Develop a localized anti-idling ordinance to limit truck idling by schools
             and residents. This ordinance should reference currently statewide and regional
             regulations by the Air Resources Board, the Air Pollution Control District, and other
             agencies as applicable.
Goals 3. Pedestrian Network. A safe pedestrian network that provides direct
         connections between residences, employment, shopping and civic uses.
         Policies
         3.1 Pedestrian network. Improve health outcomes by creating a safe and convenient
             circulation system for pedestrians that focuses on crosswalks, improves the
             connections between neighborhoods and commercial areas, provides places to sit or
             gather, pedestrian-scaled street lighting, buffers from moving vehicle traffic, and
             includes amenities that attract people of all ages and abilities.
         3.2 Pedestrian improvement prioritizations. Prioritize pedestrian improvements in existing
             areas of the City with supportive land use patterns and those facilities that provide
             connectivity to other modes of travel such as bicycling and transit.
MOBILITY                                                                                          | 05-9
         3.3 Sidewalks for roadways. Require that the City provide wide sidewalks along all
             roadways which are built or reconstructed in the City except in those instances in
             which there is insufficient right-of-way or other physical limitations.
         3.4 Pedestrian connections for development. Require that all development or
             redevelopment projects provide pedestrian connections to the external pedestrian
             network.
         3.5 Pedestrian access to gated communities. Require that all new communities,
             regardless of the presence of gates and sound walls, provide pedestrian connections
             from external areas into the community.
         3.6 Pedestrian only areas. Promote the closure of streets on a recurring basis to create
             temporary pedestrian zones for Community Events, such as farmers markets,
             community events, ciclovías (bicycle and pedestrian events), and other events
             consistent with the walking and biking environment policies of the Mobility Element.
             Leverage the momentum of other regional bike events, such as Tour de Palm
             Springs, to create events locally.
         3.7 Neighborhood connectivity. Create bicycle and pedestrian connections through
             existing residential neighborhoods, providing access to adjacent neighborhoods and
             external bicycle/pedestrian facilities.
         3.8 Park once. Design dense nodes of commercial and retail businesses with reduced
             off-street parking that is accessible to public parking locations so people can park
             once for many errands/trips.
         3.9 Pedestrian and bike use education and awareness. Support pedestrian education,
             encouragement, and enforcement activities. Encourage bicyclists to be aware of
             bicycling issues, and lawful/responsible riding. Support bike education events and
             classes that help new and experienced bike riders become more knowledgeable and
             effective at bike riding and bike maintenance.
Goals 4. Bicycle Trail Network. A bicycle and multi-use trail network that facilitates
         bicycling for commuting, school, shopping and recreational trips
         Policies
         4.1 Bicycle networks. Require that the City provide additional bicycle facilities along all
             roadways in the City which are built or reconstructed in the City except in those
             instances in which there is insufficient right-of-way or other physical limitations
         4.2 Priority bike improvements. Prioritize improvements that address bicycling in existing
             areas of the City with complementary land use patterns and connections to other
             modes of travel including walking and transit.
         4.3 Bicycle access to gated communities. Require that all new communities, regardless
             of the presence of gates and sound walls, provide bicycle connections from external
             areas into the community.
         4.4 Bicycle parking. Require that the public and private development in the City provide
             sufficient bicycle parking.
MOBILITY                                                                                         | 05-10

         4.5 Wayfinding. Develop a comprehensive and visible way-finding signage system in the
             city to direct cyclists to transit facilities, local and regional bike routes, civic and
             cultural amenities, and visitor and recreation destinations. The way-finding system
             should make an effort to connect with the region and surrounding cities.
Goals 5. Transit Supportive Development Patterns. An integrated land use and
         transportation network that supports transit ridership
         5.1 Transit improvements. Promote transit service in areas of the City with sufficient
             density and intensity of uses, mix of appropriate uses, and supportive
             bicycle/pedestrian networks.
         5.2 Bus stops. Review existing bus stop locations to determine their accessibility to key
             destinations such as schools, residential areas, retail centers, civic facilities. The City
             will encourage bus shelters as public art and work with Sun Line to relocate bus stop
             locations as needed to provide greater access to these key destinations. Prioritize
             those bus stop locations which are connected to bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
         5.3 Promote bus shelters. Encourage bus shelters in new development, if a stop is
             determined necessary by SunLine. Bus shelters should be designed as public art or
             to be compatible with the building architecture of the site.
         5.4 Transit accessible development. Encourage new large residential or commercial
             developments to locate on existing and planned transit routes.
         5.5 Senior transit. Expand affordable and reliable transportation options for older adults
             and persons with disabilities through collaboration with Sun Line, the Senior Center,
             and other community groups.
         5.6 Commute survey. Periodically participate with Sun Line Transit’s efforts to identify
             commuter travel behavior with the intent of creating vanpools, carpools, and
             employment center shuttles to reduce single occupant vehicles.
         5.7 Safe routes to transit. Regularly review and improve pedestrian and cyclist access to
             transit.
Goals 6. Sustainable Transportation. A sustainable transportation system that can
         be built, operated and maintained within the City’s existing and future
         resource limitations
         Policies
         6.1 Fair share costs. Require that new development pay for its fair share of construction
             costs for new and/or upgraded transportation infrastructure needed to accommodate
             this development.
         6.2 Operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. Require that the City evaluate operations
             and maintenance costs in addition to construction costs for new transportation
             infrastructure
         6.3 Development contributions to O&M costs. Require the new development and
             redevelopment contribute to the operations and maintenance of new transportation
             infrastructure
MOBILITY                                                                                              | 05-11

         6.4 Existing O&M costs. Promote the use of allowable funding mechanisms to assist with
              the maintenance of existing transportation infrastructure within the City.
         6.5 Sustainable Landscaping. Promote the use of sustainable landscape and streetscape
              elements along roadways and other transportation facilities as they are constructed or
              reconstructed.
Goals 7. Monitoring. An Ongoing Monitoring System. An ongoing monitoring system
         that allows the City to evaluate the performance of the transportation
         system
         Policies
         7.1 Ongoing traffic monitoring. Regularly evaluate traffic conditions.
         7.2 Evaluation of bicycle and pedestrian activity. Regularly collect data regarding bicycle
              and pedestrian travel.
         7.3 Transit monitoring. Collaborate with Sun Line Transit to report transit ridership at all
              stops within the City of Coachella.
         7.4 Safety review. Collaborate with the Riverside County Sherriff and other agencies on
              an ongoing basis to identify accident locations within the City including unsafe
              pedestrian and bicycle areas.
Goals 8. Regional Connectivity. A transportation system that provides an
         appropriate level of regional connectivity for residents and businesses
         through vehicular, freight, transit and non-motorized connections.
         Policies
         8.1 Regional transit. Collaborate with Sun Line Transit to identify regional connections for
              City residents and employees
         8.2 Regional park and ride. Collaborate with CVAG to identify potential park and ride
              locations in Coachella.
         8.3 Regional non-motorized connections. Prioritize connections between the City’s
              bicycle and pedestrian network to regional facilities such as the CV Link and other
              regional trail facilities.
         8.4 Regional planning for alternative transportation. Collaborate with CVAG on the
              development of any regional planning documents related to bicycles, pedestrians,
              transit, and low speed electric vehicles.
MOBILITY                                                                                        | 05-12

Coachella envisions a future which includes thriving physical, emotional and spiritual health for the
entire community and is committed to provide a supportive environment so this can occur. The City’s
distinctive and family-friendly neighborhoods will inspire an appreciation of Coachella’s history and
create unity among community members. Neighborhoods will provide opportunities for residents to
improve their physical and mental health while meeting daily needs – walking to the store, meeting
friends, bicycling to school, taking transit to work and having access to nutritious and affordable foods
that can be purchased or grown in the neighborhood. The City will find innovative solutions to ensure
its streets, parks and public spaces are safe, accessible and inviting for all. There will be ample choices
for team sports, exercise programs, entertainment and civic participation for people of all ages in public
spaces.
The City will encourage local businesses to pay living wages and offer safe, meaningful employment for
people of all ages and abilities. Residents will have access to educational opportunities that expand
their professional skills, foster creativity and provide tools to support a healthy lifestyle. When preventive
health is not enough, residents will be served by first class health providers and social services in the
City. Coachella acknowledges a healthy planet directly improves human health, and the City is
committed to clean air, water, and soil; conservation of resources; protection of natural areas. Youth are
honored as leaders of tomorrow and are an integral part of the City’s robust community planning and
civic engagement process. The City will consider health and equity in its actions and decisions,
supporting the concept that all community members can live healthy, meaningful lives.
Numerous community members, community organizations, and other public agency partners spent over
a year helping the City ensure this Community Health and Wellness Element and the rest of the
General Plan contained a framework and policies that would enhance the social and environmental
conditions to improve health outcomes and behaviors, quality of life and social equity.
Coachella residents value the benefits of healthy food, physical activity, healthy environments, education
and strong social ties. They understand the importance of a healthy population and encourage the City
to consider and prioritize health in decision making.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                             | 06-1

Please note that many of the issues and opportunities identified throughout the Health Element planning
process appear here, specifically goals and policies related to:
    o    Complete, walkable and family friendly neighborhoods can be found in the Land Use and
         Community Design Element.
    o    Pollution and environmental contamination can be found in the Safety Element.
    o    Climate change and health and parks and open space can be found in the Sustainability and
         Natural Environment Element.
    o    Walking, bicycling, public transportation, and traffic safety can be found in the Mobility Element.
To achieve the community’s vision for health, the Community Health and Wellness Element is organized
around the following broad goals:
   A physical, social and policy environment that supports residents’ health, well-being and equity.
    Coachella residents don’t just associate health with doctors’ visits but their environment and their
    lifestyles. The concept of health and wellness is highly valued and celebrated and such; and should
    be a touchstone for decision making and direction setting in the City. Coachella leaders and
    residents should regularly consider how any decision could affect their health.
   Safe, affordable, and healthy housing for every stage of life. Home should be a place of comfort
    and support, not a source of financial stress or toxic exposures. Older homes and trailer parks in
    Coachella have potential health risks that should be monitored and mitigated. As household- and
    family-types continue to diversify, the housing stock should anticipate needs of single young adults,
    seniors and multi-generational families. The community should ensure all residents have safe
    shelter by preventing and eliminating temporary and long-term homelessness.
   Reduced negative public health impacts of tobacco smoke. First- and secondhand smoke are
    responsible for one in five deaths in the U.S. While the City is not interested in limiting an
    individual’s freedom to smoke, it does want to protect other community members from smoking
    externalities. Since most adult smokers begin before age 18, it is critical that youth be educated
    about and protected from, the impacts of tobacco.
   Close-knit and safe communities. Strong social ties are one of the most commonly mentioned
    assets of living in Coachella and are a crucial ingredient in maintaining a healthy community. These
    connections help the community decrease stress levels, provide support in times of need, keep a
    positive outlook and keep neighborhoods safe. When the community feels safe, they feel free to
    enjoy walking and playing in the park. Spending time in these public spaces can increase health
    and further strengthen social networks.
   Strong local food production and ample opportunities to eat locally grown food. Agriculture is a
    fundamental part of Coachella’s historic and current economy and culture. Residents want a larger
    portion of their food to come from neighboring farms as well as the opportunity to grow their own
    food on a smaller scale. In addition to increasing community food security, it is important that
    children understand the community’s connection with agriculture by growing healthy fruits and
    vegetables themselves.
   Safe and convenient access to healthy, affordable, and culturally diverse foods with low
    concentrations of unhealthy food providers. Food connects family members and friends with each
    other and connects life in Coachella with the rich cultural traditions of generations past. Food
    retailers and restaurants should emphasize and enhance healthy options and minimize unhealthy
    choices. When making decisions about new stores and restaurants, community leaders should
    consider affordability, nutrition, environmental sustainability and cultural responsiveness.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                            | 06-2

  Improved economic prosperity and vibrancy of households and businesses. Individual and
   community wealth are the most important predictions of health outcomes across a lifespan. Ensuring
   people have access to lifelong educational opportunities and enriching and safe employment will
   improve household and community health in Coachella.
  Community facilities and schools that support physical activity, civic life and social connections
   for residents of all ages and interests. To improve health on a community-wide level, public
   facilities must be available to people of all ages that support education, physical activity and social
   and civic engagement. The City wants to increase collaborations with schools and other agencies to
   optimize resources and public facilities.
  Affordable, accessible, high-quality health care and social services for all residents. The
   community wants to see an accessible, integrated health and social services system with facilities in
   Coachella that puts wellness and prevention at the forefront. Community members, local employers,
   the City and community groups will work together to make this a reality. The community is
   interested in creating innovative, non-traditional models of health care delivery.
Goal 1.       Healthy Community. A physical, social and civic environment that supports
              residents’ health, well-being and equity.
              Policies
              1.1   Health in all policies. Consider, and when appropriate incorporate, public health in
                    all City policies and operations across all departments.
              1.2   Monitoring and evaluation. Work with the Riverside County Department of Public
                    Health and community groups to monitor trends of the City’s health and wellness
                    conditions and outcomes. The City shall work towards developing measurable criteria
                    to evaluate the impact of health and wellness implementation actions and will
                    encourage HARC and the Riverside County Department of Public Health to track
                    health disparities and indicators that are relevant at that time, at small geographic
                    areas and smaller socio-demographic factors. This should include monitoring trends
                    of environmental determinants of health and health outcomes.
              1.3   Health equity. Identify and address health inequities in Coachella, within Coachella’s
                    sphere of influence and between Coachella and the Riverside County on a regular
                    basis and strive to facilitate a high quality of life for all residents.
              1.4   Workplace wellness. Enhance the health and well-being of City employees through
                    workplace wellness programs and policies to increase employee productivity, improve
                    morale, decrease incidence of accidents and injuries and decrease medical costs.
                    Aspire to become a model healthy organization for other cities in the region.
              1.5   Partnerships for health. Create new and foster existing health-related partnerships
                    and collaborations with community groups and other public agencies to implement
                    the Community Health and Wellness Element and pursue other healthy communities
                    programs.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                           | 06-3

            1.6   Health events. Create opportunities for health and wellness programs such as health
                  fairs, health screenings and educational workshops/speakers, especially by
                  leveraging partnerships with existing health groups.
            1.7   EIR Review. Submit all environmental documents (Negative Declarations, Mitigated
                  Negative Declarations, and Environmental Impact Reports) prepared with the City as
                  the lead agency to the Riverside County Department of Public Health for review and
                  comment. Similarly, add Riverside County Department of Public Health to the City’s
                  agency distribution list to share information and ensure early collaboration with
                  Riverside County Department of Public Health.
Goal 2.     Healthy Housing. Safe, affordable and healthy housing for every stage of life.
            Policies
            2.1   Housing element implementation. Implement the Housing Element of this General
                  Plan, particularly programs and policies that address affordable housing.
            2.2   Affordable housing location. Support the development of affordable housing in close
                  proximity to services, transit and employment opportunities to reduce unnecessary
                  transportation costs associated with sprawl development and ensure affordable
                  housing is not located near hazardous or undesirable land uses.
            2.3   Housing diversity. Provide a greater diversity and range of housing by location,
                  tenure, type of unit and price throughout the City
            2.4   Lifecycle housing. Support lifecycle housing to provide housing accommodations or
                  living arrangements for persons of all ages and abilities, including young, single
                  professionals, small and large families and retirees, so people can always have a
                  place in the Coachella community.
            2.5   Integrated affordable housing. Strive to create mixed-income neighborhoods by
                  integrating affordable housing with market rate housing, avoiding concentrations of
                  below-market-rate or subsidized housing in any one area of the City or within the
                  City’s Sphere of Influence.
            2.6   Aging in place. Provide programs and services that allow seniors to “age in place”
                  in their homes and encourage the development of senior housing and assisted living
                  services throughout the City, especially in walkable areas well-served by transit and
                  close to commercial goods and services.
            2.7   Universal design. Require a certain proportion or number of units in each residential
                  development to include universal design elements, ensuring easy modifications to
                  accommodate wheelchairs.
            2.8   Mobile home parks. Balance the need for affordable housing while protecting the
                  health and safety of mobile home residents by setting standards for tenants and
                  property owners. The City shall work towards reducing life safety risks and avoid
                  displacement of residents. Standards can include rent and utility cost regulations and
                  other tenant protection measures; utilities infrastructure and hook-ups; fire safety;
                  drainage; water and sewer lines; street access and structure orientation. Seek out
                  resources to support improvements, infrastructure and sustainability of mobile home
                  parks.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                         | 06-4

            2.9   Farm worker housing. Educate farm owners about the need for safe and affordable
                  farm worker housing and work with local growers to increase the supply of that type
                  of housing in Coachella. Seek funding and develop partnerships to ensure adequate
                  farm worker housing exists in Coachella and within the City’s sphere of influence.
            2.10  Overcrowding. Strive to reduce conditions of overcrowding in Coachella that can
                  have negative a impact on sleep, stress, children’s school performance, fire risk and
                  sanitation.
            2.11  Code enforcement programs. Create a code enforcement program to register
                  and/or inspect abandoned properties and respond to graffiti, vandalism, abandoned
                  vehicles and other nuisances that create a perceived, or actual, unsafe environment.
            2.12  Rental assistance programs. Allow the use of incentives to encourage more
                  residential property owners to participate in rental assistance programs, such as
                  Section 8.
            2.13  Housing Displacement. Require a Health Impact Assessment for any development
                  that causes residential displacement for both established and informal housing within
                  the City and Sphere of Influence.
            2.14  Workforce housing. Prioritize the creation and retention of workforce housing in the
                  City, including farm workers, civil service workers and young professionals.
            2.15  Foreclosure prevention. Enlist non-profit and other community partners in reducing
                  the detrimental social and health effects of foreclosures for Coachella residents.
            2.16  Homelessness prevention. Partner with the county and community groups to prevent
                  and eliminate chronic homelessness in Coachella.
            2.17  Homeless services. Partner with community organizations for services for the
                  homeless, including but not limited to provisions of safe, sanitary restroom facilities
                  for homeless individuals in key locations.
            2.18  Housing for the homeless. Allow and encourage the development of transitional and
                  permanent supportive housing for homeless and very low-income residents.
            2.19  Healthy building materials. Encourage property owners pursuing new developments
                  and home renovations to use low-or non-toxic materials such as low-VOC (volatile
                  organic compound) paint and carpet and other strategies to improve indoor air
                  quality and noise levels (e.g., kitchen range top exhaust fans, treated windows,
                  etc.).
Goal 3.     Smoke-Free Environments. Reduced negative public health impacts of
            tobacco smoke.
            Policies
            3.1   Tobacco-free youth. Reduce Coachella youths’ exposure to, and interest in, tobacco
                  products through educational programs and events.
            3.2   Secondhand smoke. Reduce residents’ exposure to secondhand smoke.
            3.3   Smoking cessation services. Provide opportunities to share bilingual information and
                  services to Coachella residents to assist them in quitting smoking.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                          | 06-5

            3.4   Liquor and Tobacco marketing. Prohibit stores from placing alcohol and tobacco
                  products near candy and from placing alcohol and tobacco advertisements on
                  exterior signage and below four feet in height (child’s eye-level).
            3.5   Smoke-free entertainment. Work with Riverside County Department of Public Health
                  to encourage local casinos to ban smoking to protect Coachella residents who work
                  in, and patronize, local casinos. Approach the California Gaming Control Commission
                  about possible tobacco-related modifications to the tribes’ Tribal-State Gaming
                  Compacts.
Goal 4.     Public Safety and Social Support. Close-knit and safe communities.
            Policies
            4.1   Program diversity. Ensure social services and programs meet the diverse needs in
                  the community for seniors, youth, non-English speakers and special needs residents.
            4.2   Community programs. Work with community partners to create programs that
                  provide opportunities for volunteerism and multi-generational interaction.
            4.3   Community and Safety. Improve perceived and actual safety in Coachella.
            4.4   Domestic violence prevention. Work with community groups and other agencies to
                  provide resources to families for prevent and end domestic violence.
            4.5   Teen and youth needs. Assess the City’s entertainment/recreation resources
                  periodically with the participation of Coachella youth to ensure their needs are being
                  met and to curb the influence of gang affiliation/violence.
            4.6   Collaboration for youth. Explore opportunities to collaborate with Coachella Valley
                  Unified School District along with faith-based and non-profit organizations to better
                  serve youth.
            4.7   Urban beautification. Encourage participation of community partners for the
                  landscaping of public spaces, community gardens projects and community art
                  projects.
            4.8   Volunteer programs. Promote volunteer programs with local non-profit organizations
                  and public schools to foster a sense of ownership and pride among residents.
Goal 5.     Local Food System. Strong local food production and ample opportunities to
            eat locally grown food.
            Policies
            5.1   Local food production. Work with local agricultural stakeholders to establish a
                  strategy to encourage existing and new agricultural uses in and near Coachella to
                  grow healthy food for local consumption. Make land use and policy decisions that
                  encourage increased local food production. To the extent feasible, assess and plan
                  for local food processing and distribution needs to connect local agriculture to
                  markets, such as retailers, restaurants, schools, hospitals and other institutions and
                  encourage certified organic growing practices. Also encourage local growers to
                  consider establishing a co-operative community supported agriculture program.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                         | 06-6

            5.2   Farmers’ markets. Continue to support the expansion and success of the Coachella
                  farmers’ market. Consider holding the farmers market at night during the summer to
                  avoid extreme temperatures.
            5.3   Community gardens. Identify and prioritize locations to create a network of
                  community gardens throughout Coachella with the long-term goal of providing
                  sufficient garden spaces for residents to increase access to nutritional foods. Where
                  feasible, locate these spaces in areas that can be easily accessible to serve as a
                  focal point or community meeting place for one or more neighborhoods.
            5.4   Edible school yards. Partner with schools and other organizations to create “edible
                  school yards” and sustainable gardening programs at public and private schools
                  within Coachella. When feasible, increase access to healthy foods and promote
                  healthy eating by encouraging on-site food swaps, cooking classes and/or selling
                  food at farmers’ markets to provide educational opportunities to learn about farming
                  and selling.
            5.5   Zoning for small scale food production. Remove regulatory barriers to gardening
                  and urban farming, including modifying the zoning code, to conditionally permit these
                  activities on private property in all zones. Allow “interim agricultural uses” as part of
                  a residential land use within residential districts, and within Specific Plans and
                  Planned Development areas.
            5.6   Community kitchens. Support the development of community commercial kitchens
                  that allow residents to pursue micro-enterprise and small business opportunities that
                  increases access to healthy foods.
Goal 6.     Healthy Food Access. Safe and convenient access to healthy, affordable and
            culturally diverse foods with low concentrations of unhealthy food providers.
            Policies
            6.1   Healthy food retail. Encourage and provide incentives for healthy and culturally
                  appropriate food retail establishments (including full-service grocery stores, farmers’
                  markets, fruit and vegetable markets and small markets where a majority of food is
                  healthy) to locate in Coachella. Recognize food retailers and outlets in setting goals
                  for local procurement.
            6.2   Food access. Strive for the majority of residents to be in close proximity to a
                  supermarket or other healthy food retail establishment. Underserved areas and
                  neighborhoods with multi-family properties should be considered for edible
                  landscapes, community gardens, urban farms and the like.
            6.3   Elimination of hunger. Reduce hunger and food insecurity through government
                  programs, community education and emergency food resources. Specifically, work
                  with the county to increase enrollment in WIC and CalFresh by educating residents
                  about eligibility requirements and keeping applications at City offices.
            6.4   Nutrition education. Support the creation of public education programs about healthy
                  and unhealthy food options.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                           | 06-7

            6.5   Healthy food at public events and facilities. Serve healthy food and beverage
                  options to community members and City staff in public facilities (including vending
                  machines) and at City-sponsored events.
            6.6   Non-alcoholic beverages. Require new liquor licensees to offer a variety of non-
                  alcoholic beverages to their customers during all business hours.
            6.7   Liquor stores. Prohibit off-site alcohol sales within 600 feet of religious institutions,
                  hospitals, schools, parks, playgrounds and preschools to reduce youth exposure to
                  alcohol and potential externalities of liquor store establishments. Consider prohibiting
                  new liquor licenses in areas of the City where numerous alcohol retail
                  establishments already exist.
            6.8   Fast food. Research, draft and adopt an ordinance that restricts unhealthy fast food
                  establishments from locating near parks and public schools.
            6.9   School food. Work with the school district to improve the nutritional quality of food
                  and beverages served on campus through the school breakfast and lunch program
                  and competitive food and beverages.
Goal 7.     Jobs, Prosperity and Economic Development. Improved economic prosperity
            and vibrancy of households and businesses.
            Policies
            7.1   Workforce housing. Encourage qualified employees to live in Coachella through
                  home buyer assistance and other programs.
            7.2   Targeted employment training. Work with local schools, colleges, trade schools and
                  non-profit scholarship organizations to ensure a trained and qualified workforce is
                  available to meet the needs of projected growing industries that provide living wages
                  for persons most in need.
            7.3   Lifelong learning and professional development. Work with the school district and
                  the Riverside County Regional Occupational Center/Program to support mentorship
                  professional development and continuing education programs so working adults can
                  expand their skills and embrace lifelong learning.
            7.4   Socially responsible businesses. Develop programs to attract and retain socially
                  responsible employers that can pay a living wage, provide health insurance benefits
                  and meet existing levels of workforce education.
            7.5   Formula retail. Consider requiring a conditional use permit for formula retail
                  establishments (large national/multinational chains). The City Council can assess
                  whether the new establishment will have any serious negative impacts on the local
                  economy or public realm and propose potential conditions of approval.
            7.6   Green technology. Adopt a green technology incubator for the Eastern Coachella
                  Valley and recruit green technology entrepreneurs to locate in Coachella.
            7.7   Healthy workplace. Encourage local employers to adopt employee programs and
                  practices such as health challenges (e.g., weight loss contests, stop smoking,
                  lunchtime/worktime sponsored events, bike to work days), healthy food choices and
                  healthy work environments. The City can provide incentives (such as priority permit
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                           | 06-8
                  processing) to “healthy employers” that provide employee health benefits such as
                  paid sick days, health insurance, gym membership, among others.
Goal 8.     Educational and Community Facilities. Community facilities and school
            Facilities that support physical activity, civic life and social connections for
            residents of all ages and interests.
            Policies
            8.1   Joint use with schools. Create joint-use agreements with Coachella Valley Unified
                  School District to maximize community use of school facilities and expand school
                  use of City park facilities, where appropriate and community space to expand
                  opportunities for physical activity.
            8.2   School facilities planning. Continued use of CVAG cooperative agreement for
                  school-related projects and consult with the School District in the early planning
                  stages of any new park or school to encourage walkable school design and
                  accessible location. The City would prefer to have schools in existing and new
                  neighborhoods that are multi-story with a smaller campus size verses large school
                  campuses that are not accessible for most students.
            8.3   Neighborhood schools. Prioritize new school locations that maximize the number of
                  students who can walk or bike to school over locations that are further away.
                  Consider reducing parking minimums if the school is accessible.
            8.4   Existing school and park facilities. Meet with school districts to explore and
                  establish potential joint-use arrangements.
            8.5   Co-locate parks and schools. Work to acquire park sites adjacent to existing and
                  proposed schools, where possible, and develop these sites as joint use facilities,
                  develop joint use agreements to ensure public accessibility while ensuring safety and
                  security. Provide for sustainable resources to maintain parks.
            8.6   Public school capacity. Coordinate with Coachella Valley Unified School District to
                  provide an adequate number of elementary, middle and high schools for Coachella’s
                  growing population and achieve an equitable distribution of school sites among all
                  socio-economic categories.
            8.7   Education impact fees. Coordinate with the school districts in the assessment of the
                  impact of new development on existing public educational facilities.
            8.8   Provision of school sites. Encourage the dedication of real property, based on the
                  master plan of the applicable school district, for the provision of necessary public
                  educational facilities within a half-mile of each neighborhood.
            8.9   Health services. Encourage and plan for health clinics to open at or near schools.
            8.10  School wellness. Work with school districts and existing community groups to
                  collaborate and support school-based nutrition and physical fitness programs and
                  wellness policies.
            8.11  Healthy school siting. Work with the school district to promote standards to protect
                  students and staff from environmental hazards. Modify zoning to prevent schools and
                  other sensitive receptors from being located near known or expected new stationary
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                         | 06-9

                  sources of air pollution. The specific “safe” distance from a pollution source is
                  dependent on the source and amount of pollution releases; however, a good rule of
                  thumb is at least 500 feet.
            8.12  Safe routes to school programs. Ensure the provision of safe pedestrian and
                  bicycle access for students of new and existing school sites throughout the City.
                  Continue to implement the Safe Routes to School Program and establish a
                  comprehensive strategy to enable community leaders, schools and parents to
                  improve safety and encourage children, including those with disabilities, to walk and
                  bike to school safely.
            8.13  Child-care distribution. Encourage child-care facilities be distributed throughout the
                  community in such a way that they are readily available to the majority of residents.
            8.14  Development of child-care. Encourage the development of a range of affordable and
                  high quality child care meet the needs of Coachella residents, including family day
                  care homes and public and private day care centers, among others.
            8.15  Child-care database. Promote/list existing child care databases on the City website
                  and City offices.
            8.16  Child-care impact fee or inclusionary ordinance. Consider establishing an impact
                  fee or inclusionary ordinance to fund the expansion of existing or creation of new
                  child care and pre-k educational facilities.
            8.17  Child-care in employment centers. Allow and encourage employers to create on-site
                  child-care facilities for their employees or the public.
            8.18  Child-care subsidies legislation support. Actively support legislation that increases
                  state and federal child care subsidies for low- and moderate-income families, tax
                  credits for child-care payments, facility development and early education programs.
            8.19  Child-care wellness policies. Assist with the development, implementation and
                  monitoring/review of local wellness policies in citywide child care facilities, day care
                  centers (infant centers, preschool, etc.), and family day care facilities.
            8.20  Library. As the City grows, encourage the Riverside County Library System to add
                  another public library and/or enter into a joint-use agreement with the school district
                  to provide public access to school libraries.
            8.21  Library service standard. Coordinate with the Riverside County Library System to
                  provide local library services at a minimum standard of 0.5 square feet and 1.2
                  volumes per 1,000 residents.
            8.22  Community gathering space. Build one or more affordable, accessible and flexible
                  central gathering/meeting/event space that individuals and community groups can
                  rent for a variety of social, cultural, educational and civic purposes.
            8.23  Distributed community centers. Provide every neighborhood with easy access to
                  recreation and service programs by decentralizing community centers and programs.
            8.24  Public Plazas. Create public plazas with shaded urban open space, seating, art and
                  play features near shopping and business districts.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                          | 06-10

            8.25  Teen center. Encourage and support existing and new youth programs to create a
                  one-stop teen center that contains social, academic, health and cultural programs.
            8.26  Cooperative approaches to youth programs. Ensure that youth activities and
                  programs are provided in, or accessible from all neighborhoods, either in City
                  facilities or through joint-use or cooperative agreements with other service providers.
            8.27  Recreational and community programs. Prioritize the continued provision of high-
                  quality recreational and community programs since these highly subscribed programs
                  increase social connection, physical activity and quality of life.
            8.28  Range of recreational opportunities. Provide a full range of park and recreational
                  opportunities and active and passive public space for residents.
Goal 9.     Healthcare and Social Services. Affordable, accessible and high-quality
            health care and social services for all residents.
            Policies
            9.1   Employer-based health care. Encourage Coachella employers to provide reasonably
                  affordable health insurance to all employees.
            9.2   Urgent and primary health care providers. Encourage the provision of a range of
                  health services (including but not limited to primary, preventive, specialty,
                  prenatal, dental care, mental health and substance abuse treatment/counseling)
                  in a manner accessible to Coachella residents through partnerships with
                  community groups and the Riverside County Public Health Department.
            9.3   Affordable health centers. Allow the creation of incentives to encourage the
                  development of federally qualified health centers or private practices that are
                  committed to serving Medi-Cal and Medicare enrollees that ensure providers serve
                  all residents.
            9.4   Accessible health and social services facilities. Ensure health and social services
                  facilities are accessible to residents and well served by transit.
            9.5   Homegrown medical professionals. Aspire to cultivate “homegrown” medical
                  professionals from by supporting programs that create education pipelines in health
                  careers and providing lease assistance, tenant improvements and capital
                  contributions to new practices.
            9.6   Continuum of care. Work in partnership with county agencies to implement
                  continuum of care strategies.
            9.7   Health care information. Provide information to the community on the availability of
                  health care options and resources in and around Coachella.
            9.8   Cultural awareness. Encourage new and existing health centers to be both high-
                  touch and high-tech.
            9.9   Rural health care. Acknowledge and address the unique health care needs of a
                  suburban-rural community like Coachella, and consider the health care needs of
                  unincorporated rural communities when planning for new programs and facilities. Be
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                         | 06-11

                  open to alternative models of health care systems (such as mobile clinics) that
                  address the specific needs of rural residents in health professional shortage areas.
            9.10  Hospital. Develop a partnership with nearby cities to investigate the plausibility of
                  recruiting a regional medical center/hospital to locate in Coachella to provide
                  expanded medical services.
            9.11  Culturally appropriate medical care. Support cultural sensitivity training of
                  community medical and social service professionals and City staff and encourage
                  bilingual Coachella residents to train and work as medical translators.
COMMUNITY HEALTH + WELLNESS                                                                       | 06-12
This Element establishes the City’s long-term goals and policies for managing and protecting its natural
resources and open spaces. Our natural environment, either directly or indirectly, provides everything
needed for our survival and well-being. It not only influences the development of our City’s physical
landscape, but also shapes our community’s unique identity within the Coachella Valley. Whether it’s
the rich soil that supports our agricultural production, the surrounding hillsides and mountains that
inspire us with captivating views or the desert climate that offers residents and visitors a tranquil setting
for recreation, Coachella relies heavily on its natural resources to fulfill its social and economic needs. It
is important for us to be stewards of these valuable resources for our current community and future
generations.
Coachella envisions future development to minimize its impact on the local and global environment. The
City will promote green building and encourage architecture that responds to the arid climate while
integrated into its urban and natural surroundings. Furthermore, new development will respect the
environmental constraints and natural hazards such as steep slopes, faults and areas with landslide
potential. For example, some of the date groves and other farm uses will be preserved as a connection
to agricultural history, a visual and open space amenity and a local food source.
The Coachella Valley’s arid and sunny climate poses great opportunities and challenges for the City to
use its energy and water resources wisely. As a national hotspot for solar and wind energy production
within the Valley, the City is a prime location to generate clean, renewable energy. The City will seek
to use less energy and increase its reliance on local, renewable energy.
With the planned development of agricultural lands into communities, Coachella will need to ensure
water use in new neighborhoods does not exceed its prior levels. To execute this transition effectively,
the City will conserve water by instituting new, efficient building design standards and incorporate
xeriscaping into landscape design. A network of recycled water facilities should be pursued, and
industrial users that use recycled water should be recruited to locate in the city. The City also should
build “green streets” that treat and re-infiltrate stormwater on site.
Finally, as climate change is becoming a global priority, and California becomes more proactive in
enforcing climate-related laws and regulations, the City will embrace opportunities to limit its impact on
global climate change. Through the above efforts and other strategies (including transportation and land
use), the City will lead the Coachella Valley in cultivating a thriving and sustainable low-carbon
community.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                   | 07-1

Through long-term stewardship established by the goals and policies of the General Plan, the City will
safeguard a range of natural and man-made systems that contribute to Coachella’s long-term growth
and prosperity. The City will establish itself as a regional environmental leader and innovator by
demonstrating how to: incorporate environmentally sensitive and responsible strategies to manage
energy, water and solid waste; construct homes, roads, schools and other buildings; protect and
preserve the community’s mineral, agricultural and cultural resources.
Coachella is a community with close ties to the land and the outdoors. The community depends on the
land for food, water, jobs and recreation. Through this close relationship, the community understands
that environmental health is a key factor determining economic and community health. As such,
environmental sustainability is a fundamental component of the community’s vision for the future.
To achieve the community’s vision as presented in Chapter 3 of the General Plan, the Sustainability
and Natural Environment Element is organized around the following broad goals:
   A sustainable community that minimizes the risks of climate change. Mounting evidence indicates
    human activities are affecting global climate, which is expected to result in increasing warming in
    the Coachella Valley. As environmental stewards, the community has a strong desire to grow while
    minimizing its contributions to global warming and minimizing the risks of hazards related to a
    warming climate. With appropriate planning and forethought, the community intends to grow while
    minimizing its greenhouse gas emissions and anticipating climate change related risks.
   A resource efficient and environmentally respectful community. The City is in sun-drenched
    region, with ample opportunity for solar and wind power, as well as high demand for energy for
    comfortable living and economic opportunities. Additionally, water is a scarce resource must be
    closely managed if the City is to thrive. Through good design, green design principles, and a
    commitment to resource efficiency, the City can grow and minimize its impact on the environment.
   A community with plentiful open space and parkland. The community loves and respects the
    outdoors, understanding much of the City’s economy is generated through agricultural operations,
    but also open space provides valuable recreation areas for this active City. This element also
    provides direction for the creation and maintenance of recreational trails, parks and open space.
   Meet the recreational and service needs of Coachella's diverse population. The City will play a
    key role in meeting the community’s needs for recreational, educational and general assembly
    needs. As the City develops, new facilities will need to be phased in with new development to
    ensure residents have adequate facilities to meet their needs.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                | 07-2

Goal 1.       Climate Change. A resilient community that is prepared for the health and
              safety impacts of and minimizes the risks of climate change.
              Policies
              1.1   Municipal operations. Conduct city operations and institutionalize practices that
                    reduce municipal greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and lead the community in
                    reducing GHG emissions.
              1.2   GHG reductions. Promote land use and development patterns that reduce the
                    community’s dependence on and length of automobile trips.
              1.3   Existing GHG emissions. Work with community members and businesses to support
                    their efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
              1.4   Monitoring progress. Monitor and update periodically the city’s target to reduce
                    greenhouse gas emissions.
              1.5   Climate action plan. Maintain, implement and periodically update a climate action
                    plan and greenhouse gas inventory.
              1.6   Climate-appropriate building types. Seek out and promote alternative building types
                    that are more sensitive to the arid environment found in the Coachella Valley.
                    Courtyard housing and commercial buildings can be designed to provide micro-
                    climates that are usable year round, reducing the need for mechanically cooled
                    spaces and reducing energy consumption.
              1.7   GHG reduction incentives. Periodically review fee structures for potential
                    opportunities to provide financial and administrative incentives to support installation
                    of renewable energy generators, energy efficiency measures, land use patterns, and
                    other measures that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
              1.8   Regional participation. Act as the participant in of climate change activities in the
                    Coachella Valley.
              1.9   Climate change and health. Acknowledge the on-going and future impacts of
                    climate change and extreme events on Coachella's residents, taking action to
                    minimize the effects among vulnerable populations and help implement California's
                    executive order (EO) s-13-08 and the 2009 California Climate Adaptation Strategy.
              1.10  Adaptation strategy. Proactively develop strategies to reduce the community’s
                    vulnerability to climate change impacts.
              1.11  Urban forest. Protect the City’s healthy trees and plant new ones to provide shade,
                    increase carbon sequestration and purify the air.
              1.12  Reduced water supplies. When reviewing development proposals, consider the
                    possibility of constrained future water supplies and require enhanced water
                    conservation measures.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                   | 07-3

              1.13   Designing for warming temperatures. When reviewing development proposals,
                     encourage applicants and designers to consider warming temperatures in the design
                     of cooling systems.
              1.14   Designing for changing precipitation patterns. Periodically evaluate stormwater
                     control strategies and systems for sensitivity to changes in precipitation regimes and
                     consider adjusting those strategies to accommodate future precipitation regimes.
              1.15   Communications and outreach. Continue to work with the Riverside County Public
                     Health Department to establish social networks and website updates to distribute
                     information on climate change impacts to vulnerable populations including actions
                     they can take to reduce exposure to unhealthy conditions.
Goal 2.       Energy. An energy efficient community that relies primarily on renewable
              and non-polluting energy sources.
              Policies
              2.1    Community development–subdivisions. When reviewing applications for new
                     subdivisions, require all residences be oriented along an east-west access,
                     minimizing western sun exposure, to maximize energy efficiency.
             Figure 7-1: These diagrams demonstrate how the blocks and housing within can be designed to
             maximize building energy efficiency, maintaining the primary building axis along an east-west access to
             minimze western sun exposure.
              2.2    Passive solar design. Require new buildings to incorporate energy efficient building
                     and site design strategies for the desert environment that include appropriate solar
                     orientation, thermal mass, use of natural daylight and ventilation, and shading.
              2.3    Alternative energy. Promote the incorporation of alternative energy generation (e.g.,
                     solar, wind, biomass) in public and private development.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                         | 07-4

              2.4   Community Choice Aggregation. Work with nearby local and regional agencies to
                    develop a community choice aggregation system in order to secure alternative
                    energy supply contracts for the community.
              2.5   Construction standards. Consider and evaluate new construction practices and
                    standards that increase building energy efficiency.
              2.6   Energy performance targets – new construction. Require new construction to
                    exceed Title 24 energy efficiency standards by 15 percent and incorporate solar
                    photovoltaics.
              2.7   Energy performance targets – existing buildings. When existing buildings undergo
                    major retrofits, require the buildings to exceed Title 24 energy efficiency standards
                    by 15 percent and encourage solar photovoltaics.
              2.8   Renewable energy–open space areas. Allow the installation of renewable energy
                    systems in areas zoned for open space.
              2.9   Energy-efficient street lighting. Implement a program to install the latest energy-
                    efficient technologies for street and parking lot lights to meet City and state
                    standards.
              2.10  New industries. Actively promote the City as a place for renewable energy
                    generation, and a place for energy conservation businesses to locate.
              2.11  Publicly funded buildings. Require energy conservation as the primary strategy to
                    reduce energy demand in new and renovation projects using public funds.
              2.12  Solar access. Prohibit new development and renovations that impair adjacent
                    buildings’ solar access, unless it can be demonstrated that the shading benefits
                    substantially offset the impacts of solar energy generation potential.
              2.13  Use of passive open space. Allow renewable energy projects in areas zoned for
                    open space, where consistent with other uses and values.
              2.14  Public buildings. Require that any new building constructed in whole or in part with
                    City funds incorporate passive solar design features, such as daylighting and passive
                    solar heating, where feasible.
Goal 3.       Water Resources. Protected and readily available water resources for
              community and environmental use.
              Policies
              3.1   Conservation performance targets – new construction. Require new construction to
                    exceed the state’s Green Building Code for water conservation by an additional 10
                    percent.
              3.2   Water conservation technologies. Advocate and promote indoor and outdoor water
                    conservation and reuse practices including water recycling, grey water re-use and
                    rainwater harvesting.
              3.3   Greywater. Support the use of greywater and establish criteria and standards to
                    permit the safe and effective use of greywater (also known as on-site water
                    recycling).
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                 | 07-5

              3.4   Low impact development. Require the use of low-impact development strategies to
                    minimize urban run-off, increase site infiltration, manage stormwater and recharge
                    groundwater supplies.
              3.5   Recycled water. Use impact fees to set up tertiary water treatment infrastructure to
                    use recycled water for “non-potable” uses.
              3.6   Education. Support and expand programs to educate and incentivize the community
                    on water conservation practices for landscaping.
              3.7   Landscape design. Encourage the reduction of landscaping water consumption
                    through plant selection and irrigation technology.
              3.8   Groundwater infiltration. Encourage the use of above-ground and natural stormwater
                    facilities in new development and redevelopment, such as grassy or vegetated
                    swales, permeable paving and rain gardens.
              3.9   Water quality detention basins. Require water detention basins to be aesthetically
                    pleasing and to serve recreational purposes, such as in the form of a Mini Park.
                    Detention basins designed for active uses are intended to supplement park and open
                    space and should not be counted towards a developer’s minimum park
                    requirements, unless otherwise determined by the Planning Commission and City
                    Council.
              3.10  Retention Basins. Encourage storm water retention basins to be underground in
                    future development so as to achieve the most efficient use of land and compact
                    development and promote the urban character goals of the General Plan.
Goal 4.       Green Building. Community building stock (both new construction and
              renovations) that demonstrates high environmental performance through
              green design.
              Policies
              4.1   Public buildings. Require all new and substantially renovated or reconstructed City-
                    owned and operated buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet achieve a LEED
                    Silver Certification standard, as determined by the U.S. Green Building Council, or a
                    substantially similar green building standard.
              4.2   Affordable housing – green design. Require affordable housing developments to
                    prioritize green building design features that reduce monthly utility costs, enhance
                    occupant health and lower the overall cost of housing.
              4.3   Education. Provide technical support and information to educate the development
                    community about green building.
              4.4   Reducing GHG emissions. In consulting with applicants and designing new facilities,
                    prioritize the selection of green building design features that enhance the reduction
                    of greenhouse gas emissions.
              4.5   Heat island reductions. Require heat island reduction strategies in new
                    developments such as light-colored cool roofs, light-colored paving, permeable
                    paving, right-sized parking requirements, water efficient vegetative cover and
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                  | 07-6

                    planting, substantial tree canopy coverage, south and west side water-efficient tree
                    planting, and shaded asphalt paving.
              4.6   Public realm shading. Strive to improve shading in public spaces such as bus
                    stops, sidewalks and public parks and plazas through the use of trees, shelters,
                    awnings, gazebos, fabric shading and other creative cooling strategies.
Goal 5.       Agricultural Preservation. Viable, productive local agricultural lands and
              industry.
              5.1   Prime agricultural land. Prioritize the conservation of state-designated Important
                    Farmlands and discourage the conversion of these lands to urbanized uses until
                    such time as the land is needed for additional growth.
              5.2   Agricultural economy. Maintain and support a viable agricultural economy within the
                    City that recognizes the community’s agricultural heritage.
              5.3   Agriculture preservation. Continue to work with landowners in maintaining and
                    extending existing Williamson Act contracts.
              5.4   Preservation tools. Preserve agriculturally important lands through conservation
                    subdivisions, conservation easements and the transfer of development rights.
              5.5   Water-efficient agriculture. Promote crops and methods that require limited or no
                    irrigation.
              5.6   Habitat restoration. Allow unviable and abandoned farmland to revert to desert,
                    habitat area and open space, especially in areas contiguous to existing habitat and
                    desert.
              5.7   Accessory uses. Consider allowing accessory uses that are complimentary to
                    agricultural production to improve the financial viability of agricultural land.
              5.8   Buffers between agriculture and urban uses. Require new developments, whether
                    they are new urban or new agricultural uses, in which urban and agriculture uses
                    would be adjacent to maintain a protective buffer, such as landscape setbacks,
                    hedgerows, windrows, or canopy trees that ensures land use conflicts do not occur.
              5.9   Right to Farm. Support the right of existing farms to continue operations.
              5.10  Preservation of slow-growing trees and crops. Encourage the preservation of date
                    groves, citrus orchards, vineyards and other crops which require substantial growth
                    before achieving mature production rates.
              5.11  Farm worker housing. Encourage the producers of agricultural products to provide
                    suitable housing for farm laborers that meets applicable health and safety standards.
              5.12  Market transformation. If the agri-business industry declines in Coachella, support
                    efforts that facilitate the transition of uses, businesses and employees from
                    agriculture to other sectors of the local economy.
              5.13  Voluntary conservation. Support private conservation organizations that utilize
                    voluntary conservation easements as a tool for agricultural land conservation to
                    accomplish preservation of agricultural lands and continued agricultural operations.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                 | 07-7

Goal 6.       Visual Resources. A city with stunning views of the hillsides and
              mountains surrounding the Coachella Valley.
              Policies
              6.1   View corridor preservation. Protect and preserve existing, signature views of the
                    hills and mountains from the City.
              6.2   Scenic roadways. Minimize the impact on views by restricting new billboards along
                    the City’s roads and highways. Electronic and animated billboards should be
                    prohibited except in rare and special circumstances.
              6.3   Hillside grading. Require the preparation of a grading analysis on hillside
                    development to pre-determine where development should occur so as to minimize
                    the impact of new development on views of the City’s hillsides.
              6.4   Public facilities. Plan public facilities to take advantage of the City’s mountain and
                    hillside views.
              6.5   Dark sky. Limit light pollution from outdoor sources, especially in rural, hillside and
                    mountain areas, and open spaces, to maintain darkness for night sky viewing.
Goal 7.       Waterways Waterways and desert washes that serve a natural,
              environmental
                  .              function and provide aesthetically pleasing open space for
              the community.
              Policies
              7.1   Pollution prevention. Limit the amount and concentration of pollutants released into
                    the City’s waterways.
              7.2   Development impacts. When considering development applications, require
                    consideration of onsite detainment of stormwater runoff and require the incorporation
                    of appropriate stormwater treatment and control measures, in accordance with the
                    most recent NPDES permit requirements.
              7.3   Soil erosion. Require the prevention of water-born soil erosion from sites, especially
                    those undergoing grading and mining activities.
              7.4   Water quality. Ensure water quality in the City’s waterways meets applicable state
                    and federal standards.
              7.5   Public access. Provide regulated public access to the City’s waterways for
                    recreation and passive enjoyment of open space.
              7.6   Waterways as amenities. When considering development applications and
                    infrastructure improvements, treat waterways as amenities, not hazards, and
                    encourage designs that embrace the waterways.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                   | 07-8

Goal 8.       Mineral Areas Mineral resources readily available to support community
              needs.
              Policies
              8.1    Mining operations. Permit development of mineral resources for efficient production
                    .only where extraction activities are compatible with existing or proposed adjacent
                     land uses.
              8.2    Resource conservation areas. Ensure the availability of mineral resource areas for
                     future production.
              8.3    Open space and mining. Provide for resource extraction activities, such as mining,
                     as an allowed use in those areas with an Open Space General Plan Designation.
              8.4    Recycling. Encourage the reuse and recycling of existing aggregate, concrete and
                     asphalt materials for new residential, commercial, and industrial developments.
              8.5    Compatibility of uses. Restrict mining and mineral extraction activities to those areas
                     not adjacent to or containing sensitive receptors, important farmland, important
                     habitat or other incompatible uses.
Goal 9.       Plant and Wildlife Habitat Areas Protected plant and wildlife habitat areas
              that are protected, . productive, viable natural resources and exist
              harmoniously with adjacent development.
              Policies
              9.1    Buffers from new development. Require new developments adjacent to identified
                     plant and wildlife habitat areas to maintain a protective buffer.
              9.2    Agriculture and natural habitat. Promote the creation and maintenance of natural
                     habitat and wildlife corridors on agricultural lands through wildlife-compatible farm
                     management practices.
              9.3    Wildlife corridors. Support the creation of local and regional conservation and
                     preservation easements that protect habitat areas, serve as wildlife corridors and
                     help protect sensitive biological resources.
              9.4    Conservation and preservation easements. Develop a program to facilitate the
                     creation of conservation and preservation easements that identifies key habitat areas,
                     habitat corridors and sensitive biological resources and:
                      Establishes a simple process for land owners to grant easements, including
                       identifying organizations or agencies capable of holding the easements; and
                      Provides information to the landowners of identified properties about the benefits of
                       conservation and preservation easements.
              9.5    Multiple species habitat conservation plan. Support and adhere to the Coachella
                     Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan.
              9.6    Native habitat management. Develop a program to restore native habitat on
                     undeveloped portions of City-owned properties, where feasible, and remove invasive
                     species where they occur.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                    | 07-9

              9.7   Landscape design. Encourage new developments to incorporate native vegetation
                    materials into landscape plans and prohibit the use of species known to be invasive
                    according to the California Invasive Plant Inventory.
              9.8   Sensitive species. Require projects proposing to develop in subareas 5, 6, and 7 to
                    conduct surveys to determine if there is occurrence of sensitive species within the
                    Project area. If sensitive species are present, projects must implement mitigation
                    measures necessary as prescribed by a qualified biologist and approved by any
                    applicable resource agency in order to receive necessary City permits.
Goal 10. Passive Open Space. Preserved open space areas that represent
              significant aesthetic, cultural, environmental, economic and recreational
              resources for the community.
              Policies
              10.1  Open space network. Require new development to contribute land and/or funding
                    to expand the community’s open space network, in support of the MSHCP.
              10.2  Whitewater River/Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel corridor. Preserve a public
                    open space corridor of trails and wildlife habitat along the Whitewater
                    River/Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel.
              10.3  Archaeological resource preservation. Preserve important archaeological and
                    paleontological resources from loss or destruction and require development to
                    include appropriate mitigation to protect the quality and integrity of these resources.
              10.4  Mitigation and preservation of cultural resources. Require development to avoid
                    archaeological and paleontological resources, whenever possible. If complete
                    avoidance is not possible, require development to minimize and fully mitigate the
                    impacts to the resources.
              10.5  Grading. Require that proposed projects that involve a significant amount of grading
                    shall have an archaeological and paleontological survey conducted before
                    construction.
              10.6  Grading and vegetation removal. Limit grading and vegetation removal of new
                    development activities to the minimum extent necessary to reduce erosion and
                    sedimentation.
              10.7  Wildlife corridors. Establish and preserve wildlife corridors.
              10.8  Preservation of natural land features. Preserve significant natural features and
                    incorporate into all developments. Such features may include ridges, rock
                    outcroppings, natural drainage courses, wetland and riparian areas, steep
                    topography, important or landmark trees and views.
              10.9  Working lands. Encourage the preservation of agricultural and other working lands
                    as important aesthetic and open space resources of Coachella.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                  | 07-10

Goal 11. Air Quality. Healthy indoor and outdoor air quality through reduced, locally
              generated pollutant emissions.
              Policies
              11.1  Sources of Pollutants. Minimize the creation of new sources of air pollutants within
                    the City.
              11.2  Land use patterns. Promote compact, mixed-use, energy efficient and transit-
                    oriented development to reduce air pollutants associated energy and vehicular use.
              11.3  Sensitive receptors. Prohibit the siting of land uses that adversely impact existing
                    sensitive receptors, including schools, childcare centers, senior housing, and
                    subsidized affordable housing. The minimum distance separating these uses should
                    be 500 feet.
              11.4  Public transit. Ensure that, wherever feasible, public transit is a viable and attractive
                    alternative to the use of single occupant motor vehicles.
              11.5  Single-occupant vehicle trip reductions. Provide disincentives for single-occupant
                    vehicle trips through parking supply and pricing controls in areas where supply is
                    limited and alternative transportation modes are available.
              11.6  Neighborhood electric vehicles. Encourage developments and street systems that
                    support the use of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEV).
              11.7  Active transportation. Support infrastructure and programs that encourage children to
                    safely walk or ride a bicycle to school.
              11.8  Construction-related emissions. Require construction activities, including on-site
                    building and the transport of materials, to limit emissions and dust.
              11.9  Project mitigation. The City shall utilize the CEQA process to identify and mitigate
                    potentially significant air quality impacts associated with new development.
              11.10 Traffic congestion. Design new intersections to function in a manner that reduces air
                    pollutant emissions from stop and start and idling traffic conditions.
              11.11 Health impact assessments. Develop thresholds of significance for sensitive land
                    uses (schools, senior centers, medical facilities and residences) in proximity to
                    SR86S, SR111 and I10 to require preparation a health impact assessment (HIA), as
                    part of the CEQA environmental review process, to analyze the significance of the
                    health impact from highway adjacency and incorporate project-specific mitigation
                    measures to reduce potential impacts.
              11.12 Indoor air quality. Require new development to meet the state’s Green Building
                    Code for indoor air quality performance.
              11.13 Healthy homes. Promote green building practices that support “healthy homes,” such
                    as low VOC materials, environmental tobacco smoke control, and indoor air quality
                    construction pollution prevention techniques.
              11.14 Alternative energy sources. Promote the development of energy sources, such as
                    solar, wind, and geothermal, that do not emit pollution which has an adverse impact
                    on local air quality.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                   | 07-11

              11.15 Transportation demand management. Encourage employers to provide transit
                    subsidies, bicycle facilities, alternative work schedules, ridesharing, telecommuting,
                    work-at-home programs, employee education and preferential parking for
                    carpools/vanpools.
              11.16 Transportation management associations. Encourage commercial, retail and
                    residential developments to create and participate in transportation management
                    associations.
              11.17 Deliveries. Encourage business owners to schedule deliveries at off-peak traffic
                    periods.
              11.18 City fleet vehicles. Replace City fleet vehicles with low emission vehicles, wherever
                    possible.
              11.19 Advocacy. Support legislation that promotes cleaner industry, low emission
                    technology vehicles and more efficient burning engines and fuels.
              11.20 Regional coordination. The City shall coordinate its air quality planning efforts with
                    other local, regional and state agencies, and encourage community participation in
                    air quality planning.
              11.21 Air district coordination. The City shall work with the South Coast Air Quality
                    Management District (SCAQMD) to ensure the earliest practicable attainment of
                    federal and State ambient air quality standards.
Goal 12. Cultural Resources and Sites. Preserved and protected cultural resources
              that provide the community with significant cultural, scientific, or
              educational value.
              Policies
              12.1  Disturbance of human remains. In areas where there is a high chance that human
                    remains may be present (areas along the Whitewater Rivers/CVSC, on Tribal lands,
                    on areas with previously undisturbed soil, in the washes and canyons found in the
                    eastern areas of the Planning Area, and areas of historic settlement), require
                    proposed projects to conduct survey to establish occurrence of human remains, if
                    any. If human remains are discovered on proposed project sites, the project must
                    implement mitigation measures to prevent impacts to human remains in order to
                    receive permit approval.
              12.2  Tribal coordination. Require notification of California Native American tribes and
                    organizations of proposed projects that have the potential to adversely impact
                    cultural resources.
              12.3  Protected sites. Require sites with significant cultural resources to be protected.
              12.4  Preservation of historic resources. Where practical, encourage the preservation of
                    historic resources.
              12.5  Document historic resources. When it is not practical to preserve a historic
                    resource, require the architectural details and design elements of historic structures
                    to be preserved during renovations and remodels.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                  | 07-12
              12.6  Discovery of human remains. Require that any human remains discovered during
                    implementation of public and private projects within the City be treated with respect
                    and dignity and fully comply with the California Native American Graves Protection
                    and Repatriation Act and other appropriate laws.
              12.7  Paleontological resources. Require any paleontological artifacts found within the City
                    or Sphere of Influence be reported to the City and temporarily loaned to local
                    museums like the Western Science Center for Archaeology and Paleontology, in
                    Hemet, CA.
              12.8  Disturbance of human remains. In areas where there is a high chance that human
                    remains may be present (areas along the Whitewater Rivers/CVSC, on Tribal lands,
                    on areas with previously undisturbed soil, in the washes and canyons found in the
                    eastern areas of the Planning Area, and areas of historic settlement), require
                    proposed projects to conduct survey to establish occurrence of human remains, if
                    any. If human remains are discovered on proposed project sites, the project must
                    implement mitigation measures to prevent impacts to human remains in order to
                    receive permit approval.
Goal 13. Parks and Open Space. Increased access to parks, recreation, and
              natural open spaces to support and increase physical activity.
              Policies
              13.1  Parks and recreation. Improve existing parks and open space facilities and expand
                    recreational programs as a means of improving the health of Coachella residents.
                    Active play structures and/or amenities should be designed to accommodate a
                    range of ages and abilities.
              13.2  Revitalization efforts. Coordinate park development in existing neighborhoods with
                    City revitalization and redevelopment initiatives.
              13.3  New parks. Ensure existing and new neighborhoods have sufficient access to park
                    facilities that meet the needs of all residents, and increases in new residents do not
                    overburden existing parks.
              13.4  Accessibility to parks. Seek new park locations that will serve residential areas that
                    are more than a quarter mile from an existing or planned park or separated from an
                    existing or planned park by a street that consists of four or more travel lanes. Where
                    possible, parks shall be associated with and connected to the trail network.
              13.5  New development needs. Work with new development to provide at least three
                    acres of parkland for every 1,000 residents and ensure new development complies
                    with this requirement. Strive to provide at least 5 acres of parkland for every 1,000
                    residents and ensure no neighborhood should have less than three acres for every
                    1,000 residents. School playgrounds and fields shall be counted where access is
                    ensured by a joint use agreement.
              13.6  Perimeter paths. Create well-lit perimeter paths around parks, where feasible, to
                    improve safety and to improve how the parks interface with the sidewalk and
                    surrounding neighborhoods.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                 | 07-13
              13.7  Recreation centers. Locate more public and private health clubs and recreation
                    centers in Coachella in partnership with the Desert Recreation District, community
                    based organizations and private businesses. Explore regulatory or financial incentives
                    in the zoning code and development approval process to encourage the location of
                    private/non-profit recreation facilities (e.g., gyms, yoga or dance studios, martial
                    arts, etc.).
              13.8  Diverse recreation programs. Ensure that recreation programs are affordable and
                    meet the diverse needs in the community for users such as seniors, youth, non-
                    English speaking groups and special needs groups.
              13.9  City-wide open space network. Establish a city-wide open space network within
                    walking distance of residential neighborhoods.
              13.10 Coachella Whitewater Trail. Establish a multi-use trail that runs along the
                    Whitewater River/Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel.
              13.11 Coachella Whitewater Trail. Establish a multi-use trail that runs along the
                    Whitewater River/Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel.
              13.12 Active Recreational Areas. Prohibit consideration of natural drainages and other
                    sensitive resource areas as active park land.
              13.13 Nature access. Work with the County Tribal Governments and other recreation and
                    open space districts to create desert preserves with hiking trails, nature observing
                    areas and picnic areas.
              13.14 Parks classification system. Adopt and utilize the parks classification system
                    identified in Table 6-1 to help guide maintenance and planning work in the city.
              13.15 Sustainable landscaping. Promote sustainability for residences through desert-
                    friendly water-efficient landscaping for parks. Establish public demonstration gardens
                    using native desert planting.
              13.16 Unique features. Encourage parks and trails to be designed to conserve scenic and
                    natural features and encourage public awareness of Coachella’s unique geography.
              13.17 Park maintenance. Ensure all parks will be clean, well-kept and well-maintained,
                    preserving them as primary community gathering points in the City.
              13.18 Clean parks. Create methods and opportunities that encourage residents to monitor
                    and report vandalism along with maintenance issues in parks.
              13.19 Keep America Beautiful program. Consider becoming a “Keep America Beautiful”
                    community and utilizing free technology and online mapping programs so residents
                    can report issues using their smart phones or other portable devices.
              13.20 Park environments. Ensure parks in Coachella are a safe and well-lit environment
                    for recreational activities, day and night.
              13.21 Funding. Explore innovative funding and development concepts with non-profit
                    groups.
              13.22 Park fees. Collect land dedications or in lieu fees from new development for the
                    provision of parks and recreation facilities, in pursuit of a minimum parkland standard
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                 | 07-14

                    of three acres per 1,000 residents, as allowed by the California Quimby Act.
                    Establish policies for identifying neighborhoods that have a preference for the
                    physical provision of park and recreation infrastructure over in lieu fees and
                    administer a fee through which new development can provide parkland in lieu of
                    certain development fees.
              13.23 Sports facilities. Regularly assess how existing sports facilities (e.g., pools, fields,
                    courts, etc.) match up with the demand and incorporate findings into the planning of
                    park improvements and developments.
              13.24 Economic opportunities. Utilize parks to maximize new and existing economic
                    development opportunities through recruitment of new entertainment uses and by
                    coordinating park development to support commercial development.
              13.25 Regional parks. Seek out opportunities to create regional parks, such as
                    professional-quality soccer fields and baseball fields, that will attract tourists to the
                    City.
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                     | 07-15
Table 6-1: Parks Classification Standards
                      ACRE            POP            DISTANCE
 PARK TYPE            RANGE           RADIUS         RADIUS         GENERAL CHARACTERIST ICS
                                                                    Parks that exist primarily in residential areas or adjacent to
                                                                    light business zones and have features such as grass,
                                                                    shade, trees, passive areas, green space, shelters, native
                                                                    plant life, playgrounds and play structures. Use is limited to
                                                     Within walking
                      Less than 1     Not population                the local neighborhood. They may be realized in “tot-lot”
 MINI PARKS                                          distance of
                      acre to 1.5     radius                        configurations that provide secure recreational space for
                                                     immediate
                      acres           sensitive                     small children and typically include equipment such as
                                                     area
                                                                    swings, slides, ‘monkey bars’ and sand boxes while leaving
                                                                    sufficient room for people to sit and enjoy the space. Mini-
                                                                    Parks are intended to serve a population within a walking
                                                                    distance or short biking distance.
                                                                    Plazas and Greens have the widest variety and the most intense
                                                                    activities of all open spaces. Plazas and Greens serve as formal
                                                                    or informal community gathering spaces. Plazas are unique to the
                                                                    City of Coachella and represent a connection to the culture of the
                                                     Close to
                                      Not population                community. These park types are often shaped primarily by
 PLAZAS/GREENS                                       entertainment
                      Up to 2 acres   radius                        building frontages. Plazas are shaped primarily by building
                                                     and business
                                      sensitive                     frontages and are primarily hardscape with occasional landscape
                                                     support areas
                                                                    in planters or containers. Greens are landscaped open areas
                                                                    located at the center of a community. Features may include
                                                                    gazebos, water features, trees, shade, performance areas, public
                                                                    artwork and other similar features.
                                                                    Parks provide large unobstructed areas for passive or active rec -
                                                                    reation throughout neighborhoods. Often contain community
                                                     About a 2.5
 NEIGHBORHOOD                         6 to 10 acres                 gardens and playgrounds and are primarily landscaped. These
                                                     mile radius in
 PARKS                About 1.5-15    per 1,000                     parks are located in residential areas. They include features such
                                                     the developed
                                      residents                     as: grass, trees, restrooms, tot lots, picnic and shade shelters,
                                                     area
                                                                    grills, playground equipment, open fields, informal sports areas,
                                                                    swimming pools and/or neighborhood center.
                                                                    Parks located in large areas that are compatible to surrounding
                                                                    uses with features such as: large grass areas, large picnic and
 COMMUNITY                            One site per   About a 5 to   shelter areas, restrooms, on-site parking, swimming pool,
                      About 10-50
 PARKS                                25,000         10 mile        community center, sports areas/complexes, lights, entertainment
                      acres
                                      residents      service radius areas, special features such as skateboard areas, outdoor
                                                                    theatres, disc golf, BMX, exercise station, ponds and/or water
                                                                    features.
                                      One site per                  Parks not located in residential areas. Features might include:
 SPECIAL USE                                         About a 25
                                      50,000 to                     large scale sports complex, special events site (such as fairs and
 PARKS                50+ acres                      mile service
                                      200,000                       festivals), gardens, concessions, trails, natural/open space, lakes,
                                                     radius
                                      residents                     animal uses.
                                                                    Areas generally free from development or developed at low
                                                                    intensity uses that respect natural environmental characteristics
                      As resources                   As natural
 NATURE/OPEN                          Not population                and serve as preservation of natural, cultural, archaeological
                      available                      resource
 SPACE                                radius                        resources, passive outdoor recreation, public safety and health,
                      (usually                       areas are
                                      sensitive                     and shape urban form. In some cases, these open space types
                      large)                         available
                                                                    may include working lands such as farms, ranches, and mining
                                                                    areas.
                                                     Distance is a  Greenways and Trails may consist of walking, biking, hiking,
 GREENWAYS/                           Not population
                      As resources                   function of in equestrian, greenway, long distance, off road, rail, canal, and
 TRAILS                               radius
                      are available                  and between    waterway with the purpose to meet passive or active recreation,
                                      sensitive
                                                     park options   informal or formal transportation.
                                                     Tied to
                      Should          Not population                Purpose is to connect parks, entry ways, transportation route, and
 LINEAR PARKS                                        neighborhood
                      connect with    radius                        unique features. May be concrete, asphalt, or crusher fine, among
                                                     entries and
                      trails          sensitive                     other options.
                                                     park sites
SUSTAINABILITY + NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                                                               | 07-16

This Element provides strategies that City staff, residents, developers and business owners can
implement to effectively address the natural hazards where the City of Coachella is vulnerable. The
goals and policies are long-term measures that reflect the City’s desire to deal effectively with natural
hazards and provide a safe living environment for the community. The primary objective of the Safety
Element, as the policies and actions are implemented over the next 20 years, is to make Coachella
increasingly resistant to disasters and become more self-reliant, sustainable and prosperous.
For Coachella to become the most important city in the Valley, it needs to grow responsibly, completely
aware and respectful of the natural forces that have shaped this area over the last millennia and are
still active today. Several of these forces, including earthquakes, floods, wildfires and severe weather,
have the potential to cause substantial damage to the fabric of the community, with resultant significant
economic and social dislocation. When (not if) the San Andreas Fault ruptures next, the growth and
development of the region has the potential to be delayed for years, if not decades. If the City is well
prepared, however, the impact that this earthquake would have on the community could be minor.
Preparation for this worst-case scenario will be expensive but money spent in disaster preparedness will
be a fraction of what the actual earthquake would cost the City in disaster response and post-disaster
recovery. Thus, earthquake-preparedness should be viewed as a worthy and necessary investment.
The characteristics that define Coachella’s unique identity – the gently sloping valley underlain by thick,
rich soils that make it one of the most productive agricultural regions in the world, and the rounded hills
and steep, jagged mountains were formed by movement along the San Andreas fault, the wandering of
the Whitewater River during flood stage, and the gentle but constant tug of gravity. Most of the time,
these forces have little effect on the environment. The big, landscape-changing events occur
intermittently, sometimes only once every generation, or less. As a result, it can be difficult to
engender the support necessary from the public and government to take action and prepare for these
low-probability but high-consequence events. Coachella, however, recognizes the importance of being
proactive and addressing disaster preparedness. It is the responsible thing to do, both for the current
community and the generations to come.
When weighing in the effectiveness and cost of disaster preparedness programs, it is helpful to realize
many of the action items designed to reduce the community’s risk to natural hazards can work
seamlessly with other implementation actions of the General Plan. Thus, green buildings that work well
in the arid environment can also be earthquake- and fire-resistant. Respect for the preservation of
natural landscapes such as steep slopes and springs along the San Andreas Fault will prevent
construction on or across features that are natural hazards. Similarly, preservation of the Whitewater
River wash as a habitat and corridor for wildlife can prevent the storm-induced flooding of otherwise ill-
located structures. Incorporating xeriscaping into landscape design can decrease the fuel loads available
for wildland fires, reducing the potential for vegetation fires at the urban-wildland interface. Recycling
water can reduce or eliminate the potential for groundwater-withdrawal-induced subsidence. “Green
SAFETY                                                                                                   | 08-1

streets” that allow for the infiltration of stormwater lessen runoff, erosion and sedimentation, and the
potential for flooding downstream.
Lastly, it is also helpful to realize that Safety Elements are provisional by scope and definition. The
policies and implementation actions are established within a framework that identifies timelines and
priorities. As the more critical policies are implemented, emphasis will shift to new priorities. This
permits the City to prioritize its use of limited resources over the short- and long-term, while
continuously moving forward in its ultimate goal of being disaster resistant. Both the process and the
ultimate result will help Coachella realize its goals of being a social and economic leader in the region.
The geologically and physically diverse environment that forms the backdrop for the community of
Coachella formed after thousands of years of tectonic and climatic forces acting on the area. These
forces are ongoing today, with the potential to severely impact the built environment, especially if
structures and infrastructure are not designed adequately. When this happens, there is the potential for
loss of life, limb and/or property. The goals below reflect the City’s fundamental responsibility and
desire to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the community.
    Minimally impacted by seismic shaking and other earthquake-induced hazards. The San Andreas
     Fault bisects the City. The section of the fault that extends through Coachella has a high probability
     of rupturing in the next 30 years. The resulting earthquake will be accompanied by extreme
     seismic shaking and lateral rupture of the ground that locally may exceed 20 feet. Other
     earthquake-induced hazards expected in the area include ground deformation due to liquefaction
     and slope failure. Any of these conditions can result in damage to the built environment, including
     the collapse of structures. Recognizing and avoiding or mitigating those areas where earthquake-
     induced ground failure is likely to occur will minimize the impact this earthquake would have on the
     City.
    All new habitable buildings and structures are seismically resistant. Earthquake-induced damage
     to the built environment, such as the catastrophic failure of structures, can result in large numbers
     of casualties. We cannot prevent earthquakes from occurring but we can design and build our
     structures to prevent them from collapsing. Given that an earthquake on the San Andreas Fault
     has the potential to be the worst-case disaster for Coachella, the City has a strong incentive and
     desire to become as earthquake-resistant as possible.
    Older structures are resistant to seismic shaking. The latest building codes have incorporated
     many lessons learned from the damaging earthquakes that occurred globally in the 1990s and early
     2000s. Building codes are unfortunately not retroactive but we can voluntarily retrofit older
     structures to be stronger and thus more earthquake-resistant.
    Infrastructure is resistant to seismic shaking, surface fault rupture and seismically induced
     ground deformation. Earthquake scenarios indicate the infrastructure in the region will be damaged
     extensively by an earthquake on the San Andreas Fault. The water-distribution system especially
     will be hard-hit but other services, including the transportation network, will also be affected. The
     Coachella Canal is expected to be damaged by surface fault rupture and ground deformation, with
     the potential for significant flooding in the Coachella area. Retrofitting these systems is a priority.
    The community is minimally impacted by geologic hazards. The geologically young soils that
     underlie Coachella can be poor foundation materials, susceptible to liquefaction and differential
SAFETY                                                                                                   | 08-2

    settlement. Some of the soils are highly expansive or corrosive to metallic objects. All of these
    conditions, if recognized before construction, can be mitigated effectively with engineering solutions.
   Potential geologic hazards have been mitigated before construction of new developments. The
    City is expanding into the hills to the east of the San Andreas Fault. Slope instability is a potential
    hazard in this area but can be mitigated through appropriate engineering design.
   The community is minimally disrupted by flooding and inundation hazards. Given the arid
    conditions that characterize Coachella, it can be difficult to recognize the Whitewater River channel
    and the desert washes, in and at the base of the hills, can carry significant amounts of water during
    storms, even when those storms do not drop measurable rain. An interconnected, permanent flood
    control system can prevent flooding in the low-lying areas of the City. Inexpensive but effective
    seismic strengthening measures can prevent the inundation of low-lying areas downstream of
    above-ground reservoirs in the event these structures fail during an earthquake.
   Fire hazards are negligible, the result of effective fire suppression, mitigation and response
    measures. Vegetation fires in the Coachella area have historically been small. With the increased
    encroachment of development into the hillside areas, however, wildland fire may increase in the
    future, unless effective programs are implemented. These measures include vegetation control, fire-
    resistant construction and educational programs for homeowners, business owners and motorists.
    Strengthening of the gas and water distribution systems will limit the potential for devastating fires
    after an earthquake.
   Hazardous materials are used minimally. Recognizing that the production, use, storage, transport
    or disposal of hazardous materials poses a significant hazard to the community and the
    environment, the City encourages the use of alternative, non-toxic products as much as possible. If
    hazardous materials are required, the smallest amounts necessary to get the job done will be used.
    Facilities that generate, use, or store hazardous materials are not located within the 100-year
    floodplain, in an area susceptible to seismic or geologic hazards, or near schools, nursing homes,
    or other facilities with sensitive or special-needs populations.
   The community is minimally impacted by severe weather. Strong winds, dust storms, temperature
    extremes and drought can have short- and long-term impacts on the region’s economy and on the
    health and wellbeing of residents and visitors. Even more severe weather, with higher
    temperatures, stronger winds, and more intense flooding, could be the norm as a result of global
    climate change. As part of the process of becoming more sustainable, the City will implement
    measures to reduce where possible, the effects of severe weather, and respond proactively and
    effectively when a storm, strong wind, extreme heat or drought affects the region.
   The community has an effective disaster response and recovery system in place, thus is self-
    reliant and sustainable. History shows the Coachella Valley region is susceptible to several
    different types of natural hazards. Some of these, like an earthquake on the San Andreas Fault,
    will have a regional impact, whereas others, like slope failures, tend to be contained to a small
    geographic area. Coachella has developed a disaster preparedness, response, and recovery plan
    that allows the community to be responsive to any type and size of natural hazard with minimal
    assistance from outside agencies and neighboring cities.
SAFETY                                                                                                  | 08-3

Goal 1. Earthquake Hazards. A community that is minimally affected by seismic
        shaking and other earthquake-induced hazards.
        Policies
        1.1   Development plan review. Review all plans for new development to be certain new
              structures are designed in accordance with the most recent California Building Code
              adopted by City Council, including the provisions regarding seismic loads, lateral
              forces and grading.
        1.2   Earthquake-resistant new buildings. Require all new habitable buildings and
              structures to be designed and built to be seismically resistant and not built across
              the trace of an active fault.
        1.3   Strengthened and seismically retrofitted older structures. Promote the
              strengthening of older structures to make them more resistant to seismic shaking.
              This includes encouraging owners of potentially hazardous buildings, such as pre-
              1952 wood-frame structures, concrete tilt-ups, pre-1971 reinforced masonry, soft-
              story, multi-family residential buildings and manufactured homes, to assess the
              seismic vulnerability of their structures and conduct seismic retrofitting as necessary
              to improve the buildings’ resistance to seismic shaking.
        1.4   Strengthened infrastructure. Promote the strengthening of infrastructure and utilities
              to make them more earthquake resistant by encouraging the City’s utility service
              providers to identify, evaluate and replace or strengthen, as needed, those sections
              of their distribution network that are located in areas susceptible to fault rupture,
              liquefaction or slope instability. This also includes encouraging the City’s utility
              service providers to identify and replace or strengthen those sections of their
              distribution network in the General Plan area that are the oldest, and therefore more
              likely to be weathered or corroded.
        1.5   Seismically damaged buildings. Prohibit any additions or reconstruction of
              structures damaged by seismic hazards, unless the structure is re-located to a safer
              area, or it can be demonstrated the proposed project and its occupants can be
              protected from future, recurrent damage by implementing mitigation measures not
              present in the original, damaged structure.
        1.6   Liquefaction assessment studies. Require liquefaction assessment studies be
              conducted for all projects proposed in areas identified as potentially susceptible to
              liquefaction (Plate 1-3, Technical Background Report). These studies need to be
              conducted in accordance with the provisions in the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
              and the most recent version of the California Geological Survey’s Special Publication
              117: Guidelines for Evaluating and Mitigating Seismic Hazards in California.
        1.7   Liquefaction mitigation. In areas where geotechnical testing shows the sediments
              are susceptible to liquefaction, require the implementation of mitigation measures as
              a condition of approval. Liquefaction mitigation measures shall be applied to all
              habitable structures, bridges, roadways, major utility lines and park improvements to
              be built in these areas.
SAFETY                                                                                             | 08-4

        1.8   Seismic hazards map update. If the California Geological Survey (CGS) develops
              a Seismic Hazards Zonation Map that includes the City, review the preliminary map
              for agreement with geotechnical reports filed at the City, work with the CGS to make
              any necessary changes and adopt the final map as a replacement to the Seismic
              Hazards Map currently part of the Technical Background Report (Plate 1-3).
        1.9   Inundation review. Regularly evaluate the above-ground water storage tanks in the
              General Plan area to assess their potential inundation hazard in the event of
              catastrophic failure and ensure all tanks are fitted with appropriate seismic
              safeguards, including shut-off valves, in accordance with the most recent water tank
              design guidelines.
Goal 2. Geologic Hazards. A community that has used engineering solutions to
        reduce or eliminate the potential for injury, loss of life, property damage
        and economic and social disruption caused by geologic hazards such as
        slope instability; compressible, collapsible, expansive or corrosive soils;
        and subsidence due to groundwater withdrawal.
        Policies
        2.1   Geotechnical investigations. Require all development proposals in the City to
              conduct, as a condition of approval, geotechnical and engineering geological
              investigations, prepared by state-certified professionals (geotechnical engineers and
              engineering geologists, as appropriate) following the most recent guidelines of the
              California Geological Survey and similar organizations, that address, as a minimum,
              the site-specific geologic hazards identified in the Technical Background Report. This
              includes the hazard of slope failure in, and adjacent to, hillside areas.
        2.2   Mitigated geologic hazards. Require all new developments to mitigate the geologic
              hazards that have the potential to have an impact on habitable structures and other
              improvements.
        2.3   Slope failure mitigation. Minimize grading and modifications to the natural
              topography to prevent potential for man-induced slope failures. Where deemed
              necessary, erect protective devices such as barriers, rock fences, retaining structures
              or catchment areas.
        2.4   Field inspections. Conduct routine field inspections during grading and construction
              to ensure safety practices are being followed and the site is being graded; and new
              structures are being built in accordance with the most recent California Building
              Code adopted by the City, in agreement with the approved plans and specifications.
        2.5   Slope failure map updates. Maintain an updated map of slope failures in the
              General Plan area to identify slopes where debris flows, surficial mass wasting
              events, and rockfalls have occurred, especially during wet winters.
        2.6   Learn from past mistakes. Monitor the losses caused by geologic hazards to
              existing development and require studies to specifically address these issues,
              including implementation of measures designed to mitigate these hazards in all
              future developments in the General Plan area.
SAFETY                                                                                          | 08-5
        2.7   Damaged buildings. Prohibit any additions or reconstruction of habitable structures
              destroyed or damaged by geologic hazards unless the structure is relocated to a
              safer area or the applicant proves that the remedial measures proposed will mitigate
              the unsafe geological conditions so the proposed project and its occupants can be
              protected from future, recurrent damage.
        2.8   Critical facility siting. Regulate the location of new essential or critical facilities in
              areas that could be affected by geologic hazards by comparing, during the project
              feasibility stage, the location of the proposed facilities with the mapped areas in the
              Technical Background Report identified as susceptible to natural hazards.
        2.9   Groundwater resources protection. Develop partnerships with the Coachella Valley
              Water District and adjacent communities to manage the groundwater resources of
              the region, prevent over-drafting of the aquifers and prevent regional subsidence due
              to excessive water extraction.
Goal 3. Flood hazards. A community that is minimally disrupted by flooding and
        inundation hazards.
        Policies
        3.1   Hydrological studies. Require new development proposals to include as a condition
              of approval, hydrological studies prepared by a state-certified engineer with expertise
              in these kinds of studies, that assess the impact the new development will have on
              the flooding potential of existing development down-gradient. The studies shall
              provide mitigation measures to reduce this impact to an acceptable level.
        3.2   Flood mitigation in repetitive-flooding areas. Identify repetitive flood problem areas
              in existing development, prioritize hydrological studies of areas that flood repeatedly
              during storms and develop feasible engineering solutions to mitigate these sites.
        3.3   Flood mitigation for both existing and new construction. Require all new
              developments and redevelopments in areas susceptible to flooding (such as the
              100-year floodplain and areas known to flood during intense or prolonged rainfall
              events) to incorporate mitigation measures designed to minimize or eliminate flood
              hazards.
        3.4   Flood hazard enforcement. Continue to enforce City ordinances for flood hazard
              reduction, tract drainage and stormwater management for all new developments and
              existing projects undergoing substantial improvements within the FEMA-designated
              Special Flood Hazard Areas, other areas identified by the state as susceptible to
              flooding, hillside areas, and other areas known to flood. Mitigation measures may
              include (but are not limited to) the design of onsite drainage systems connected to
              the Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel, keeping surface waters within the project
              area, grading of the sites so that runoff does not affect adjacent properties, and
              building structures so they are elevated above the anticipated flood levels.
        3.5   Storm drainage facilities. Maintain, develop and improve where needed, the storm
              drain facilities (including bridges and other stormwater channel crossings) with an
              emphasis on those areas in the City that flood repeatedly.
SAFETY                                                                                               | 08-6
        3.6   Floodplain development. Promote the use of floodplains as parks, nature trails,
              equestrian parks, golf courses or other types of recreational facilities that can
              withstand periodic inundation. In the planned build-out of the City, create an
              atmosphere of working with nature and the natural processes characteristic of the
              arid environment.
        3.7   Disaster response plan. Require all essential and critical facilities (including but not
              limited to essential City offices and buildings, medical facilities, schools, childcare
              centers and nursing homes) in or within 200 feet of Flood Zones A and X, to
              develop disaster response and evacuation plans that address the actions to be taken
              in the event of storm flooding or inundation due to catastrophic failure of a water
              reservoir or other water retention facilities such as the Coachella Canal, the Eastside
              Dike and levees of the Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel.
        3.8   Hazardous material siting. New facilities that use or store hazardous materials in
              quantities that would place them in the State’s TRI or SQG databases shall not be
              permitted in the flood zone (Zones A and X) unless all standards of elevation,
              anchoring and flood proofing have been implemented to the satisfaction of the City
              and the Riverside County Department Hazardous Materials Division. The hazardous
              materials must be stored in watertight containers not capable of floating or in flood-
              proof receptacles or tanks.
        3.9   Storm Ready Program. Participate in the Storm Ready Program with the National
              Weather Service, including the monitoring of precipitation and snow levels on the
              mountains, providing storm watches and warnings in real-time and issuing
              evacuation notices for the potentially affected neighborhoods in a timely manner.
        3.10  Smart systems. Encourage the use of technology to identify flood-prone areas and
              to warn residents and motorists of impending flood hazards.
        3.11  Flood damage. Prohibit any additions or reconstruction of structures damaged by
              flooding, unless the structure is relocated to a safer area or can be demonstrated
              the proposed project and its occupants can be protected from future, recurrent flood
              damage by implementing mitigation measures not present in the original, damaged
              structure.
        3.12  Flood Insurance. Encourage property owners and residents to purchase flood
              insurance for areas outside of the FEMA-mapped 100-year flood zones, especially
              in those areas that have experienced flooding in the past.
Goal 4. Fire hazards. A community that is minimally affected by wildland and
        structure fires.
        Policies
        4.1   Vegetation control. Require the use of vegetation control methods to reduce the
              hazard of wildland fire.
        4.2   Construction materials. Require the use of fire-resistant building construction
              materials to reduce the hazard of structure fires, within the developed areas of the
              City and at the urban-wildland interface.
SAFETY                                                                                              | 08-7

        4.3   Sprinkler retrofits. Encourage owners of non-sprinklered high-occupancy structures
              to retrofit their buildings to include internal sprinklers.
        4.4   Fire response adequacy. Ensure, to the maximum extent possible, that fire
              services, such as firefighting equipment and personnel, infrastructure and response
              times, are adequate for all sections of the City. To that end, continue to regularly
              evaluate specific fire hazard areas, and adopt reasonable safety standards, such as
              adequacy of nearby water supplies, fire-retardant roofing materials, fire-equipment
              accessible routes, clarity of addresses, street signage and street maintenance.
        4.5   Fire flow tests. Ensure that annual fire flow tests are conducted, and that any
              deficiencies found be mitigated as soon as possible.
        4.6   Fire inspections. Conduct regular inspection of parcels throughout the City, and
              direct property owners to bring their property into compliance with fire safety
              standards. This includes enforcing the weed abatement and notification program to
              reduce the potential for vegetation fires that could occur in vacant or poorly
              maintained lots, and encourage homeowners to follow fire-safe practices, including
              maintaining a fire-safe landscape and keeping combustibles (such as fire wood) a
              safe distance away from all structures.
        4.7   Fire Hydrant Management. Establish a fire hydrant monitoring and testing program.
              Explore different funding streams including development impact fees.
Goal 5. Hazardous Materials Management. A community that has reduced the
        potential for hazardous materials contamination.
        Policies
        5.1   Enforcement actions. Continue to enforce disclosure laws that require all users,
              generators and transporters of hazardous materials and wastes to identify the
              materials they store, use or transport.
        5.2   Effective response. Ensure the City and the county’s fire and sheriff departments
              can respond safely and effectively to a hazardous materials incident in the City,
              whether as a spill at a permitted facility, a pipeline release or an accident along a
              section of the I-10 or railroad line that extends across Coachella; ensure all
              residents, workers and visitors to Coachella are protected from exposure to
              hazardous materials and waste.
        5.3   Hazardous materials siting. Prohibit the placement of proposed new facilities that
              will be involved in the production, use, storage, transport or disposal of hazardous
              materials near existing land uses that may be adversely affected by such activities.
              Conversely, prohibit the development of new sensitive facilities (like schools, child-
              care centers, nursing homes, senior housing, etc.) near existing sites that use,
              store or generate hazardous materials.
        5.4   Gasoline dispensing facilities. Avoid siting new sensitive land uses (schools, child-
              care centers and senior housing) within 300 feet of a large gas station (defined as
              a facility with a throughput of 3.6 million gallons per year or greater) and vice versa.
              A minimum 50-foot separation is recommended for other uses.
SAFETY                                                                                           | 08-8

        5.5   Hazardous materials transport routes. Identify roadways along which hazardous
              materials are routinely transported and if schools, medical facilities, child-care
              centers or other facilities with special evacuation needs are located along these
              routes, the City, together with these facilities, will identify emergency response
              actions that can be implemented if a roadway accident results in the unauthorized
              release of hazardous materials.
        5.6   Hazardous materials on public property. Reduce or eliminate the use of pesticides
              and herbicides that can have a negative impact on human health on city properties
              – especially in parks and publicly accessible open spaces.
        5.7   Green cleaning in public buildings. Require the City use green and non-toxic
              cleaning supplies in all public buildings to protect the health of workers and users of
              the facilities. Encourage school districts, health facilities, youth programs and local
              business within Coachella to use green and non-toxic cleaning supplies.
        5.8   Non-toxic alternatives. Encourage residents and businesses to reduce or eliminate
              the use of hazardous materials, including pesticides and herbicides, by using non-
              toxic, safer products and methods that do not pose a threat to the environment or
              by buying and using only the smallest amount of a hazardous substance needed for
              the job.
        5.9   Green dry cleaning. Promote and incentivize dry cleaning facilities that use
              environmentally friendly cleaning processes.
        5.10  Household hazardous waste collection. Increase awareness in the community about
              proper disposal/collection of leftover household products, especially those that
              contain corrosive, toxic, ignitable, or reactive ingredients that are considered to be
              "household hazardous waste.” Require special care for disposal or collection of
              products, such as paints, cleaners, oils, batteries and pesticides that contain
              potentially hazardous ingredients.
        5.11  Hazardous materials disposal. Continue to support the operation of programs and
              recycling centers that accept hazardous substances, such as paint, paint thinner,
              used waste oil, etc., such as the City’s Drop-Off facility.
Goal 6. Clean Environment. A community protected from the harmful effects of
        pollution and hazardous materials, hazardous waste and environmental
        contamination.
        Policies
        6.1   Clean drinking water. Work with the Riverside County Department of Environmental
              Health and community organizations to educate families about the health risks of
              drinking from potentially contaminated wells and provide options for the families to
              obtain safe and clean water.
        6.2   Water funding. Seek funding to ensure adequate infrastructure and service delivery
              to provide safe drinking water and access to an adequate wastewater system within
              Coachella and within the City’s sphere of influence.
SAFETY                                                                                             | 08-9

       6.3  Mold and lead hazards prevention. Partner with the Riverside County Environmental
            Health and Public Health Departments to provide education and technical assistance
            in reducing mold and lead hazards in homes.
       6.4  Agriculture-related hazards. Protect residents and workers from the sometimes-
            harsh conditions and potentially harmful consequences of agricultural operations
            while preserving the vitality of the industry.
       6.5  Worker safety. Work with the county and community groups to educate agricultural
            workers, their families and employers about minimizing exposure to pesticides while
            at work and preventing the spread of harmful pesticides from the field to their homes
            and families.
       6.6  Buffer zones. Create buffer zones between agricultural and residential areas,
            schools and other sensitive receptors to protect community members from pesticides
            and herbicides.
       6.7  Noticing. Work with the farms to provide education about and inform nearby
            residences, schools, businesses, etc. about upcoming pesticide sprays and how to
            avoid negative impacts.
       6.8  Pesticides on agricultural land. Create and periodically update a master database
            of local agricultural land, nurseries and greenhouses that includes, to the extent
            feasible, information on soil quality, past and present use of herbicides and
            pesticides, past occurrences of contaminant releases and other historical events that
            could pose a health risk, so the City has accurate information when considering new
            development proposals or soil-mitigation projects.
       6.9  Agricultural land project coordination. Work with the Riverside County Department
            of Environmental Health and the Agricultural Commissioner’s Office on regulating
            pesticide/hazardous materials upon conversion of an existing agricultural operation.
            Encourage property owners to coordinate with regulatory agencies concurrently with
            project design and development. A materials analysis (degree of contamination,
            scope of treatment, remediation and/or disposal measures) should be considered,
            initiated and documented in conjunction with the preliminary design, project review
            and construction. Develop a process to keep adjacent residents informed and
            protected throughout the stages of development, including the identification and
            remediation phases.
       6.10 Agriculture soil quality. Require testing of land previously used for agricultural
            purposes before new development. If contaminants are present, the soil must be
            treated and re-tested until levels are adequate, or if necessary, removed and
            replaced with clean soil, before any development on site.
       6.11 Soil Quality. Require soil testing for contaminants on sites that have historically, or
            currently, been exposed to chemical releases. If contamination does exist, require a
            remediation strategy to reduce or eliminate contamination on site.
       6.12 Conversion to organic farming. Incentivize the conversion of Coachella’s farms to
            organic methods of agriculture that do not use chemical pesticides and herbicides.
SAFETY                                                                                         | 08-10

        6.13  Pesticide education to businesses. Provide education to gardeners and landscape
              companies that do business in Coachella about alternatives to, and safer usage of,
              toxic pesticides and herbicides.
        6.14  Proximity to pollution sources. Avoid locating new sensitive uses such as schools,
              child-care centers, multifamily housing and senior housing in proximity to sources of
              pollution (e.g., I-10, truck routes, busy roadways and agricultural land where
              pesticides and chemical fertilizers are used regularly) and vice versa. Where such
              uses are located in proximity to sources of air pollution, use building design,
              construction and technology techniques to mitigate the negative affects of air
              pollution on indoor air quality. For guidance consult with the South Coast Air Quality
              Management District, CARB’s Air Quality and Land Use Handbook or other more
              recent scientific studies or tools.
        6.15  Regional air and water quality. Track and publicly support regional, state and
              federal efforts that improve air and water quality to protect human and environmental
              health and minimize disproportionate impacts on sensitive population groups.
Goal 7. Severe Weather Hazards. A community that is minimally affected by high
        winds, dust storms, extreme temperatures and drought.
        Policies
        7.1   Climate and health indicators. Monitor local changes in temperature, extreme heat
              days, heat waves, drought and precipitation patterns to inform policy and planning
              decisions.
        7.2   Public awareness. Develop a public awareness program, including educational
              materials, that provides information on what to do before, during and after a
              windstorm to protect life and property.
        7.3   Backup energy sources. Obtain and install backup power equipment for critical
              facilities to ensure they are functional during a power failure, resulting from a
              windstorm or earthquake, and ensure the equipment is in working condition at all
              times.
        7.4   Below ground utilities. Phase out and replace overhead electric lines with
              subsurface lines that will not be affected by fallen trees and branches during
              windstorms.
        7.5   Tree trimming. Enforce the national guidelines on tree trimming and vegetation
              management around electric transmission and communication lines to prevent or
              reduce the potential for felled branches or trees to cause power outages and
              disrupted communications.
        7.6   Monitor severe weather losses and climate change-related hazards. Monitor and
              regularly assess climate vulnerabilities. Create a database to track incidents of
              windstorms, dust storms and other severe weather events to develop a better
              understanding of the frequency, magnitude and costs associated with severe
              weather. Use this knowledge to determine the value of establishing a “bad weather”
              fund to pay for repairs, cleaning and other direct costs of severe weather.
              Periodically review the effectiveness of existing plans, programs, codes and
              ordinances in protecting health and safety
SAFETY                                                                                          | 08-11

        7.7   Populations at risk. Identify populations that, due to economic or other
              circumstances, do not have the resources to cool or heat their living environment
              during hot summers, or cold winters, and thus may be at risk for temperature-related
              illnesses or death. During high heat or extreme cold events, check on these
              individuals, and if necessary, transport them to cooling centers or heated shelters.
        7.8   Cooling centers and air conditioning. Work with the City’s emergency response
              team and community action partnership of Riverside County to expand access to the
              drop-in cooling centers for people vulnerable to high heat days. This should also
              include organizing a transportation-assistance program for individuals without access
              to vehicles, develop a robust heat warning system and provide up-to-date
              information to residents about cooling center locations and the health risks of
              extreme heat.
        7.9   Workers’ safety. Enforce Cal-OSHA’s Heat Illness Prevention Program, especially
              in the agricultural and construction sectors where employees are exposed to extreme
              heat conditions at outdoor worksites.
        7.10  Wind barriers. Encourage the preservation and establishment of additional wind
              barriers in the form of hedges and tree lines to reduce the effects of dust and sand.
        7.11  Best management practices during construction and planting. Enforce the use of
              water spray and other mitigation measures to control dust in grading and
              construction sites and in agricultural fields being prepared for planting. This may
              include prohibiting earthwork activities at construction sites and farms on windy days.
Goal 8. Disaster Preparedness. A community that has planned for emergency
        response and recovery from natural disasters, especially from
        earthquakes, flooding, and fire, and from civil unrest that may occur
        following a natural disaster.
        Policies
        8.1   Local Hazard Mitigation Plan: Maintain and update on a regular basis, as mandated
              by FEMA, a Local Hazard Mitigation Plan. Incorporate an assessment of climate
              change-related hazards in all future Local Hazard Mitigation Plan updates.
        8.2   Emergency response organization: Maintain and update the emergency response
              organization consisting of representatives from all City departments, the Riverside
              County Fire and Sheriff Departments, local quasi-governmental agencies, private
              businesses, citizens, and other community partners involved in emergency relief
              and/or community-wide emergency-response services.
        8.3   Ask the climate question. Consider and plan for climate change-related hazards
              when conducting disaster preparedness exercises.
        8.4   Regional hospital: Provide incentives to establish a new hospital in the region that
              includes extensive redundant systems, including generators and its own water
              storage, to provide medical emergency services to the area.
        8.5   Mutual aid: Continue to maintain mutual aid agreements with neighboring cities and
              the Riverside County Operational Area.
SAFETY                                                                                         | 08-12

       8.6  Emergency exercises: Participate in regional and local emergency exercises, such
            as the Great California ShakeOut, an annual statewide earthquake drill.
       8.7  Maintain critical facilities: Ensure to the fullest possible extent that, in the event of
            a major disaster, critical, dependent care and high-occupancy facilities remain
            functional. The Riverside County Fire Department, in their annual review of these
            facilities, will encourage owners and operators to maintain alternate emergency exits,
            emergency evacuation plans, emergency generators and anchor computers, shelving,
            and other non-structural elements.
       8.8  Sensitive facilities: Compile and maintain a list of facilities that because of
            population demands (such as mobility issues, construction type, location relative to a
            high hazard area or other factors) may have a high risk and specific needs requiring
            special response during a disaster.
       8.9  Public preparedness: Enhance public awareness and preparedness by encouraging
            residents and businesses to store supplies for self-reliance following a disaster.
            Emergency preparedness kits should include, at a minimum, a seven-day supply of
            drinking water and food for all members of the household or business, including
            pets.
       8.10 Earthquake-preparedness educational programs: Offer educational programs for
            residents and businesses regarding measures to take before, during, and after an
            emergency, and involve the public in the awareness of City emergency response
            plans, resources, risk reduction and mitigation measures.
       8.11 Changing fire hazards. When reviewing fire hazards, consider the increasing risk of
            wildfires and consider requiring enhanced fire protection measures.
       8.12 Flood-preparedness educational programs. Prepare and distribute informational
            materials to owners of properties within the flood zones (Zones A and X), as well as
            potential seismically induced inundation areas, regarding the potential for flooding in
            their area. It would include the potential for flooding of access routes to and from
            their neighborhoods. Continue to educate and remind the public of the risks of
            flooding and the uncertainties inherent in the flood hazard mapping.
       8.13 Periodic reminders: Periodically issue reminders to encourage residents to review
            and renew their earthquake-preparedness kits and other emergency preparedness
            materials and procedures.
       8.14 Emergency response training: Direct select City staff to coordinate with the
            Riverside County Fire Department and train in NIMS-compliant emergency response
            procedures to provide assistance as needed during emergency situations. This
            includes conducting emergency response exercises, including mock earthquake-
            induced fire-scenario exercises, to evaluate and improve, as needed, the City’s
            ability to respond to the multiple ignitions that an earthquake is likely to generate.
       8.15 Community training programs: Develop and hold regular training exercises that
            involve residents as much as possible, through the Community’s Emergency
            Response Team (CERT) program, to empower individuals and neighborhoods to be
            self-reliant in the aftermath of a natural or man-made disaster.
SAFETY                                                                                          | 08-13

       8.16 Emergency shelters: Review potential shelter locations and draw agreements, as
            needed, with the owners and operators of those facilities. Specific sheltering
            amenities that each of these facilities can provide, including restrooms and showers,
            whether cooking can be done on site, and whether family pets are allowed, should
            be identified so this information is available in advance of a disaster. Identify and
            procure shelter locations for horses and other large animals.
       8.17 Local preparedness plans: Continue to support the development of local
            preparedness plans and multi-jurisdictional cooperation and communication for
            emergency situations consistent with regional, state (SIMS), and federal standards,
            guidelines and/or recommendations (NIMS).
SAFETY                                                                                         | 08-14
This Element establishes the City’s long-term goals and policies for establishing and managing its
infrastructure systems and public services. City facilities and public services sustain and support the
smooth functioning and long-term health of the community. They require regular maintenance and
upgrading to meet the demands of a growing population and to improve their environmental
performance. The Infrastructure and Public Services Element provides information and policy guidance
to ensure the provision of public facilities and services in order to support existing and new
development in the City of Coachella.
Infrastructure decisions have widespread impact on housing, development, investment patterns and
quality of life. As Coachella grows, so does the need for additional buildings to accommodate City
personnel and infrastructure to provide capacity for everything from educational services to wastewater
management. It is imperative to coordinate the timing of new development with the provision of
adequate infrastructure, public facilities, and public services so services can keep pace with demand.
Additionally, existing facilities are costly to maintain and update, and reliable revenue sources are
required to maintain or replace aging infrastructure. At the same time, some existing facilities in
Coachella are in need of upgrades and/or replacement.
Services and opportunities should be available and accessible to everyone in the community. At the
same time, employment and economic benefits associated with building and maintaining infrastructure
should be shared as well. The means for collecting revenues to support infrastructure improvements
should be determined and applied in ways that are fair and do not disproportionately burden those with
lower incomes. New development should not have a negative impact on existing residents and should
contribute to City coffers so the current level of services can be maintained.
Policies supporting well-maintained infrastructure, excellent police as well as fire services are essential
to achieve broader development objectives and support the future envisioned by the residents of
Coachella. The Infrastructure and Public Services Element addresses the changing public service and
infrastructure needs and provides for their logical and timely expansion to keep pace with growth.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                      | 09-1

To achieve the community’s vision as presented in Chapter 1 of the General Plan, the Infrastructure
and Public Services Element is organized around the following broad goals.
   A healthy community with well maintained, efficient, high-quality public infrastructure facilities
    and services throughout the city. With tremendous growth potential on the horizon, the City needs
    fundamental parameters on how new infrastructure will be constructed and how those systems will
    be managed.
   Water supply facilities that meet future growth within the city and assure a high-quality and
    reliable supply of water to existing and future residents. As the City grows, it will be critical it
    continues to seek out new potable water and reclaimed water sources. Similarly, it is very important
    the City develop an adequate infrastructure plan and ensure new water infrastructure is phased in
    and funded by new development.
   Adequate and reliable sewer and wastewater facilities that collect, treat and safely dispose of
    wastewater. As with water supplies, it will be critical that the City continues to plan for and
    construct wastewater treatment and conveyance facilities to ensure it has the capacity to
    accommodate new development without having an impact to local water sources. It is also very
    important the City develop an infrastructure plan and ensure new wastewater infrastructure is
    phased in and funded by new development.
   Sufficient stormwater drainage facilities and services are environmentally sensitive,
    accommodate growth and protect residents and property. Proper planning now will help ensure
    the City can grow without increasing stormwater risks to new and existing development.
   An integrated solid waste management system that recycles resources locally and minimizes
    contributions to landfills. Just as the community desires to protect its environmental resources,
    minimizing waste generation is also an important goal. Future City efforts must also reduce waste
    generation so that the City can grow without substantively increasing its environmental footprint.
   Coachella residents, the business community and educational institutions are provided easy
    access to quality internet services, modern telecommunication services, and reliable energy
    throughout the City. Through collaboration with private and quasi-public utilities, Coachella can
    prepare for the provision of new services to future and existing residents and improve
    communication access without undue impact on the local environment.
   Improved public safety, increased fire safety and quality emergency medical services. Police and
    fire services are critical public services provided to the community and it will be very important that
    new development is coordinated with City services so as to protect existing service coverage.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                      | 09-2

Goals 1. Citywide Utilities. A healthy community with well maintained, efficient,
            high-quality public infrastructure facilities and services throughout the city.
            Policies
            1.1   Provision of service. Continue to provide and maintain adequate water, wastewater
                  and stormwater drainage utility services to areas currently receiving these services
                  from the City. Shall provide and maintain adequate water, wastewater, and
                  stormwater drainage utility services to areas in the City that do not currently receive
                  these services upon funding and construction of the infrastructure necessary to
                  provide these services.
            1.2   Service standards. Establish and maintain service standards for water, wastewater,
                  stormwater drainage and solid waste services.
            1.3   Cost-efficient services. Continue to provide sustainable utility services and
                  infrastructure in a cost-efficient manner.
            1.4   Development phasing. Ensure that new public facilities and services are phased in,
                  in conjunction with the approved urban development it’s intended to serve.
            1.5   New development infrastructure costs. Require new developments to provide
                  adequate facilities or pay its fair share of the cost for facilities needed to provide
                  services to accommodate growth without adversely impacting current service levels.
            1.6   Remedying inadequate capacities. Develop and implement a financing strategy and
                  assess fees to construct needed water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, and solid
                  waste facilities to maintain established service levels and to mitigate development
                  impacts to these systems (e.g., pay capital costs associated with existing
                  infrastructure that has inadequate capacity to serve new development). The City
                  shall also assist developers in identifying funding mechanisms to cover the cost of
                  providing utility services in infill areas.
            1.7   Infill. Identify and prioritize infill areas for infrastructure improvements.
            1.8   Joint-use facilities. Support the development of joint-use water, drainage and other
                  utility facilities as appropriate in conjunction with schools, parks, golf courses and
                  other suitable uses to achieve economy and efficiency in the provision of services
                  and facilities.
            1.9   Land use compatibility. Ensure public utility facilities are designed to be safe,
                  aesthetically pleasing, and compatible with adjacent uses.
            1.10 Minimized environmental impacts. Locate and design utilities to avoid or minimize
                  any impact to environmentally sensitive areas and habitats.
            1.11 Municipal districts. Coordinate with utility agencies to investigate, and possibly
                  create, a Municipal Utility District for the City to manage and distribute all local
                  utilities to residents, business, and government facilities.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                       | 09-3

Goals 2. Water Supply Facilities. Water supply facilities that meet future growth
            within the city and assure a high-quality and reliable supply of water to
            current and future residents.
            Policies
            2.1   Water rights. Exercise and protect City water rights and entitlements in perpetuity.
            2.2   Water Master Plan. Adopt and maintain a Water Master Plan with defined
                  infrastructure and facilities, capital improvement schedules and funding resources.
            2.3   Water service quality. Maintain water storage, distribution and treatment
                  infrastructure in good working condition in order to supply domestic water to all
                  users with adequate quantities, flow and pressure.
            2.4   Water supply planning. Prepare, implement and maintain long-term, comprehensive
                  water supply plans, like the Urban Water Management Plan.
            2.5   Water supply for new development. Ensure water supply capacity and infrastructure
                  capacity is in place before granting building permits for new development.
            2.6   Expanding water supply. If water supply is not adequate to supply new
                  development, require new water supplies be secured before granting building permits
                  for new development.
            2.7   Long-term water supply. Ensure the provision of water services is consistent with
                  the growth planned for the General Plan area, including the Sphere of Influence.
            2.8   Fair-share costs. Establish connection fees to ensure all development has adequate
                  infrastructure for the provision of water and require real property be dedicated when
                  new water facilities are required to serve a development.
            2.9   Water supply source protection. Protect local groundwater resources from localized
                  and regional contamination sources such as septic tanks, underground storage
                  tanks, industrial businesses and urban runoff.
            2.10 Infrastructure maintenance and repair. Replace and repair water distribution
                  infrastructure as needed to improve water delivery and fire flow; maintain healthy
                  and safe drinking water for all residents and businesses.
            2.11 Water conservation. Implement water conservation programs aimed at reducing
                  demands from new and existing development.
            2.12 Water conservation promotion. Promote water conservation through municipal
                  applications, public education, incentive programs and standards for new and
                  retrofitted development.
            2.13 Water-efficient landscaping. Require the use of water-efficient landscaping in all
                  new development.
            2.14 Grey water. Strongly encourage new development to utilize on-site grey water
                  systems.
            2.15 Reclaimed water. Expand the use of reclaimed water for irrigation and other
                  applications.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                   | 09-4
            2.16 Reclaimed water infrastructure. As existing water distribution infrastructure is
                   replaced, consider adding reclaimed water distribution systems to minimize
                   construction costs. To the extent feasible, the replacement should be concurrent with
                   major infrastructure or development projects within the City.
            2.17 Reclaimed water use. To promote water conservation and increase the use of
                   reclaimed water, use reclaimed water in City-owned parks, plazas, landscaped
                   medians and other public spaces and in privately-owned open spaces wherever
                   feasible.
            2.18 Groundwater replenishment. Cooperate with CVWD and other agencies to develop
                   groundwater replenishment programs to ensure viability of the groundwater aquifer in
                   the east Whitewater basin.
            2.19 Well contamination. Prepare management plans for wells that have been
                   contaminated for wells that have poor quality water to increase water quality.
Goals 3. Wastewater Systems. Adequate and reliable sewer and wastewater
            facilities that collect, treat and safely dispose of wastewater.
            Policies
            3.1    Wastewater treatment capacity. Provide sufficient wastewater conveyance, storage
                   and pumping capacity for peak sanitary sewer flows.
            3.2    Sewer Master Plan. Adopt and maintain a Sewer Master Plan with defined
                   infrastructure and facilities, capital improvement schedules and funding sources.
            3.3    Facility design. Ensure that public facilities and infrastructure are designed and
                   constructed to meet ultimate capacity needs to avoid the need for future upsizing.
                   For facilities subject to incremental upsizing, initial design shall include adequate
                   land area and any other elements not easily expanded in the future. Infrastructure
                   and facility planning should discourage oversizing of infrastructure which could
                   contribute to growth beyond what was anticipated in the General Plan.
            3.4    Wastewater treatment capacity for new development. Ensure that wastewater
                   treatment and conveyance capacity is in place before to granting building permits for
                   new development.
            3.5    Fair-share costs. Require new development fund fair-share costs associated with the
                   provision of wastewater service through the collection of development impact fees
                   and connection fees to ensure all development has adequate infrastructure for a
                   wastewater collection and treatment system.
            3.6    Expanding water supply. If water supply is not adequate to supply new
                   development, require new water supplies be secured before granting building permits
                   for new development.
            3.7    Long-term wastewater treatment capacity. Ensure the provision of wastewater
                   treatment capacity is consistent with the growth planned for the General Plan area,
                   including the Sphere of Influence.
            3.8    Illegal wastewater disposal. Abate illegal onsite wastewater disposal systems within
                   the incorporated area of the City and coordinate with the County and affected
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                       | 09-5
                  property owners to remediate inadequate or substandard onsite wastewater disposal
                  systems within unincorporated areas.
            3.9   Sewer system connections. Require connection to the sewer system of all new
                  development at densities of one unit per acre or greater. New development at rural
                  densities or in areas with extremely difficult and/or expensive sewer construction, for
                  example the Mecca Hills, may be accommodated by private septic systems provided
                  there are no negative health and safety impacts and subject to review and approval
                  by the City Council, the Coachella Sanitary District, the Riverside County
                  Environmental Health Department, the Coachella Valley Water District, and the
                  Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Goals 4. Stormwater Capacity. Sufficient stormwater drainage facilities and services
            that are environmentally sensitive, accommodate growth and protect
            residents and property.
            Policies
            4.1   Drainage System Master Plan. Adopt and maintain a Drainage System Master Plan
                  with defined infrastructure and facilities, capital improvement schedules and funding
                  sources.
            4.2   New stormwater facilities. Ensure all new drainage facilities are adequately sized
                  and constructed to accommodate stormwater runoff in urbanized areas.
            4.3   Regional stormwater facilities. Coordinate efforts with Riverside County and other
                  agencies in the development of regional stormwater facilities.
            4.4   Fair-share costs. Require new development fund fair-share costs associated with the
                  provision of stormwater drainage to ensure all development has adequate stormwater
                  drainage protection.
            4.5   New development. Require the preparation of drainage studies that evaluate
                  adherence to City stormwater design requirements and incorporate measures to
                  prevent on- or off-site flooding with all new development applications.
            4.6   Stormwater Pollution Prevention. Cooperate in regional programs to implement the
                  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program.
            4.7   Stormdrain monitoring. Routinely monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the
                  storm drain system and make adjustments as needed.
            4.8   Agricultural tile lines. Coordinate with CVWD to identify existing agricultural tile lines
                  to ensure the continued viability of the system.
            4.9   Property dedication. Require the dedication of real property and improvements of
                  that property when new stormwater drainage facilities are required to serve a
                  development.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                     | 09-6
Goals 5. Solid Waste Management. An integrated solid waste management system
            that recycles resources locally and minimizes contributions to the county
            landfill.
            Policies
            5.1   Lead by example. Serve as a role model to businesses and institutions regarding
                  purchasing decisions that minimize the generation of solid waste in addition to
                  encouraging all City staff to recycle at City facilities.
            5.2   Reduce use of toxics. Reduce the use of disposable, toxic, or nonrenewable
                  products in City operations.
            5.3   Solid Waste Diversion and Recycling. Meet or exceed the state’s solid waste
                  diversion requirements under AB 939.
            5.4   Zero waste. Strive for zero waste to landfills by 2040 through reusing, reducing and
                  recycling solid waste and using conversion technology if appropriate.
            5.5   Disposal capacity. Continue to coordinate with Riverside County in providing long-
                  term landfill disposal capacity.
            5.6   Hazardous materials. Prohibit the disposal of hazardous materials into the municipal
                  waste stream.
            5.7   Collection service. Provide trash collection services to commercial and residential
                  developments.
            5.8   Neighborhood clean-up program. Consider creation and sponsorship of a
                  Neighborhood Clean-Up Program.
            5.9   Greener waste management practices. Support on-going green waste recycling
                  efforts and facilitate composting opportunities for Coachella residents and businesses
                  in order to reduce surface ozone pollution and offset greenhouse gas emissions and
                  provide soil nutrients.
            5.10 Electronic waste. Coordinate with businesses that recycle electronic waste to
                  provide convenient collection/drop off locations for city residents.
            5.11 Education. Sponsor solid waste educational programs on backyard waste
                  composting and grasscycling (i.e., mulching grass clippings back into the lawn).
            5.12 Construction materials. Encourage use of recycled materials in new construction.
            5.13 Construction and demolition debris. Require recycling and reuse of construction
                  wastes, including recycling materials generated by the demolition and remodeling of
                  buildings, with a minimum diversion of 75% by weight.
            5.14 Recyclable materials. Encourage the use of recycled paper and other recycled
                  materials in all City operations.
            5.15 On-site collection and storage of recyclables. Require new public and private
                  buildings to be designed with on-site storage facilities for recycled materials.
            5.16 Public education. Expand public education programs about waste reduction and
                  diversion strategies
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                   | 09-7

Goals 6. Telecommunications and Utilities. Coachella residents, the business
            community and educational institutions are provided easy access to
            quality internet services, modern telecommunication services, and reliable
            energy throughout the city.
            Policies
            6.1   Private utilities. Work with private and quasi-public utilities to ensure the adequate
                  provision of energy and telecommunications service that meets the needs of the
                  community.
            6.2   Range of access. Work with service providers to ensure access to and availability of
                  a wide range of state-of-the-art telecommunication systems and services for
                  households, businesses, institutions and public agencies throughout the city.
            6.3   Expanding service. Work with utility companies to retrofit areas that are not served
                  by current telecommunication technologies and shall provide strategic long-range
                  planning of telecommunication facilities for newly developing areas, as feasible.
            6.4   Innovation. Encourage local industries, higher educational institutions and other
                  entities to support innovation in the design and implementation of state-of-the-art
                  telecommunication technologies and facilities.
            6.5   Co-location of facilities. Encourage compatible co-location of telecommunication
                  facilities and work with utility companies to provide opportunities for siting
                  telecommunications facilities on City-owned property and public right-of-ways.
            6.6   Smart communities. Establish requirements for the installation of state-of-the-art
                  internal telecommunications technologies in new large-scale planned communities,
                  office and commercial developments (e.g., wiring of all new housing and
                  businesses).
            6.7   High-voltage lines. Coordinate with the electrical utilities on the location of future
                  high voltage corridors and the effects produced by high voltage electrical facilities in
                  power corridors and electrical substations.
            6.8   Utility line undergrounding. Require undergrounding of all new publicly owned utility
                  lines, encourage undergrounding of all privately owned utility lines in new
                  developments and work with electricity and telecommunications providers to
                  underground existing overhead lines.
            6.9   Utility siting standards. Coordinate with the appropriate utility purveyors to develop
                  local standards for the location and design of natural gas, electrical and
                  telecommunications facilities where such improvements are visible along street
                  frontages.
            6.10 Transmission corridors. Encourage the shared use of major transmission corridors
                  and other appropriate measures as a means of preserving the aesthetic resources of
                  the City and to lessen the visual impact of such development. The City shall work
                  with the appropriate agencies in developing these corridors for recreational use.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                      | 09-8
Goals 7. Police and Fire Services. Improved public safety, increased fire safety and
            quality emergency medical services.
            Policies
            7.1   Quality of service. Provide courteous, responsive and efficient police services.
            7.2   Service efficiency. Strive to continuously improve the performance and efficiency of
                  the police department.
            7.3   Service ratio. To the extent feasible, raise the ratio of police officers to residents to
                  a minimum of 1.3 officers per 1,000 residents, and maintain personnel and facilities
                  in the police department necessary to provide the best response time feasible.
            7.4   Serving current and future growth. The police department will maintain adequate
                  police staffing, performance levels and facilities to serve the existing Coachella
                  population as well as its future growth.
            7.5   Review of new development. Encourage the police department will continue to work
                  with the Community Development Department to review and modify development
                  proposals to incorporate “defensible space” concepts and other public safety design
                  concepts into new development.
            7.6   Anti-crime programs. Develop anti-crime programs and implement them through
                  coordination with schools, neighborhoods, churches and other governmental
                  agencies.
            7.7   Alternative funding. Explore innovative options of funding additional sworn officers,
                  support staff and equipment through the use of federal and state grants.
            7.8   Development impacts. Require new development in the City to mitigate project-
                  related impacts to police and fire services.
            7.9   Fire service improvements. Work with the Riverside County Fire Department to
                  continuously improve the performance and efficiency of fire protection services for
                  Coachella.
            7.10 Fire service equipment. Work with the Riverside County Fire Department to ensure
                  adequate fire-fighting and EMS infrastructure, equipment and personnel to provide a
                  high level of fire and emergency medical service in Coachella to meet growing
                  demands.
            7.11 Fire service facility improvements. In coordination with the Riverside County Fire
                  Department and surrounding cities, support the replacement of old and outdated fire
                  facilities with new facilities containing the necessary infrastructure and design
                  features to adequately support fire and emergency functions for the area.
            7.12 Fire service response standards. Work with the Riverside County Fire Department
                  to manage the distribution of fire stations and seek goals of 2.0 personnel per
                  1,000 population, provide fire protection within a 1.5 mile radius from the fire
                  stations, and five-minute response times.
            7.13 Water pressure. Ensure that sufficient water service and pressure is available
                  throughout the City for use in firefighting.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                      | 09-9

            7.14 Service funding. Explore funding sources, such as impact fees from development or
                  parcel taxes, to ensure a high level of fire services for the City.
            7.15 Pre-emption technology. The Police, Fire and Public Works Departments shall
                  coordinate to install traffic signal pre-emption technology for emergency response
                  vehicles in appropriate locations in the City, as funding and capital programming
                  allow.
            7.16 Fair-share contributions. Establish a development impact fee program that requires
                  individual development projects to pay fair-share contributions to public safety
                  infrastructure needs.
INFRASTRUCTURE + PUBLIC SERVICES                                                                   | 09-10
The Noise Element of the General Plan is a comprehensive program for including noise control in the
planning process. It is a tool for local planners to use in achieving and maintaining land uses that are
compatible with environmental noise levels. The Noise Element identifies noise sensitive land uses and
noise sources, and defines areas of noise impact for the purpose of developing and implementing
programs to ensure that Coachella residents will be protected from excessive noise intrusion.
Approximately 1,339 acres (27.7%) of Coachella’s 4,924 acres of non-agricultural or vacant land are
residential, and those are considered the most noise-sensitive. Other noise-sensitive land uses include
schools, hospitals and other long-term care medical facilities, libraries and parks.
The predominant noise source in Coachella, as in most communities, is motor vehicles. The city
includes a range of facilities including regional freeways, major highways and other arterials, and
collector and local streets. The highest volume roadways in the city are SR111, which runs northwest to
southeast through the community and is referred to as Indio Boulevard north of Harrison Street and
Grapefruit Boulevard south of Harrison Street; the SR86S freeway, which parallels SR111 about one
mile east on the other side of the Whitewater River; and Harrison Street, which runs north to south
through the middle of Coachella from SR111 and beyond the southern city limits. Other major sources of
noise in Coachella include the railway that runs through Coachella along the east side of SR111 and
factories, processing and distribution facilities such as the Coronet Concrete plant located on the
northwest corner of Grapefruit Boulevard and 1st Street. Other, less significant noise sources in
Coachella include aircraft overflights, air conditioning units and other mechanical equipment on
buildings, landscaping equipment and human speech. None of these sources significantly contribute to
overall noise levels when compared to traffic noise. The airport closest to Coachella is Jacqueline
Cochran Regional Airport, located approximately two miles south of central Coachella on the south side
of Airport Boulevard. Additional details on the noise environment, measurement locations, and projected
future noise contours can be found in Appendix A.
As Coachella continues to grow, traffic levels and traffic-related noise is expected to increase. As
demonstrated in this Noise Element, noise levels are forecast to exceed City standards in some areas if
not properly attenuated. The goals and policies below reflect the City’s fundamental responsibility and
desire to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the community from excessive noise, as
defined in the City’s Land Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix, shown in Figure 10-1: Coachella Land
Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix.
NOISE                                                                                                | 10-1

Figure 10-1: Coachella Land Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix
Figure 10-1 shows which land uses are satisfactory within different noise environments. Green indicates an acceptable
noise level within which a use could be located. Red indicates an unacceptable noise level within which a use could be
located.
                                   LAND USE CATEGORIES                                                                    CNEL
               CATEGORIES                                             USES                               55     60     65       70     75     80
                                              Single Family, Duplex,
 RESIDENTIAL                                  Multiple Family
 RESIDENTIAL                                  Mobile Homes
 COMMERCIAL - Regional, District              Hotel, Motel, Transient Lodging
 COMMERCIAL - Regional, Village               Commercial Retail, Bank, Restaurant, Movie
 District, Special                            Theater
 COMMERCIAL                                   Office Building, Research and Development,
 INDUSTRIAL                                   Professional Offices, City Office Building
 INSTITUTIONAL
 COMMERCIAL - Recreation                      Amphitheater, Concert Hall
 INSTITUTIONAL - Civic Center                 Auditorium, Meeting Hall
                                              Children’s Amusement Park, Miniature Golf Course,
 COMMERCIAL - Recreation                      Go-cart Track, Equestrian Center, Sports Club
 COMMERCIAL - General, Special                Automobile Service Station, Auto Dealership,
 INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL                    Manufacturing, Warehousing, Wholesale, Utilities
                                              Hospital, Church, Library,
 INSTITUTIONAL - General                      School Classroom
 OPEN SPACE                                   Parks
                                              Golf Couse, Cemeteries,
 OPEN SPACE                                   Nature Centers, Wildlife Reserves, Wildlife Habitat
 AGRICULTURE                                  Agriculture
 INTERPRETATION
 ZONE A (GREEN)                               Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal
 CLEARLY COMPATIBLE                           construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
 ZONE B (YELLOW)                              New construction or development should be undertaken only after an analysis of the noise reduction
 NORMALLY COMPATIBLE                          requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design are determined.
                                              Conventional construction, with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will
                                              normally suffice.
 ZONE C (ORANGE)                              New construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or development does
 NORMALLY INCOMPATIBLE                        proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise
                                              insulation features included in the design.
 ZONE D (RED)                                 New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
 CLEARLY INCOMPATIBLE
 * Construction of new residential uses will not be allowed within the 65 dBA CNEL contour for airport noise.
NOISE                                                                                                                                          | 10-2

Goal 1. Land Use Planning and Design. A community where noise compatibility
        between differing types of land uses is ensured through land use planning
        and design strategies.
        Policies
        1.1   Noise Compatibility. Use the City’s Land Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix shown in
              Figure 10-1 as a guide for planning and development decisions.
        1.2   Noise Analysis and Mitigation. Require projects involving new development or
              modifications to existing development to implement mitigation measures, where
              necessary, to reduce noise levels to at least the normally compatible range shown in
              the City’s Land Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix in Figure 10-1. Mitigation measures
              should focus on architectural features, building design and construction, rather than
              site design features such as excessive setbacks, berms and sound walls, to maintain
              compatibility with adjacent and surrounding uses.
        1.3   Mixed Use. Require mixed-use structures and areas be designed to prevent transfer
              of noise from commercial uses to residential uses, and ensure a 45 dBA CNEL level
              or lower for all interior living spaces.
        1.4   County and Regional Plans. Periodically review county and regional plans for
              transportation facilities and airport operation, to identify and mitigate the potential
              impact of noise on future development.
        1.5   Airport Land Use Planning. Comply with all applicable policies contained in the
              Riverside County General Plan Noise Element relating to airport noise, including
              those policies requiring compliance with the airport land use noise compatibility
              criteria contained in the airport land use compatibility plan for Jacqueline Cochran
              Regional Airport; and those policies prohibiting new residential land uses, except
              construction of single-family dwellings on legal residential lots of record, within the
              60 dB CNEL contour of this airport.
        1.6   Land Use and Community Design. Except in cases where noise levels are in the
              clearly incompatible range as shown in the City’s Land Use/Noise Compatibility
              Matrix shown in Figure 10-1, prioritize the building design and character policies in
              the Land Use and Community Design Element over those in the Noise Element to
              ensure that new development meets the design vision of the City.
NOISE                                                                                             | 10-3

Goal 2. Stationary Source Noise. A community where excessive noise from
        stationary sources is minimized.
        Policies
        2.1   Noise Ordinance. Minimize noise conflicts between neighboring properties through
              enforcement of applicable regulations such as the City’s noise ordinance.
        2.2   Noise Control. Minimize stationary noise impacts on sensitive receptors and noise
              emanating from construction activities, private developments/residences, landscaping
              activities, night clubs and bars and special events.
        2.3   Entertainment Uses. Require entertainment, restaurants, and bars engage in
              responsible management and operation to control activities of their patrons on-site,
              within reasonable and legally justifiable proximity to minimize noise impacts on
              adjacent residences and other noise-sensitive receptors, require mitigation, as
              needed, for development of entertainment uses near noise-sensitive receptors.
        2.4   Industrial Uses. Require industrial uses engage in responsible operational practices
              that minimize noise impacts on adjacent residences and other noise-sensitive
              receptors require mitigation as needed for development of industrial uses near noise-
              sensitive receptors.
Goal 3. Mobile Source Noise. A community where excessive noise from mobile
        sources is minimized.
        Policies
        3.1   Roadway Noise. Where roadway noise exceeds the normally compatible range
              shown in the City’s Land Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix shown in Figure 10-1,
              implement policies listed under Goal 1 to reduce the impacts of roadway noise on
              noise-sensitive receptors.
        3.2   Traffic Calming. Where roadway noise exceeds the normally compatible range
              shown in the City’s Land Use/Noise Compatibility Matrix shown in Figure 10-1,
              consider the implementation of traffic calming measures such as reduced speed
              limits or roadway design features to reduce noise levels through reduced vehicle
              speeds and/or diversion of vehicle traffic.
        3.3   Railway Noise. Ensure noise from rail lines is taken into account during the land
              use planning and site development processes.
NOISE                                                                                          | 10-4

                                                           11 | HOUSING
INTRODUC TION
The Housing Element addresses existing and future housing needs for persons of all economic groups
in the city. The Housing Element is a tool for use by citizens and public officials in understanding and
meeting the housing needs in Coachella.
Recognizing the importance of providing adequate housing in all communities, the State has mandated
a housing element within every general plan since 1969. It is one of the seven elements required by
the State. Article 10.6, Section 65580–65589.8, Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government
Code sets forth the legal requirements of the housing element and encourages the provision of
affordable and decent housing in all communities to meet statewide goals. Specifically, Section 65580
states that the element shall consist of “identification and analysis of existing and projected housing
needs and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives, financial resources and scheduled
programs for the preservation, improvement, and development of housing.” The element must also
contain a housing plan with quantified objectives for the implementation of the goals and objectives of
the housing element. The contents of the element must be consistent with the other elements of the
general plan.
Meeting the housing needs established by the State is an important goal for the City of Coachella. As
the population of California continues to grow and scarce resources decline, it becomes more difficult
for local agencies to create adequate housing opportunities while maintaining a high standard of living
for all citizens in the community. State law recognizes that housing needs may exceed available
resources and therefore does not require that the City's quantified objectives be identical to the
identified housing needs. This recognition of limitations is critical, especially during this period of
financial uncertainties in both the public and private sectors.
Section 65583(b)(2) states, “It is recognized that the total housing needs…may exceed available
resources and the communities’ ability to satisfy the need. Under these circumstances, the quantified
objectives need not be identical to the identified existing housing needs but should establish the
maximum number of housing units that can be constructed, rehabilitated, and conserved over a five-
year time frame.”
PU R POS E
The State of California has declared that “the availability of housing is of vital statewide importance and
the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California family is a
priority of the highest order.” In addition, government and the private sector should make an effort to
provide a diversity of housing opportunities and accommodate regional housing needs through a
cooperative effort, while maintaining a responsibility toward economic, environmental, fiscal factors, and
community goals within the General Plan.
State housing element law requires “an assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources
and constraints relevant to the meeting of these needs.” The law requires:
HOUSING                                                                                                  11-1

•    An analysis of population and employment trends
•    An analysis of the City’s fair share of the regional housing needs
•    An analysis of household characteristics
•    An inventory of suitable land for residential development
•    An analysis of the governmental and non-governmental constraints on the improvement,
     maintenance, and development of housing
•    An analysis of special housing needs
•    An analysis of opportunities for energy conservation
•    An analysis of publicly assisted housing developments that may convert to non-assisted housing
     developments
The purpose of these requirements is to develop an understanding of the existing and projected housing
needs within the community and to set forth policies and schedules, which promote preservation,
improvement, and development of diverse types and costs of housing throughout Coachella.
OR GA N I ZATI ON OF TH I S ELEM EN T
The Housing Element contains community goals; housing goals, policies, and actions; and quantified
objectives. The Housing Element is supported by the Housing Technical Appendix (Appendix B of the
General Plan), which provides the following:
•    Public Participation. This section highlights the public participation process and outcomes.
•    General Plan Consistency. This section outlines state requirements and identifies how this Housing
     Element is consistent with the other elements of the City’s General Plan.
•    Community Profile. This section provides information about demographic trends, household
     characteristics, special needs groups, and affordable housing units at risk of converting to market-
     rate housing units.
•    Housing Opportunities and Resources. This section includes the City’s fair-share housing allocation,
     the inventory of vacant residential land, financial resources for affordable housing, and opportunities
     for energy conservation.
•    Housing Constraints. This section provides information and analysis of various governmental and
     non-governmental constraints to the development of affordable housing.
OUR COMMUNIT Y ’S GOALS
The Housing Element is designed to address existing and future housing needs of all types for persons
of all economic groups in the city. During the Housing Element update process, the citizens of
Coachella, along with the City Council and the Planning Commission, provided their ideas for how the
City should address these housing issues. They identified the unique aspects of the city as well as the
vision for the growth as Coachella transforms from a small town into a medium-sized city. As part of
this process, the community identified key land use and community design concepts, described below,
which are the foundation both for the City’s future land-use vision and the development of General Plan
designations and for the specific goals and policies contained in this element, as well as elsewhere in
the General Plan.
HOUSING                                                                                                   11-2

To achieve the community’s vision, the Housing Element is organized around the following broad goals:
•  Adequate housing in the city by location, price, type, and tenure, especially for those of low and
   moderate income and households with special needs.
•  Balanced growth in the city with residential development constructed at suitable sites.
•  Conservation and improvement of the existing affordable housing stock within the city.
•  Reduced residential energy usage within the city resulting in reduced housing costs.
•  Equal housing opportunities for all residents of the city regardless of race, religion, marital status,
   age, sex, nationality, physical or developmental disability, family size, and level and source of
   income.
•  Maintenance, improvement, and development of housing commensurate with local needs.
•  Adequate housing to meet the needs of all economic segments of the community.
•  Preservation of existing affordable housing opportunities for lower-income residents of the city.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION AC TIONS
Goal 1.     Adequate Housing. Adequate housing in the city by location, price, type,
            and tenure, especially for those of lower income and households with
            special needs.
            Policies
            1.1   Land Use Controls. Use the Land Use Element of the General Plan and the Zoning
                  Code to ensure the availability of adequate sites for a variety of housing types.
            1.2   Varying Densities. Employ a range of housing densities to provide housing for all
                  economic segments of the community consistent with good planning practice.
            1.3   Infill and Contiguous Land. Maximize use of vacant land within the city and
                  contiguous to existing development in order to reduce the cost of off-site
                  improvements and create a compact city form.
            1.4   Compatible Uses. Ensure the compatibility of residential areas with surrounding uses
                  through the separation of potentially hazardous or damaging uses, construction of
                  adequate buffers, and other planning and land use techniques.
            1.5   Housing Downtown. Promote higher-density and mixed-use redevelopment within
                  the downtown area.
            1.6   Services and Facilities. Require that adequate public and private services and
                  facilities are or will be provided to all new residential developments as a prerequisite
                  for their approval.
            1.7   Adaptive Reuse. Investigate the adaptive reuse of vacant commercial structures in
                  the downtown area for housing, possibly in a mixed-use fashion.
            1.8   Innovative Construction. Promote and encourage the use of innovative construction
                  techniques.
HOUSING                                                                                                   11-3

IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS
Action 1.1: The City will adopt the updated General Plan Land Use Element to provide for a wide
            range of housing opportunities, suitable for residents of all income levels. Following
            General Plan adoption, the City will conduct a study that analyzes changes needed to
            the Zoning Code to implement the new General Plan and will then complete a
            comprehensive Zoning Code update. Once the City's General Plan and Zoning Code
            are adopted, the City's standards will:
            •    Provide adequate, suitable sites for the construction of new housing, reflecting a
                 variety of housing types and densities;
            •    Explore and establish mechanisms such as incentives and funding to promote and
                 preserve housing affordability in targeted growth areas;
            •    Meet the requirements of state housing law;
            •    Facilitate housing in a variety of neighborhood styles;
            •    Allow mixed-use residential development; and
            •    Ensure the compatibility of residential areas with surrounding commercial and other
                 nonresidential uses.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                      Funding: Department budget
                      Time Frame: General Plan update adopted in early 2014, Compatibility Study
                      completed by 2014, Zoning Code updated by 2015, Examine potential
                      affordable housing incentives annually or as needed when projects are
                      proposed, establish incentives in conjunction with the Zoning Code update by
                      2015.
Action 1.2: Continue to utilize environmental and other development review procedures to ensure
            that all new residential developments are provided with adequate public and private
            facilities and services. Require documentation of the adequate services and facilities
            that are or will be provided as a condition of approval.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                      Funding: Department budget
                      Time Frame: Ongoing, 2014–2021
Action 1.3: While the new General Plan standards will create ample opportunity for higher-density
            housing appropriate to meet the lower-income RHNA for the 2008–2014 and 2014–
            2022 planning periods, zoning standards are not yet in place to facilitate development
            at planned General Plan densities. Thus, as part of the planned Zoning Code update,
            the City will ensure that the new zoning standards facilitate housing development at
            new General Plan densities to accommodate the remaining 2008–2014 RHNA of 1,916
            units and the remaining 2014–2022 RHNA of 2,542 lower-income units. Potential
            rezone sites are listed in Table B-49. It is anticipated that sites rezoned to meet this
            remaining RHNA will be those located in the Urban Neighborhood and Urban
            Employment land use areas, which have planned minimum densities of 20 and 30 units
            per acre, respectively.
HOUSING                                                                                              11-4

            The City will ensure that sites made available through zoning changes to meet the
            Coachella’s remaining 2008–2014 RHNA and remaining 2014–2021 lower-income
            RHNA meet the following criteria:
            •    Require a minimum density of 20 units per acre
            •    Be of adequate size to accommodate at least 16 units per site
            •    Allow multi-family residential development “by right” (without discretionary review)
            •    At least 50 percent of sites will allow residential uses only
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development and Building Departments
                      Financing: Department budgets
                      Time Frame: Sites will be made available within one year of Housing Element
                      adoption.
Action 1.4: Evaluate opportunities for parcel assembly and the use of underutilized sites for
            affordable housing. Discuss housing development potential with developers and consider
            relaxing development standards and prioritizing application processing to facilitate
            housing on these sites. Communicate with developers regarding the variety of housing
            development options available for these sites under the new General Plan.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                      Funding: Department budget
                      Time Frame: Ongoing, 2014–2021
Action 1.5: Regularly post housing data, such as information on building permits, vacancy rates,
            and availability of funding sources, on the City’s website and provide the information in
            a hard copy, available upon request.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                      Funding: Department budget
                      Time Frame: 2014; updated every 6 months thereafter
Action 1.6: Encourage developers to provide units with three or more bedrooms, suitable to house
            large households. In addition, identify incentives for development of housing suitable for
            families with children, with family members requiring assistance, and multigenerational
            families. Encourage and where feasible incentivize developers to construct new units
            that include a full bathroom and bedroom on the first floor.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                      Funding: Department budget
                      Time Frame: Offer incentives and work with developers as projects are
                      processed through the Community Development Department.
Action 1.7: Consider preparing a study to explore the benefits and impacts of an inclusionary
            housing ordinance. The study will:
            •    Determine an appropriate percentage of affordable units and potential level of
                 affordability;
HOUSING                                                                                              11-5

                •    Analyze potential program options including the provision of below market rates on-
                     and off-site as well as land dedication and in-lieu fee options; and
                •    Examine administrative resources required to administer an inclusionary program.
                          Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                          Funding: Department budget
                          Time Frame: 2014
Action 1.8:     Facilitate development on large sites designated for high-density housing by
                communicating with developers regarding housing opportunities for these sites, providing
                priority subdivision processing, and utilizing the new Master Plan review process (as
                described in the draft General Plan Land Use Element) to facilitate affordable unit
                development. Work with land owners and developers to create sites ranging from one to
                10 acres in size that are feasible and appropriate for the development of affordable
                housing.
                          Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                          Funding: Department budget
                          Time Frame: Adopt the Master Plan process as part of the new General Plan in
                          early 2014; engage in ongoing dialogue with developers; and offer priority
                          subdivision processing as applications are submitted.
Goal 2.     Conservation and Improvement. A preserved and well-maintained existing
            affordable housing stock.
            Policies
            2.1     Rehabilitation Funds. Continue to use available state and federal funds for housing
                    rehabilitation, in a manner that will benefit the largest number of lower-income
                    households, including those with extremely low income.
            2.2     Overcrowding. Allow utilization of rehabilitation assistance funds to alleviate
                    overcrowded conditions.
            2.3     Unit Rehabilitation. Encourage the rehabilitation of substandard dwelling units
                    instead of requiring their demolition, whenever possible, to preserve the existing
                    affordable housing stock.
            2.4     Neighborhood Enhancement. Utilize the neighborhood enhancement capabilities of
                    the City to ensure that property owners renting unsanitary and unsafe housing units
                    correct identified code violations.
            2.5     Code Enforcement. Ensure that all new housing units constructed in the city are
                    safe and livable through vigorous enforcement of the Uniform Building Code.
            2.6     Substandard Units. Pursue the removal and replacement of substandard units that
                    cannot be rehabilitated.
            2.7     Neighborhood Character. Preserve the physical character of existing neighborhoods.
HOUSING                                                                                                11-6

IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS
Action 2.1: Continue to implement the City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program as funding is
            available. Allow funds to be used to alleviate overcrowding, make improvements to
            accommodate the special needs of elderly and disabled residents, including persons
            with developmental disabilities, and improve energy efficiency. The City will continue to
            advertise the program on the City’s website, share program information with service
            organizations, and post program information in City Hall.
                     Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                     Funding: CDBG and HOME
                     Time Frame: Ongoing
Action 2.2: Continue to monitor housing conditions throughout the city, and periodically conduct
            formal housing condition surveys.
                     Responsible Agencies: Community Development and Building Departments
                     Funding: Department budgets and (for housing condition surveys) CDBG
                     Planning/Technical Assistance Grants
                     Time Frame: 2014 and as funding is available through 2021
Action 2.3: Continue to implement the abandoned and vacant property ordinances, enforce
            proactive neighborhood enhancement policies, and explore new methods of eliminating
            unsightly property conditions in residential areas.
                     Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                     Funding: Department budget
                     Time Frame: Ongoing, 2014–2021
Action 2.4: Continue to monitor health and safety issues related to substandard mobile home parks
            located within the city limits and those within the City’s sphere of influence. Explore
            funding opportunities for a loan or grant program to assist with mobile home unit and
            park repairs and improvements as well as mobile home ownership.
                     Responsible Agency: Coachella Community Services Department
                     Funding: Department budget
                     Time Frame: Explore program by 2015, monitoring ongoing
Action 2.5: Maintain a representative and an alternate to the CVAG Housing Committee to
            consistently represent the City in discussions regarding housing issues.
                     Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, City Council
                     Funding: General Fund
                     Time Frame: Annually
Action 2.6: Participate in the SAFE Cities Committee and in other groups and committees that bring
            together public safety, neighborhood enhancement, and regional representatives.
                     Responsible Agency: Economic Development Department
HOUSING                                                                                             11-7

                         Funding: General Fund
                         Time Frame: Ongoing
Action 2.7:     Work with Riverside County, Riverside County LAFCO, Coachella Valley Water District,
                the Coachella Valley Regional Water Management Group (CVWRMG), and local
                advocacy organizations to identify and address housing-related infrastructure needs in
                disadvantaged unincorporated communities within and adjacent to the City’s sphere of
                influence. The City will participate in outreach and information gathering events and
                strategy sessions, contribute to efforts to identify and estimate the cost of potential
                infrastructure improvements including the preparation of the Integrated Regional Water
                Management Plan (prepared by CVWRMG), and pursue funding sources to complete
                necessary upgrades.
                As a condition of approval for development in new growth areas, require that
                developers plan for and construct oversized facilities to create infrastructure connection
                opportunities for nearby disadvantaged communities. Coordinate with agencies and
                communities groups to explore annexation potential and timeframes.
                         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                         Funding: General Fund
                         Time Frame: Attend events as available, engage in ongoing communication with
                         Riverside County and other organizations, assist with funding applications as
                         NOFAs are released, require infrastructure extensions as development
                         agreements are prepared in new growth areas, engage in ongoing dialogue
                         (meet at least annually) to determine annexation potential and timeframes.
Goal 3.     Reduced Energy Usage. Reduced residential energy usage within the city,
            resulting in reduced housing costs.
            Policies
            3.1     Conservation Techniques. Encourage the use of energy-conserving techniques in
                    the siting and design of new housing.
            3.2     State Requirements. Actively enforce state energy conservation requirements for
                    new residential construction.
            3.3     Resource Reduction Education. Make local residents aware of the free home
                    surveys performed by the Coachella Water Authority as a means to reduce water
                    consumption and the rebate programs offered by the Imperial Irrigation District and
                    Southern California Gas Company.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS
Action 3.1:     Continue to utilize the development review process to incorporate energy conservation
                techniques into the siting and design of proposed residences to minimize energy
                consumption as well as housing costs
                         Responsible Agencies: Community Development and Building Departments
                         Funding: Department budgets
                         Time Frame: Ongoing
HOUSING                                                                                                  11-8

Action 3.2:     Continue to require that, at a minimum, all new residential development complies with
                the energy conservation requirements of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
                           Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                           Funding: Department budget
                           Time Frame: Ongoing
Action 3.3:     Assist in distributing information to the public regarding free home water consumption
                audits of the Coachella Water Authority and rebate programs offered by Imperial
                Irrigation District.
                           Responsible Agency: IID, Community Development Department
                           Funding: N/A, materials provided by IID
                           Time Frame: Ongoing
Action 3.4:       Assist in distributing information about energy efficiency retrofit rebates and financing
                  opportunities available to the residents and property owners such as Energy Upgrade
                  California, the New Solar Homes Partnership, and the Western Riverside Council of
                  Governments HERO program.
                           Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                           Funding: N/A, materials provided by rebate/financing programs
                           Time Frame: Ongoing
Goal 4.     Equal Housing Opportunity. Equal housing opportunities for all residents
            of the city regardless of race, religion, marital status, age, sex, nationality,
            physical or developmental disability, family size, and level and source of
            income.
            Policies
            4.1      Equal Opportunity. Advocate equal housing opportunity for all residents.
            4.2      Fair Housing. Utilize local fair housing agencies to investigate promptly and
                     aggressively any complaints involving housing discrimination.
            4.3      Tenant and Landlord Education. Promote greater awareness of tenant and landlord
                     rights.
            4.4      Handicapped Access. Promote handicapped access in new housing developments
                     and in existing housing.
            4.5      Emergency Shelters. Assist and support local social service agencies in their
                     applications for federal funds to provide emergency shelters for homeless individuals
                     and families.
            4.6      Special Needs Housing. Encourage the development of housing to meet the needs
                     of elderly, large family, and female-headed households.
            4.7      Unit Sizes. Promote the provision of sale and rental housing to meet the needs of
                     families of all sizes.
HOUSING                                                                                                    11-9
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS
Action 4.1: Continue to provide information on fair housing law on the City’s website, at City Hall,
            and at the local library. In addition, the City Clerk shall continue to include a statement
            to City utility bills which indicates that information on fair housing laws is available to
            the public without charge. Information will be provided in both English and Spanish.
            Complaints may be directed to the Community Development Department.
                      Responsible Agency: City Manager’s Office, Community Development
                      Department, City Clerk
                      Funding: Department budget
                      Time Frame: Ongoing, 2014–2021
Action 4.2: Adopt a “Reasonable Accommodation” procedure, in accordance with SB 520, as part
            of the updated Zoning Code to allow for administrative processing of requests for
            features and accessibility for persons with disabilities and persons with developmental
            disabilities.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                      Funding: City General Fund
                      Time Frame: 2015, as part of the comprehensive Zoning Code update
Action 4.3: Amend the Zoning Code to define transitional and supportive housing in accordance
            with the Health and Safety Code, Sections 50675.14 and 50675.2, and specify that
            both types of housing shall be treated as residential uses of property, subject to the
            same restrictions/regulations as other types of housing in the same zoning district.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development and Building Departments
                      Funding: City General Fund
                      Time Frame: Within one year of Housing Element adoption
Action 4.4: Continue to actively support efforts of providers who establish short-term bed facilities
            for segments of the homeless population including specialized groups such as the
            mentally ill and the chronically disabled.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                      Funding: General Fund
                      Time Frame: Ongoing, 2014–2021
Action 4.5: Amend the Zoning Code to include manufactured housing as an approved housing type,
            as per State of California requirements.
                      Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning
                      Commission
                      Funding: City General Fund
                      Time Frame: 2015, amendment will be completed as part of the comprehensive
                      Zoning Code update
HOUSING                                                                                                11-10

Action 4.6:  Revise the Zoning Code to allow State-licensed and unlicensed group homes, foster
             homes, residential care facilities, and similar facilities; to allow, by right, group homes
             with six or fewer persons in any residential zone; and to allow with administrative
             approval group homes with greater than six persons in all high-density residential
             zoning districts.
                       Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                       Funding: Departmental budget
                       Time Frame: Within one year of adoption of this Housing Element
Action 4.7:  Amend the Zoning Code to ensure that permit processing procedures for farmworker
             housing do not conflict with Health and Safety Code Sections 10721.5 and 17021.6.
             The City will also ensure that such procedures encourage and facilitate the development
             of housing for farmworkers.
                       Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning
                       Commission
                       Funding: Departmental budgets
                       Time Frame: Within one year of adoption of this Housing Element
Action 4.8:  Amend the Zoning Code to define single-room occupancy units (SROs) and identify
             zones in which SROs are allowed. Facilitate the development of SROs as appropriate
             housing type for persons with special needs and extremely low incomes.
                       Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning
                       Commission
                       Funding: Departmental budgets
                       Time Frame: Within one year of adoption of this Housing Element
Action 4.9:  Amend the Zoning Code to broaden the definition of “family” in keeping with state and
             federal law and current best practices to protect the rights of persons with disabilities
             and nontraditional families.
                       Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning
                       Commission
                       Funding: Departmental budgets
                       Time Frame: Within one year of adoption of this Housing Element
Action 4.10: Encourage the development of housing for farmworkers by assisting developers with site
             identification and providing technical assistance on funding applications. In addition, the
             City will develop an informational brochure illustrating the possible funding sources and
             other potential incentives for the development of farmworker housing and provide this
             brochure at the Community Development Department and on the City web site.
                       Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Planning
                       Commission
                       Funding: Departmental budgets
HOUSING                                                                                                11-11

                          Time Frame: Assist farmworker housing developers as needed, prepare and
                          make brochure available within one year of Housing Element adoption
Goal 5.     Remove Constraints. Policies, standards and programs that facilitate the
            maintenance, improvement, and development of housing commensurate
            with local needs.
            Policies
            5.1     Building and Zoning Codes. Periodically reexamine local building and zoning codes,
                    in light of technological advances and changing public attitudes, for possible
                    amendments to reduce housing construction costs without sacrificing basic health
                    and safety considerations.
            5.2     Development Fees. Charge development fees that do not unreasonably contribute to
                    the cost of housing.
            5.3     Site Improvement Assistance. Continue to financially assist with land and/or off-site
                    improvements costs for lower-income housing projects, as funds become available.
            5.4     Expedited Processing. Continue practice of expeditious processing of residential
                    development proposals and permits.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS
Action 5.1:     Upon adoption of the General Plan, the City will conduct a study that analyzes changes
                needed to the Zoning Code to implement the new General Plan and will then complete
                a comprehensive Zoning Code update. The updated Zoning Code will build on concepts
                outlined in the General Plan to incorporate the use of innovative land use techniques
                and construction methods such as clustering of units, density transfers, zero lot line
                development, and others to minimize housing development costs and to maximize
                development opportunities.
                          Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                          Funding: Department budget
                          Time Frame: Every five years
Action 5.2:     Periodically (every five years) survey other cities in the Riverside County area to
                ensure that the City’s development fees are reasonable and do not pose an
                unreasonable constraint to housing development.
                          Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                          Funding: Department budget; possible CDBG Planning/Technical Assistance
                          Grant
                          Time Frame: 2015 and 2020
Action 5.3:     Encourage concurrent processing of entitlements to foster an environment conducive to
                business, allowing various analyses and staff reports to be done at the same time,
                rather than requiring one process to be completed before beginning the next process.
                Department staff will notify applicants early in development process of this policy and
                maintain public notice of the City’s policy on the website.
HOUSING                                                                                                11-12

                         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                         Funding: Department budget
                         Time Frame: Ongoing, 2014–2021
Action 5.4:     Review revisions to the Zoning Code to evaluate implementation of reduced parking
                requirements for residential projects serving special needs groups or for projects located
                close to public transportation or commercial services.
                         Responsible Agency: Community Development and Building Departments
                         Funding: Department budgets
                         Time Frame: 2015 as part of the comprehensive Zoning Code update
Action 5.5:     Amend the Zoning Code to allow second units with ministerial review (rather than a
                Conditional Use Permit) in the R-O-6000 zone. Review second unit requirements and
                identify zoning changes to facilitate second unit development as part of the
                comprehensive Zoning Code update.
                         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                         Funding: Department budget
                         Time Frame: 2015 as part of the comprehensive Zoning Code update
Action 5.6:     Monitor residential development under the new General Plan land use categories.
                Review densities proposed for new development, correspond with developers, and
                assess how the new densities are or are not working to facilitate housing development,
                particularly affordable housing units.
                         Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                         Funding: Department budget
                         Time Frame: Review annually
Goal 6.     Adequate Housing/Housing Affordability. Adequate housing to meet the
            needs of all economic segments of the community.
            Policies
            6.1    Construction Costs. Consider the use of innovative land use techniques and
                   construction methods to minimize housing construction costs without compromising
                   basic health, safety, and aesthetic considerations.
            6.2    State and Federal Funding. Investigate and pursue state and federal programs and
                   funding sources designed to expand housing opportunities for lower-income and
                   special needs households, including extremely low-income households, farmworkers,
                   the elderly, and persons with physical and developmental disabilities.
            6.3    CDBG and HOME Funds. Apply for CDBG, HOME, and other funds to provide
                   affordable housing opportunities for extremely low-income and low- to moderate-
                   income households.
HOUSING                                                                                                11-13

            6.4      On-site Affordable Units. Encourage the inclusion of lower-income units, including
                     extremely low-income and moderate-income units, in privately sponsored multi-family
                     housing developments.
            6.5      Affordable Unit Financing. Work with local lending institutions to maximize private
                     financing for the construction of new lower-income housing, including extremely low-
                     income units, and moderate-income housing.
            6.6      Developer Marketing. Actively market Coachella to housing developers through
                     appropriate advertisements in development publications and in metropolitan area
                     newspapers.
            6.7      New Assisted Units. Promote the construction of new assisted housing units in the
                     city for lower-income households, including those with extremely low income.
IMPLEMENTATION        ACTIONS
Action 6.1:     When feasible, continue to defer development fees for housing units affordable to
                extremely low-, very low-, and low-income households.
                           Responsible Agencies: Community Development, Building, and Public Works
                           Departments
                           Financing: Department budgets
                           Time Frame: Ongoing, as projects are processed through the Community
                           Development Department
Action 6.2:     Continue to work with nonprofit and for-profit developers to apply for financing to fund
                the development of housing affordable to lower-income and special needs households,
                particularly housing that will serve persons with extremely low incomes, farmworkers,
                the elderly, and persons with disabilities and developmental disabilities. Funding sources
                may include, but are not limited to, the USDA Section 515 Rural Housing Program,
                MHP, Joe Serna Farmworker Housing Grant Program, CalHome, Low Income Housing
                Tax Credits, and tax-exempt bonds. The City will be open to providing letters of support
                for funding applications; the City will also consider partnerships with nonprofits for
                utilization of City staff to help write and to review project applications. The City will take
                actions necessary to expedite processing and approvals for such projects.
                           Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                           Funding: General Fund, HCD
                           Time Frame: Assist with funding applications as needed, 2014–2021; annually
                           review potential funding opportunities
Action 6.3:     Continue to pursue funding for the construction and rehabilitation of affordable housing,
                including annual applications for HOME and CDBG funds. The City will work with
                nonprofit and for-profit housing developers and will take actions necessary to expedite
                processing and approvals for such projects.
                           Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                           Funding: HCD
                           Time Frame: Apply for funding annually, 2014–2021
HOUSING                                                                                                    11-14

Action 6.4:     Continue to offer a density bonus in keeping with state law (Government Code Section
                65915).
                          Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                          Funding: Department budget
                          Time Frame: Ongoing, 2014–2021
Action 6.5:     As part of the City’s website update, the City will include housing-related resources
                including information regarding the City’s housing rehabilitation program, first-time
                homebuyer loans, loans available through CalHFA, and other relevant links.
                          Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                          Funding: CalHFA First-Time Homebuyer Program
                          Time Frame: 2015, as part of the City’s comprehensive website update
Goal 7.     Housing Preservation. Preservation of existing affordable housing
            opportunities for lower income residents of the city.
            Policies
            7.1     Preservation Funding. Utilize federal, state, and local funding to preserve lower-
                    income rental housing to the extent possible.
            7.2     Preservation Cooperation. Work closely with nonprofit organizations and public
                    agencies involved in the provision of affordable housing to preserve existing lower-
                    income rental units in the city.
            7.3     Displacement Prevention. Investigate the establishment of procedures to prevent the
                    displacement of lower-income residents from assisted housing units that may convert
                    to market-rate housing in the future.
IMPLEMENTATION       ACTIONS
Action 7.1:     Actively support the Riverside County Housing Authority’s attempts to secure additional
                Section 8 rental assistance for low-income households.
                          Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                          Financing: HUD Section 8 Certificate and Housing Voucher Programs
                          Time Frame: Ongoing
Action 7.2:     Monitor and assist in the preservation of affordable units at risk of converting to market
                rate. Actions will include:
                •    Monitor the Risk Assessment report published by the California Housing Partnership
                     Corporation (CHPC).
                •    Maintain regular contact with the local HUD office regarding early warnings of
                     possible opt-outs.
                •    Maintain contact with the owners and managers of existing affordable housing to
                     determine if there are plans to opt out in the future and offer assistance in locating
                     eligible buyers.
HOUSING                                                                                                 11-15

                  •   Maintain the list of potential purchasers of at-risk units and act as a liaison between
                      owners and eligible purchasers.
                  •   Ensure that all owners and managers of affordable housing are provided with
                      applicable state and federal laws regarding notice to tenants of the owner’s desire
                      to opt-out or prepay. State law requires a 12-month notice.
                           Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                           Funding: HCD
                           Time Frame: As needed and ongoing, 2014–2021
QUANTIFIED OBJEC TIVES
Quantified objectives estimate the number of units likely to be constructed, rehabilitated, or
conserved/preserved by income level during the planning period. The quantified objectives do not
represent a ceiling on development, but rather establish a realistic estimate based on needs, resources,
and constraints.
•   The construction objective refers to the number of new units that are likely to be constructed using
    public and/or private sources over the planning period of the Housing Element, given the City’s
    land resources, constraints, and proposed programs.
•   The rehabilitation objective refers to the number of existing units expected to be rehabilitated during
    the planning period.
•   The conservation/preservation objective refers to the preservation of the existing affordable housing
    stock throughout the planning period.
Each quantified objective is detailed by income level as shown in Table 1. The City will strive to meet
the new construction goals of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (refer to the Housing Resources
and Opportunities section in the Housing Technical Appendix for analysis of the allocation) of 6,771
units. However, the new construction estimate is based on actual construction trends for the past 10
years in Coachella, during which an average of 436 new units were constructed per year. As funding
permits, the City will provide loans to assist with the rehabilitation of 80 units through loans and
rehabilitate additional homes through code enforcement efforts, and preserve the 30 affordable housing
units that are at risk of converting to market rate, existing section 8 housing units, and existing
residential units serving households at all income categories.
Table 1: Quantified Objectives by Income Level, 2014–2021
                               Extremely     Very Low     Low          Moderate     Above         Total
                               Low                                                  Moderate
New Construction                       384           384         558           628        1,534         3,488
Rehabilitation 1
                                        30            60          70            60           40           260
Conservation/Preservation               10            10          50            20           20           110
Total                                  424           454         678           708        1,594         3,858
Source: City of Coachella 2013
HOUSING                                                                                                     11-16

For some topics in this General Plan, the new adopted policies are sufficient to realize certain goals. However,             Coachella is a smaller city, with big ideas and a clear vision of its future. The City staff and elected officials
most goals will require additional implementation actions to help make those operational. This section ties together         welcome and encourage community organizations, the business community, other public agencies, neighborhood
the goals and policies in the General Plan. The following pages contain actions organized under each of the                  groups and passionate individuals to help implement many of these actions. The City and community members
General Plan Elements (except for Housing) to realize the vision for Coachella's future. These are generally one-            have endorsed all of the action items below. While, some items are marked as “low” priority, that should not
time actions needed to mobilize and execute specific policies within the General Plan, such as creating an                   preclude any partner organization or individual from making it a “high” priority in their own work in collaboration with
ordinance or updating a master plan. The actions are in the following order:                                                 the City.
      1.   Land Use + Community Design (LU)
      2. Mobility (M)
      3. Community Health + Wellness (CHW)
      4. Sustainability + Natural Environment (SNE)
      5. Safety (S)
      6. Infrastructure + Public Services (IPS)
      7. Noise (N)
In the matrix that follows, each implementation action includes the following information:
  #                   ACTION DESCRIPTION                   PRIORITY                                                      TIME FRAME                                              RESPONSIBILITY                 RELEVANT GOALS
  Each action is      An actionable description of the     Action items are marked as “High”, “Medium”, or “Low”         A broad timeframe that refers to when the action        Identification of the          List of goal(s) that the action item
  numbered as a       implementation action. Some          depending on community and staff input throughout the         should be implemented. The timeframes are as            agency or department           will help implement. Goals will be
  comprehensive       actions include end-note references  process. Some of the criteria that helped determine priority  follows:                                                responsible for                listed with the Element title
  list for each       to supportive background material    included:                                                              Immediate – Current/ongoing projects or       implementing the action.       acronym and the goal number. For
  element             or example projects.                         Cost.                                                          within one year of Plan adoption.                                            example an action that implements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Goal 3 from the Land Use +
                                                                   Feasibility.                                                  Short – Within 2 to 4 years of Plan                                          Community Design Element and
                                                                   Whether the action would help engage and empower               adoption.                                                                    Goal 2 from the Community Health
                                                                    residents.                                                    Medium – Between approximately 5 and 7                                       + Wellness Element, this column
                                                                                                                                   years of Plan adoption.                                                      would contain “LU-3, CHW-2”.
                                                                   Whether action could improve or enhance existing
                                                                    programs/infrastructure (instead of create something          Long – 10+ years after Plan adoption.
                                                                    new).                                                         Ongoing – Reoccurring or immediate
                                                                                                                                   action.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 12-1

  #   ACTION DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                           PRIORITY TIME     RESPONSIBILITY RELEVANT
                                                                                                                                                                                            FRAME                   GOALS
  1.  Zoning ordinance update. Following the adoption of the General Plan, update Coachella’s Zoning Ordinance. The City Council and planning staff should e xplore                   High     Short      Planning      LU-1
      and/or modify the following items in addition to others in line with the Plan’s vision. The zoning consistency analysis can be found in Appendix C.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU-2
             Update the zoning code and official Zoning Map to comply with and implement the General Plan Designations and General Plan Designation Map.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU-3
             Update the zoning code to encourage creative leisure and recreational uses in transit accessible and walkable areas.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU-5
             Create a park once district.
             Establish climate-appropriate, design guidelines that recommend best practices for passive heating and cooling in Coachella’s climate.                                                                    M-1
             Develop an incentive program that will assist developers in revitalizing existing structures.                                                                                                             M-4
             Develop an incentive program to encourage and assist developers to develop along transit routes and to revitalize existing structures.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M-7
             Create bicycle parking and storage requirements for all new development (or remodeling/rebuilding to the extent feasible) to cover a broad range of bike parking
              needs, including parking in multi-family residential dwellings, employee parking for commuters and general purpose parking in commercial areas, civic facilities                                         CHW-5
              and parks. Collaborate with the School Districts to provide adequate bicycle parking facilities for students and staff.                                                                                  CHW-8
             Require a certain proportion or number of units in each residential development to include universal design elements, ensuring easy modifications to                                                     CHW-9
              accommodate wheelchairs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SNE-1
             Establish community gardens in appropriate locations and set forth basic regulations for community gardens, such as creation, maintenance, and operating rules.
             Allow food gardening by right in residential open space areas, including front, back, and side yard space.                                                                                               SNE-2
             Prevent schools and other sensitive receptors from locating near known or expected new sources of air pollution and vice versa. The specific “safe” distance from a                                      SNE-4
              pollution source is dependent on the source and amount of pollution releases; however, a good rule of thumb is at least 500 feet from busy roadways, highways,                                           SNE-5
              and stationary sources.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SNE-9
             When permitting new child-care facilities, require them to submit a customized, or adopt a standard, wellness policy plan to address physical activity programs,
              interdisciplinary nutrition education and provide meals and snacks that are consistent with current guidelines established by the US Department of Agriculture.                                         SNE-11
             Allow physicians and other medical providers to convert foreclosed or other vacant residential structures into neighborhood health clinics. The City may set
              restrictions (such as hours of operation, parking, signage, and services offered) to ensure the clinic is not a burden to the neighborhood.
             Strive for and encourage all new health and social service facilities to be transit-accessible and pedestrian-friendly. Work with Sun Line to improve transit routes
              and Sun Dial (Dial a Ride) access to service related facilities.
             Encourage the co-location of medical healthcare, mental/behavioral health and social services to increase access to care.
             Update development standards and/or create a development checklist to incorporate climate change adaption techniques into the development process.
             Establish minimum tree planting requirements and guidelines for different sub areas, development types, street trees and parking lot landscaping to ensure the
              City’s urban forest/tree canopy is extensive and well maintained. These requirements should also address drought tolerant and native plants and landscaping to
              reduce overall water usage.
             Allow and encourage the creation of legal accessory dwelling units (ADUs) to enhance the diversity of housing options in existing residential neighborhoods. ADUs
              may be detached or attached to the principal structure.
             Require below market rate units to come in a mix of sizes/number of bedrooms to address the need for affordable housing for different household types.
             Require developers/contractors to recycle at least 50 percent of all construction and demolition waste.
             Allow and incentivize renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies.
             Identify and remove regulatory or procedural barriers to implementing green building practices within the City, such as updating codes, guidelines and zoning, and
              ensure that all plan review and building inspection staff are trained in green building design practices and techniques.
             Identify appropriate buffers between agricultural and urban uses.
             Develop standards to provide for cluster development and conservation design to minimize the impacts of urban development on areas where sensitive species
              are identified.
             Identify standards for green roofs.
             Create guidelines/requirements for permeable paving.
             Expand allowances for home occupations/businesses in residential areas.
             Reduce parking minimum requirements in projects where the developer conducts a traffic study to determine that unbundled parking and other measures will
              reduce the number of spaces required per unit.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 12-2

  2.  Design guidelines update. Update the City’s design guidelines to encourage human-scale urban design at the neighborhood-, block-, and building-scale to promote         Medium Medium          Planning       LU-2, LU-3
      walkability and social interaction. Elaborate and expand upon the contents of the Land Use + Community Design and Mobility Elements. Guidelines should specify
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Engineering         LU-5
      how development along existing and planned transit lines should provide convenient, direct and safe connections to nearby transit stops and integrate transit stops
      into public space designs.                                                                                                                                                                                      LU -6
  3.  Healthy development review. Work with the Riverside County Department of Public Health to create a development review process to analyze the health and social           High   Short          Planning          LU-3
      equity impacts of development proposals prior to the beginning of the CEQA review process. This could include the creation of a checklist that includes a key set of
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Engineering
      high priority questions related to how the project affects the food, recreation, and active transportation environments; affordability and access; pollution and toxics
      exposure; local wealth creation and other topics deemed relevant. The City can choose to integrate this review into the approval process. For larger or more                             County Public Health
      complex projects the City may partner with others (the County Public Health Department, community groups, independent consultants, universities, etc.) to compile
      a more extensive health impact assessment.
  4.  Community engagement process protocols. Work with community groups and the school district to create minimum protocols for community outreach and                        High   Short          Planning         LU-15
      engagement processes for different types of municipal decisions so community members can easily learn about input opportuniti es and know how best to
                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Clerk
      contribute. These protocols should be utilized by all City departments and could include a single electronic database/spreadsheet of institutions, community groups,
      business, and interested individuals who want to receive meeting announcements; a list of public outreach methods ; Spanish translation/interpretation guidance (in                         School District
      what cases to use); social media strategies; youth engagement; provision of food and child-care at public meetings; and other related items. The City should also                      Local community groups
      consider purchasing translation headsets to support increased inclusion.
  5.  Sphere of Influence update. Update the City’s Sphere of Influence to exclude undevelopable land in Sub-Area 17.                                                         Medium Medium          Planning          LU-1
  6.  Open space conservation strategy. Create an open space conservation program that prioritizes which open space lands to preserve. Emphasize the creation of a            Medium Medium          Planning          LU-2
      citywide greenbelt to achieve conservation goals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Parks          LU-4
  7.  Economic development strategic plan. Develop a long-term economic development strategy that develops and retains businesses and a strong middle class in                 High   Short          Planning          LU-2
      Coachella for the decades to come. The plan should place a strong importance on creating quality jobs in Coachella for existing Coachella re sidents, career support
                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Manager        LU-7
      programs and lifelong education, and professional development. The plan should also highlight the community’s desire for indu stries that use a “triple bottom line”
      (health/people, environmental sustainability and profit) and invest back into Coachella’s local economy.                                                                                        Finance         LU-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Library        LU-11
  8.  Fiscal impact assessment fees. Establish guidelines and create a fiscal impact assessments fee structure for new projects over 20 acres.                                 High  Medium          Planning         LU-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Finance
  9.  Historic preservation study. Study neighborhoods with a significant number of buildings over 50 years old to determine whether historic districts should b e             Low   Ongoing         Planning          LU-1
      established. Create and maintain an inventory of historic and pre-historic sites, structures and landmarks of historic and cultural significance in order to determine
      the potential impact on these resources from proposed projects.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 12-3

  #   ACTION DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                               PRIORITY TIME            RESPONSIBILITY            RELEVANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                FRAME                                     GOALS
  1.  Complete streets manual. Develop a complete streets manual to ensure new roadway construction addresses all modes of travel to implement complete stre et                           High    Ongoing LU-3         Engineering           M-1
      principles. This manual should include the following components, which the City can write as stand-alone chapters over time:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Public Works          LU-3
               Multi-modal street guidelines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning            LU-5
                    o    Review, identify and implement - Review existing roadways in the City to identify what enhancements are appropriate for specific facilities to better
                         accommodate additional modes of travel and increase connectivity. Implement guidelines within the Complete Streets Design Manu al that can be                                               Grants Manager
                         constructed in lieu of roadway and intersection widening.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Public Works
                    o    Create standards – Design and document standards for typical roadway right-of-way widths and types that include specifications for bicycle
                         facilities, sidewalks, turn lanes, intersections, crosswalks, transit facilities and other details.                                                                        LU
                    o    Multi-modal level of service – Develop traffic study guidelines that address the impact on all users including automobile drivers and passengers,
                         bicyclists, pedestrians, persons with disabilities and transit riders. Consider revising traditional vehicle level of service (LOS) with methodologies
                         more inclusive of other modes such as the multi-modal level of service (MMLOS). The City should update these guidelines on an ongoing basis as
                         Coachella continues to grow and as new research and technology becomes available.
               Pedestrian and bicycle action plan
                    o    Pedestrian and bicycle design guidelines – Develop pedestrian and bicycle design guidelines that identify pedestrian requirements such as sidewalk
                         width, offset from the curb and other criteria for sidewalks along roadways. Bicycle guidelines and requirements should ensure that bicycle facilities
                         connect all areas of the city including new and existing developments, regardless whether these areas have gates, sound walls or other barriers. The
                         guidelines should also contain design specifications for on- and off-street bike paths and bike lanes,, street markings, dimensions, intersections, turning
                         lanes, signage and bicycle parking standards. The guidelines should also consider installing drinking water fountains along key bicycle and pedestrian
                         routes.
                    o    Prioritization plan – Prepare a prioritization plan for the creation and improvement of sidewalks in existing neighborhoods and bicycle facilities throughout
                         the City.
                    o    Subdivision retrofits program – Review existing subdivisions to identify those neighborhoods that can be retrofitted to accommodate additional pedestrian
                         and bicyclist connections.
                    o    Active transportation requirements – Develop guidelines that require future residential and commercial developments in the City enhance and connect to
                         external bicycle and pedestrian networks.
                    o    Pedestrian and bicycle network map update – Create and update Citywide map (or two maps) of pedestrian and bicycle facilities on a recurring interval of
                         no less than two years and ensure the map(s) is/are accessible to the public.
                    o    Active transportation programs – In addition to design and policy, the plan should contain programs to complement infrastructure improvements such as
                         safety education or a bike sharing programs.
               Complete streets funding - On an ongoing basis, pursue grants to implement the multi-modal streets in Coachella, including but not limited to funding
                from federal and state agencies, philanthropic organizations and corporate giving programs.
  2.  Traffic calming program. Develop a citywide program that implements a mechanism to apply traffic calming features to neighborhood roadways in a systematic                          High     Medium              Engineering           M-2
      fashion. This program should incorporate a strong element of public involvement to obtain resident feedback and input to identify appropriate improvements from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Public Works
      each neighborhood.
  3.  Temporary car-free zones program. Develop a program with a simple application process for community event organizers to apply for temporary street closure                         Medium     Short              Public Works          M-3
      permits necessary to create car-free events that allow people to safety walk, bike, socialize and exercise in the streets.
  4.  Signage program. Implement a signage program for bicycle facilities that documents connections to regional facilities, bicycle parking and community facilities                    Medium     Short              Public Works          M-4
      along existing and future bicycle facilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Engineering
  5.  Walking, cycling and public transit education. Develop an active transportation awareness and safety education program in partnership with community groups,                        Low      Medium             School District        M-3
      schools, other public agencies; employers to educate residents, workers, drivers, businesses and other organizations about the benefits of walking, bicycling, and/or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 County Health Department
      using public transit.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Engineering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 12-4

  6.  Transit supportive environments. Collaborate with Sun Line Transit Agency to identify and enhance those existing areas of the City where the land uses,                    High   Short    Sun Line    M-5
      development intensity and the pedestrian environment are conducive to higher levels of transit service and usage.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Engineering
              Bus stop location review. Review existing bus stop locations to determine their accessibility to key destinations such as schools, residential areas, r etail
               centers and civic facilities. Work with Sun Line to relocate existing bus stop locations as needed to provide greater access to key community destinations.
              Bus stop prioritization. Prioritize those bus stop locations that are connected to bicycle and pedestrian facilities to help meet users’ last mile travel needs.
              Transit service prioritization. Work with Sun Line to prioritize future transit service in those areas where the greatest level of transit ridership will occur
               based on the supportive land use and transportation patterns.
              Development incentives. Explore and develop incentives to encourage higher-density, transit-friendly development along these transit routes.
  7.  Transit service improvements for seniors. Meet with Sun Line Transit and community groups annually to identify transit service changes and improvements to                Medium Ongoing  Engineering  M-5
      accommodate the mobility needs of seniors.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sun Line
  8.  Travel survey. Implement a regular travel survey in association with Sun Line Transit for Coachella residents to identify their commute patterns every two to five         Low   Medium    Planning    M-5
      years.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Engineering
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sun Line
  9.  Operations and maintenance annual reports. Prepare annual reports disclosing incremental operations and maintenance costs associated with new                             Medium  Short   Engineering  M-6
      transportation infrastructure built in the City over the past year.
                                                                                                                                                                                               Public Works
  10. Transportation
          F            infrastructure maintenance funding. Investigate funding mechanisms to maintain existing transportation infrastructure based on existing                   High   Short   Engineering  M-6
      development such as assessment districts. Citywide traffic fee programs should also be updated on a recurring interval of not less than every five years.
  11. Traffic data collection program. Implement a traffic data collection program on a recurring interval of no less than two years. The program should collect data on        Medium Medium   Engineering  M-7
      peak and non-peak traffic counts, bicycling and pedestrian counts for key intersections, transit ridership and automobile collision locati ons, especially ones that
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sun Line
      involved a pedestrian cyclist, or alcohol usage.
  12. Driver education programs. Work with community groups or other public agencies to educate motorists about safely sharing the road with bicyclists, pedestrians,            Low   Medium   Engineering  M-3
      and transit vehicles; child restraint laws; fuel efficient driving; and common causes of preventable collisions to promote overall safety of multi-modal streets users.
  13. Improve traffic flow. Implement traffic features such as roundabouts or the use of integrated signalization to improve traffic flow and reduce emissions from vehicle     Medium Medium   Engineering SNE-11
      idling and stop and start.
                                                                                                                                                                                               Public Works
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                          | 12-5

   #    ACTION DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                              PRIORITY TIME        RESPONSIBILITY                 RELEVANT
                                                                                                                                                                                 FRAME                                      GOALS
   1.   Health impacts in staff reports. Collaborate with the Riverside County Department of Public Health to create and implement the use of a health impacts             High    Immediate             Planning              CHW-1
        protocol to help assess and disclose the health co-benefits and impacts of new construction, capital improvement projects and other land use decisions. The
                                                                                                                                                                                             Riverside County Department of
        protocol should provide guidance on a range of health topics and include objective criteria. The protocol’s results should be included in city council and
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Public Health
        planning commission staff reports. When appropriate, seek review assistance from the Riverside County Department of Public Health in completing the
        assessment.
   2.   Healthy budget items. Create a process and criteria that helps staff and elected officials make budget decisions about programs and capital improvement            High      Short            City Manager             CHW-1
        projects that could improve health and equity in Coachella.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Human Resources
        A potential approach could include:
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning
                 Train department leadership on health equity.
                 Create health and equity criteria to help departments prioritize budget items.                                                                                                         Finance
                 Encourage each department to identify one or more health objectives for their annual budget.                                                                                         Engineering
                 Ensure budget items leverage opportunities to improve health co-benefits.                                                                                                           Public Works
   3.   Community oversight. Expand the role of an existing commission or create an ad hoc committee to advise the city council and planning commission on the             High     Ongoing              Planning              CHW-1
        implementation of the Community Health and Wellness Element and other health-related issues.
   4.   Workplace wellness. Identify a workplace wellness team and create a model workplace wellness program for City employees. The team should assess                    High     Ongoing           City Manager             CHW-1
        employee health needs and implement workplace wellness programs and events. Some possible actions include offering employee incentives for healthy
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning              CHW-7
        eating and physical activity; smoking cessation programs; group fitness or diet programs; health screenings; physical activity breaks for meetings over one
        hour in length; accommodate breastfeeding employees upon their return to work; and encourage walking meetings and use of stairways. The City should
        share this model workplace wellness program information with local employers to encourage the adoption of similar practices. The City can provide incentives
        (such as priority permit processing) to “healthy employers” who provide employee health benefits such as paid sick days, health insurance, gym membership,
        among others.
   5.   Support events. Host, co-sponsor, and/or organize citywide community health events such as health fairs, educational talks, and workshops, to support             Medium    Ongoing            City Council            CHW-1
        positive health behaviors.
   6.   Mobile home park environmental checklist. Work with community partners to create a mobile home park checklist to assess compliance with health and                 High      Short          Code Enforcement           CHW-2
        safety regulations for a recurring site inspection program.
   7.   Foreclosure prevention. To prevent foreclosures and to help families who are already in the foreclosure process, work with local community partners t o do the    Medium    Ongoing         Code Enforcement           CHW-2
        following:
                 Identify key information such as the number, location, value, condition and owners of foreclosed properties ;
                 Create bi-lingual information and self-help resources (to post on the City’s website and in City offices) to help residents prevent and cope with the
                  foreclosure process.
                 Sponsor a home economics/finance education class for first time homebuyers.
                 Pass and enforce a foreclosure registration ordinance that applies to both vacant and occupied buildings.
                 Work with utility companies to transfer account holder names in lieu of shutting off service in foreclosure properties.
   8.   Homelessness plan and services. Review the Valley Wide Homelessness Plan and existing homeless services and shelters in the Eastern Coachella Valley to                     Ongoing              Planning              CHW-2
        determine gaps in services and housing. Implement the most applicable strategies for Coachella and focus on helping homeless persons in high visibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Manager
        areas (like Harrison street or Veterans’ Park) who detract from perceptions of public safety. Work with community organizatio ns to create supportive housing
        for homeless community members.                                                                                                                                                                   CVAG
                                                                                                                                                                                               Riverside County Homeless
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Programs Unit
   9.   Healthy building resources. Create healthy building material checklists and fact sheets that can be provided to property owners and contractors when                         Short               Building              CHW-2
        applying for building permits.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 12-6

   #    ACTION DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                  PRIORITY TIME        RESPONSIBILITY               RELEVANT
                                                                                                                                                                                     FRAME                                    GOALS
   10.  Tobacco retail licensing fee. Adopt a tobacco retail licensing fee and penalties that would allow more stringent oversight and enforcement of tobacco sales to                  Medium      Police Administration        CHW-3
        minors.
   11.  Smoke-free public events and facilities. Ban smoking at outdoor public events and public facilities, including farmers’ markets, public parks and trails, and                   Ongoing         Public Works             CHW-3
        community street fairs.
   12.  Second- and third-hand smoke exposure. Research and adopt an ordinance that bans smoking in multi-unit residential buildings and care/convalescent                               Short             Planning              CHW-3
        facilities. Before an ordinance is passed, educate single- and multi-family property owners and managers about the effects of second-and third-hand smoke
        and encourage them to include anti-smoking policies in rental agreements. Connect property owners to resources (such as model lease language) if they
        want to ban smoking in their rental units.
   13.  Smoke-free worksites. Write and adopt an ordinance that bans smoking: in outdoor dining areas, within 30 feet of unenclosed waiting areas, within 30 feet of                     Short             Planning              CHW-3
        enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, in hotel rooms, in retail stores dealing exclusively in the sale of tobacco and s moking paraphernalia, and in
        unenclosed places of employment.
   14.  Teen and youth needs. Assess the City’s entertainment/recreation resources every three years with the participation of Coachella youth to ensure their needs                    Ongoing            Planning              CHW-8
        are met and to curb the influence of gang affiliation/violence.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         City Council
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Police
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Desert Recreation District
   15.  Safe teen activities. Streamline the process for community organizations to provide after-hours, weekend, and drug- and alcohol-free programming for youth                       Short       Park and Recreation         CHW-8
        in public spaces and facilities.                                                                                                                                                                  Committee
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Public Works
   16.  Senior programs. Assess the overall needs of Coachella’s older adult population every three years, in order to plan the appropriate type, quantity and schedule                  Short          Senior Center            CHW-4
        of senior programs and activities. The assessment should also address senior transportation and funding mechanisms.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Administration
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Planning
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Desert Recreation District
   17.  Community events. Streamline the permit process for block parties, street fairs and neighborhood events that promote positive interactions, build                              Immediate        Public Works             CHW-1
        relationships and attract residents from surrounding communities.
   18.  Crime prevention through environmental design. Train one or more city employees in crime prevention through environmental design ( CPTED) principles so                          Short             Planning              CHW-4
        they can review and improve the safety of development plans and existing developments with strategies such as building doors/ entrances and windows to
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Building
        look out on to streets and parking areas; pedestrian-friendly sidewalks and streets; front porches and adequate nighttime lighting.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Engineering
   19.  Police-community forums. Organize annual community forums with the police department, residents and local businesses to improve relationships and                              Immediate            Police               CHW-4
        address public safety related to gangs, prostitution, illegal drug sales/use, and general safety around schools and parks.
   20.  Grassroots emergency preparedness. Facilitate the creation and training of neighborhood emergency response teams to promote preparedness/safety, build                         Immediate      EOC Coordinator            CHW-4
        community and encourage self-efficacy of neighbors.
   21.  Edible landscapes. Seek opportunities to create resilient and diverse edible landscapes in appropriate public spaces in Coachella for educational and                           Ongoing         Public Works             CHW-5
        nutritional purposes. Edible landscapes could be on public property, such as parks, in public rights-of-way, or in front of public buildings, so long as the edible
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Planning
        landscapes do not negatively affect the pedestrian experience or create unsafe environments for residents and vehicle occupants. Establish a community-
        based network of residents, businesses and community organizations to maintain the plants and harvest the food.                                                                                  Engineering
   22.  Community garden and composting education. Consider hosting demonstration or lecture events and/or providing electronic or printed resources about                               Short          Public Works             CHW-5
        community and home gardening, composting and permaculture to educate the general public on how to grow organic edible plants.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Planning
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Master Gardener – UCR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Extension Program
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 12-7

   23.  Gardening tools and resources. Work with community organizations and neighborhood groups to organize a garden-tool lending program and garden bounty                          Short            Public Works         CHW-5
        exchange program. The tool lending program would have a “library” of tools and gardening supplies that residents could “check -out” for free or at a very low
        cost. The garden bounty exchange could be a regular (weekly or monthly) gathering where residents can trade their surplus food crops.
   24.  Emergency food. Partner with the Riverside County Public Health Department, local agricultural businesses and charity groups to distribute information about                 Ongoing           City Manager         CHW-6
        and expand the capacity and reach of emergency food resources.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Food Banks
                                                                                                                                                                                             Riverside County Department of
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Public Health
   25.  Healthy foods and beverages at public events. Research and adopt an ordinance to increase healthy food and beverage options at public facilities, meetings                    Short              Planning           CHW-6
        and events. The ordinance should consider banning sugar-sweetened beverages and increase the proportion of “healthy” items sold in vending machines and
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Heal Committee
        at concession stands. Adopt City nutrition guidelines based on work across the state and nation. Guidelines should include unhealthy food items that may not
        be served at public meetings/events, ideas of healthy food and beverage alternatives and criteria for “healthy” vs. “unhealthy ” items.
   26.  Safe routes to school. Work with local community groups and public agencies to increase the number of students who walk and bike to/from school by                           Ongoing         Grants Manager         CHW-8
        implementing the following:
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Engineering
                  Collaborate with the county public health department, the Coachella Valley Unified School District (CVUSD), and local community groups to obtain
                   grant funds to for infrastructure and safe routes to school programs (crossing guards, walking schools buses, bike trains, and carpools).                                             Planning
                  Work with the CVUSD to incorporate traffic safety awareness, including bicycle and pedestrian safety, into school curriculums .
                  Integrate street improvement priorities identified by the county’s safe routes to school program into the City’s capital improvement program.
                  Work with local developers, Home Owners Associations, and schools to provide more direct pedestrian and cyclist access to schools by creatin g
                   pathways through dead ends and sound walls.
   27.  Comprehensive child care plan. Work with local and regional agencies and community partners to assess child-care supply, demand and affordability in                          Short              Planning           CHW-8
        Coachella at least every five years and implement programs to address child-care shortfalls. Develop and implement a comprehensive Coachella child-care
                                                                                                                                                                                                           First 5
        facilities plan that engages the resources of the City, community partners, and employers in Coachella. The plan will identify priority geographic areas to locate
        new centers considering target populations and supply gaps and identify and assess existing and potential financing mechanism s for facility development.                              Business License Technician
        The plan will also consider a variety of funding sources and, if appropriate, include a nexus study to determine whether new development sho uld contribute to
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning
        child care facilities in Coachella.
   28.  Library facilities. Work with the Riverside County library system to expand the reach and scope of programs and services offered at the Coachella branch.                    Ongoing           City Manager         CHW-8
        Specifically, improve service to the immigrant community; be a centralized resource for information ab out, and referrals, to community and social services;
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Finance
        bridge the digital divide (age, race/ethnicity, and income) through computer classes; expand multilingual materials. As Coach ella’s population increases,
        consider using development impact fees to fund additional library facilities, equipment and programs.                                                                                    Riverside County Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                          System
   29.  Community space fund. Maintain development fee programs to accumulate funds for the acquisition and improvement of parks and public gathering places                         Ongoing              Finance           CHW-8
        and facilities.
   30.  Plaza vendors. Create a simple healthy food truck permit program that allows food and beverage vendors to operate in or around the perimeter of parks and                    Ongoing             Planning           CHW-6
        plazas so long as they meet certain nutritional requirements determined by the City.
   31.  Patient protection and the Affordable Care Act. Provide resources and training for employers to address compliance with the Affordable Care Act.                              Short          Riverside County       CHW-9
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Finance
   32.  Mobile clinics. Increase the use of mobile or remote health care (e.g., e-health care, clinics on wheels) in Coachella for farm workers and others with poor                 Ongoing       Local Health Clinics     CHW-9
        health care access through partnerships with Riverside Department of Public Health, local hospitals and community clinics.
   33.  Multi-use facilities. Collaborate with community partners to create a resource center that could house a “one-stop shop” for social services in the City           Long term  Long              City Council        CHW-8
        including an employment opportunity center.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Manager
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning
   34.  Health and social services resource list. Publish a list of health and social services resources on the City’s website.                                            Immediate Ongoing Information Technical Manager  CHW-9
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Planning           CHW-8
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 12-8

 #    ACTION DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                         PRIORITY TIME        RESPONSIBILITY                 RELEVANT
                                                                                                                                                                                          FRAME                                      GOALS
 1.   Heat island mitigation plan. Write and adopt a Heat Island Mitigation Plan that requires new commercial and residential developments to incorporate cool roofs,               High      Short            Engineering              SNE-1
      cool pavements and strategically placed shade trees. The plan should outline how the City will actively inspect and enforce state requirements for cool roofs on non-
      residential re-roofing projects.
 2.   Sustainable landscape management plan. Create and update a landscape management plan that includes a consistent and sustainable landscaping and                               High     Medium              Planning               SNE-1
      streetscape palette to apply to all roadways throughout the City. Different pallets and designs should apply to different districts and street types. Should specify
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Building Engineering         SNE-3
      different landscape designs for different districts and street types and prioritize shade, ease of maintenance and water conservation. The plan should also contain an
      urban forest management strategy. The effect should seek to optimize shade, ease of maintenance, water conservation climate benefits.                                                                    Public Works            SNE-11
 3.   Vulnerability/resiliency assessment and climate adaptation strategy. Work with the regional government associations to conduct a community-wide assessment                   Medium    Medium              Planning               SNE-1
      of the potential health impact, cumulative impact, and risk resiliency factors of climate change on Coachella residents. The assessment should identify the
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Emergency Coordinator
      geographic areas, groups and individuals most vulnerable to climate change and specific opportunities for the City to improve its response. Vulnerable groups
      typically include infants and young children, the elderly, outdoor workers, people with preexisting health conditions such as asthma, and communities already                                                CVAG
      affected by other social, economic, or other environmental injustices. With this information, develop a climate adaptation strategy to protect the public from heat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HARC
      waves and vector control, increased threats of wildfire, changing precipitation patterns, reduced water supply and increased peak energy demand.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Public Health
 4.   Energy efficiently education. Organize workshops on how to increase energy efficiency of homes and businesses through topics such as home weatherization,                     High     Ongoing              Building              SNE-2
      building envelope design, smart lighting systems and conducting a self-audit of energy usage.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Imperial Irrigation District
 5.   Water efficient buildings. Establish or adopt a checklist to ensure developers and contractors plan and install water-efficient infrastructure and technology,                High      Short              Planning               SNE-3
      including low-flow toilets and showerheads, moisture-sensing irrigation and other advances.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Building
 6.   Grey water ordinance. Write and adopt a grey water ordinance establishing criteria and standards to permit the safe and effective use of grey water (also known as            High      Short              Planning               SNE-3
      on-site water recycling). Review and revise, without compromising health and safety, other building code requirements that might otherwise prohibit such systems.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Building
 7.   Agriculture education park. Acquire a working agricultural site to manage as an educational and cultural park.                                                                Low       Long             Public Works             SNE-5
 8.   Right-to-Farm Ordinance. Work with the Riverside County Agriculture Commissioner to write and adopt a right-to-farm ordinance. (See this model ordinance:                     High      Short              Planning               SNE-5
      http://www.smartgrowthamerica.org/smartgrowthusa/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/modelrtfordinance.pdf)
 9.   Habitat impacts. Develop a set of guidelines for evaluating project impacts to habitat, as well as for requiring specific mitigations for those that are identified.          Low      Medium              Planning               SNE-9
 10.  Vehicle idling ordinance. Establish a local ordinance that exceeds the state vehicle idling restrictions where appropriate, including restrictions for bus layovers,         Medium    Ongoing           City Manager            SNE-11
      delivery vehicles, trucks at warehouses and distribution facilities and taxis, particularly when these activities take place close to sensitive land uses (schools, senior
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Public Works
      centers, medical facilities and residences).
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Engineering
 11.  Eco-contractor policy. Consider the creation and adoption of a policy that gives preference to contractors that use reduced emissions equipment for City                      Low      Ongoing           City Manager            SNE-11
      construction projects as well as for City contracts for services (e.g., garbage collection). The preference policy could also include other aspects of environmentally
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Public Works
      friendly business and operations practices.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Engineering
 12.  Parks Master Plan. Revise and adopt the parks master plan, which shall address current deficiencies in park space, specific sites, accessibility, funding sources and         High    Immediate          Public Works            SNE-13
      fees. The new Parks Master Plan shall also provide for physical activity amenities in selected parks and recreation centers. The Ci ty shall install and maintain indoor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Planning
      or outdoor exercise equipment in selected park and recreation centers and signage to encourage exercise (i.e., mile markers o n existing and new paths, health and
      safety tips, and stretching/ strengthening exercise suggestions, etc.). The City shall also incorporate improvements, such as water fountains and restroom facilities,
      in parks to allow people to spend more time outdoors.
 13.  Developer park guidelines. Create “Developer Guidelines for Coachella Park Standards and Requirements” to set standards, requirements, definitions, and                      Medium     Short              Planning              SNE-13
      procedures to assist developers in creating parks that contribute to the City’s parks system .
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                          EngineeringParks and
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Recreation Committee
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 12-9

 14.  Climate Action Plan. Maintain and implement a Climate Action Plan. At a minimum interval of two years, update the GHG invento ry and evaluate progress towards
      the City’s GHG emissions reduction target.
 15.  Retention Basins. Establish requirements for below grade onsite storm water requirements water storage of a certain size be s tored underground to preserve land.
                                                                                                                                                                            PRIORITY TIME                                             RELEVANT
  #   ACTION DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                                                RESPONSIBILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                     FRAME                                            GOALS
      Hazard prevention education. Develop and make available to all residents and businesses, literature on hazard prevention and disaster response, including                                                                         S-8
  1.                                                                                                                                                                                 Short-             Community Development
      information on how to earthquake-proof residences and places of business and information on what to do before, during and after an earthquake.
      Housing rehabilitation program. Develop and administer a housing rehabilitation grant and/or loan program that allows owners of manufactured (mobile) homes t o                                                                   S-1
  2.                                                                                                                                                                                 Short-             Community Development
      seismically retrofit their houses.
      FIRM updates. Work with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Coachella Valley Water District to develop better, more comp rehensive Flood                                                                       S-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Community Development, Public
  3.  Insurance Rate Maps for Coachella, including the hillside areas. The City should identify and map local problem areas too small or currently out side of FEMA or               Long-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Works, and Water Department
      California Department of Water Resources mapping. Use the mapping to create flood overlays for zoning and land use maps.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Public Works, Community         S-3
  4.  Comprehensive drainage plan. Develop a comprehensive drainage plan that could be used as a guide as the City is built out in the future.                                       Long-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Development
                                                                                                                                                                                     Long-term, as                                      S-8
      Fire safety education. Prepare and provide educational materials that inform homeowners of the importance of defensible space, correct use of power tools and                  development        Fire Department, Community
  5.
      machinery that can spark and ignite a fire, the dangers of igniting outdoor fires and fireworks and proper construction standards and materials.                               occurs in hillside Development
                                                                                                                                                                                     areas
      Notification of hazardous materials. Adopt a notification and posting requirement ordinance for pesticide use in all public buildings and facilities in the City.                                                                 S-5
      Notification that pesticides, such as insecticides, fungicides or herbicides, are to be applied creates the opportunity to id entify problems before spraying. A City
  6.                                                                                                                                                                                 Short-             Fire Department
      ordinance may consider limiting when and what pesticides are used (e.g. restricting spray zones to non-play areas, prohibiting pesticide application when residents
      will be present, etc.).
      Pesticide education to business. Create a program to provide educational materials to gardeners and landscape companies that do business in Coachella about                                                                       S-6
  7.                                                                                                                                                                                 Short              Fire Department
      alternatives to and safer usage of toxic pesticides and herbicides.
      Restrictions on pesticide application. Develop policies and protocols to ensure pesticides are not sprayed when not safe to do so, for example when there are high                                                                S-6
  8.
      winds, when nearby schools are in session, etc.
  9.  Siting. Update the zoning code to reflect healthy siting considerations and avoid siting unhealthy land uses near schools or residential areas.                                Ongoing            Community Development           S-5
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 12-10

                                                                                                                                                                        PRIORITY TIME   RESPONSIBILITY    RELEVANT
  #   ACTION DESCRIPTION
                                                                                                                                                                                 FRAME                    GOALS
                                                                                                                                                                        High            Utilities Manager    IPS-2
      Development Impact Fees. Update the development impact fee program to fund the development of all infrastructure necessary for new development, including
  1.  new water supplies and new water supply infrastructure. This fee program shall include a mechanism for the provision of tertiary water treatment and distribution          Short  Engineering
      infrastructure.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Finance
                                                                                                                                                                        High            Sanitary             IPS-3
  2.  Wastewater treatment. Establish a development impact fee program to fund the development of new wastewater treatment and conveyance capacity.                              Short
                                                                                                                                                                                        Finance
  3.  Stormwater treatment. Establish a development impact fee program to fund the development of new stormwater treatment and conveyance capacity.                     High     Short  Public Works        IPS-4
      Solid waste management. Create and implement a Solid Waste Management Plan to institute measureable reduction targets that includes composting green              Medium          Public Works        IPS-5
  4.                                                                                                                                                                             Medium
      waste and food scraps.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                             | 12-11
                                                                                                                                                                                PRIORITY TIME     RESPONSIBILITY RELEVANT
  #   ACTION DESCRIPTION
                                                                                                                                                                                         FRAME                   GOALS
  1.  Revise the City’s Municipal Code to achieve the goals and policies of this General Plan Noise Element, as necessary. Examples of such revisions may                          High     Short      Planning      N-1
      include:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N-2
              Limit the hours of deliveries to commercial, mixed-use, and industrial uses adjacent to residential and other noise-sensitive land uses.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N-3
              Limit noise levels generated by commercial and industrial uses.
              Limit the hours of operation for refuse vehicles and parking lot sweepers if their activity results in an excessive noise lev el that adversely affects adjacent
               residential uses.
              Require the placement of loading and unloading areas so that commercial buildings shield nearby land uses from noise generated by loading dock and
               delivery activities. If necessary, additional sound barriers shall be constructed on the commercial sites to protect near by noise-sensitive uses.
              Require all commercial health, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) machinery to be placed within mechanical equipment ro oms wherever possible.
              Require the provision of localized noise barriers or rooftop parapets around HVAC, cooling towers, and mechanical equipment so that line of sight to the
               noise source from the property line of the noise-sensitive receptors is blocked.
IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 12-12

