CITY OF
PLAN
JANUARY 1593 UPDATE
MANDATORY AND OPTIONAL ELEMENTS Adopted October 31, 1988 Resolution Number 2522
***AMENDMENTS***
RESOLUTION # 2616 March 30, 1989
Land Use Resignation Change Natoma Station Project
RESOLUTION # 2522 July 6, 1990
Policy 8.1, General Plan Golas & Policies Pg. 15-5
Policy 8.1, Chapter 21 Land Use Element Pg. 21-11
RESOLUTION #3018 Ausgust 20, 1990
Land Use Designation Change-
Blue Ravine Oaks East Parcel B
RESOLUTION# 3242 February 12, 1991
Land Use Designation Change-
Briggs Ranch Unit #4
RESOLUTION # 3579 February 25, 1992
Land Use Designation Change-
Willow Sprins and Suncountry Project Area
RESOLUTION # 3673 June 30, 1992
Additon 310+. acres
Alder Creek Auto Center Project
RESOLUTION #3762 August 25, 1992
Housing Element Amendment
RESOLUTION # 3798 September 10, 1992
*	Light Rail corridor alignment, LRT station and Park and Ride lots.
*	Alignment of major roads and interchange plancement.
*	Amendment to policies 17.6 and 17.17, transportation and circulation element.
*	Amendment to 33.0 Public Facilities Element, 33.1 Introduction.
*	Amendment to chapter 40.0 Area Plans and Specific Plans, 40.1.3 Folsom East Area Facilities Plan (EAFP).
RESOLUTION # 3860 October 27, 1992
Land Use Designation Change - Broadstone II
RESOLUTION # 3896 December 1, 1992
Land Use Designation Change - Russell Ranch
RESOLUTION # 3944 February 23, 1993
Land Use Designation Change for Prairie City Center.
A 405 +. acre site - southeast comer of Prairie City Road
and Blue Ravine.
RESOLUTION # 3960 March 9, 1993
Land Use Designation Change for American River Canyon
North Subdivision. 11 acre site - east & west of Santa Juanita Avenue
and American River Canyon Drive.
JK/th 3/25/93 a:\res.. list
RESOLUTION NO. 2S22
A RESOLUTION TO ADOPT FINDINGS OF FACT AND A STATEMENT OF OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION AND APPROVING THE, UPDATED crrr of folsom general plan
WHEREAS, the City of Folsom had undertaken a compmVi.rmw planning effort to update the City General Flap- and
WHEREAS, the General Plan update process has involved extensive public participation, both through the substantial contributions made by the Citizens General Plan Advisory Committee and through several Planning Commission and Qty Council public hearings at which comments were received from concerned rlttwiv and
WHEREAS, the City Planning Commission, after substantial consideration of alternatives, recommended on September 26.1988 that the City Council certify the EIR prepared for the Proposed General Plan and approve the General Plan as revised: and
WHEkEAS. the Planning Commission further recommended the Preferred Alternative land use plan be approved by the Qty Council: and
WHi^kEAS. on October 7, 1988. after holding several work sessions and public hearings, the City Connell certified the EIR and approved the revised General Plan, subject to preparation and approval of Findings of Fact and Statements of Overriding Considerations; and
WHEkEAS. proposed Finding* of Fact and statements of Overriding Considerations as set forth in Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference; have been prepared for and reviewed by the City Council in accordance with CEQA Guidelines Section 15091,15092 and 15093: and
WHEREAS, the proposed General Plan ha* been prepared in conformance with State Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Sections 65000-66003). and has been considered pursuant to the California Environmental Qualify Act (CEQA) (Public Resources Codes Sections 21000-21177).
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FOLSOM RESOLVES AS FOLLOWS:
1.	The Final EIR far the revised General Plan has beer completed in compliance with CEQA, and has been reviewed and considered by the City Council prior to approving the proposed General Plan.
2.	The proposed Findings of Fact and Statements of Overriding Considerations, attached as Exhibit A. have been reviewed and considered by the Qty Council. and are hereby adopted as the City Council's Findings of Fact and statm^ept of Overriding Considerations.
3 After having considered the Final EIR in conjunction with the approved Findings, the proposed Qty of Folsom General Plan, and Preferred Alternative land Use Element and I.and Use Map. are hereby adopted and supersede the prior General Plan.
The foregoing Resolution was duly passed and adopted at a properly noticed meeting of the Folsom City Council held on the 31st day of October. 1988. by the following vote:
AYES: Councllmen Goodell. Hannaford. Carmody. Kipp NOES: None ABSTAIN: None


i
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS CITY OF FOLSOM, CALIFORNIA
MAYOR AND CITY Ci
Mayor John E. “Jack” Kipp Vice Mayor Guy Gibson. Jr.. Councilman Lindsay S. Goodell
' • Councilman George E. Hannaford Councilman Rod Carmody
PLftWNgKI.a
SION
Chairman Charles Townsend Vice Chairman Marilyn Gautschi Commissioner Bob Bowen Commissioner Art Carlson Commissidher Nick Econome Commissioner Jim Reeves Commissioner Gall Zittel
£

rS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Stan Gisler, Chairman Neva Cimaroli Dennis Inks Kim Lloyd Steve Speights Steve Toney Eleanor Vance Thomas DUle Price Walker Dick Merz
Cy Thomas Nick Johnson Martin Hill Jim Loughridge A1 Fitzsimons Jim WLQiams Scott Schneider Bret Worthington Donna Lunardini Jack Wilson
QUXSXAEE
City Manager, William Kime City Attorney. Philip C. Mertng Finance Director, Luther Faler
City Treasurer. Barbara J. Patrick Director of Public Works. Bob Blaser. City Clerk, Arlene Soto Fire Chief, Robert B. Welch Police Chief, Hal Barker Chief Building Inspector, Marvin May
£
•A < 11', ( «R| V	i j M -Jt 0 •) y
■DEPARTMENT
Community Development Director, Brad Kortlck Senior Planner, Steven K. Harris Associate Planner. Amy Feagans
Assistant Planner. Loretta McMaster
Planning Commission Secretary, Loma Daskalu Secretary. Sandy Amick Clerk Typist Valerie Castellano

CONSULTANTS
Stephen L. Jenkins Steve Feher
Conneriy and Associates Brown and Buntin Associates Mundie and Associates Minitler and Associates CH2M Hill
James A. Roberts
Mike Melanson
QUAD Consultants
Sierra Research
Balfrey and Abbott
Wilbur Smith and Associates
INTRODUCTION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
10.0 INTRODUCTION.......................................
10.0
11.0 URBAN DEVELOPMENT POLICY........................
12.0 ASSUMPTIONS.......................................
12.0
11.0
1
13.0 FOLSOM GENERAL PLAN GOALS AND POLICIES.....................
13.0
20.0 MANDATORY ELEMENTS
21.0 Land Use.................................................
22.0 Transportation and Circulation...........................
23.0 Housings (Xucptlo S/z.5/qz peso* ........................
24.0 Open Space and Conservation..............................
25.0 Safety...................................................
26.0 Noise....................................................
21.0
22.0
23.0
24.0
25.6
26.0
10-1
PAGE
30.0 OPTIONAL ELEMENTS
31.0 Parks and Recreation.......................................
32.0 Air Quality................................................
33.0 Public Facilities..........................................
34.0 Hazardous Materials........................................
35.0 Fiscal Element (TO BE ADDED) ..............................
31.0
32.0
33.0
34.0
35.0
40.0 AREA PLANS AND SPECIFIC PLANS..............................
40.0
40
50.0 ENVIRONMENTAL ELEMENT/
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT (incorporated by reference)
60.0 IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
......................................60.0
GLOSSARY
....................................BACK OF BOOK

10- 2
a®,®
Prepared By The City of Folsom Community Development Department
October 31, 1988


. 'f:
i t;
INTRODUCTION
Folsom’s General Plan is a long term policy guide for the physical, economic, and environmental growth of the City. It is comprised of goals, policies, and implementation programs which are based on an assessment of current and future needs and available resources.
California State Law requires each City and County to adopt a General Plan “for the physical development of the City or County, and any land outside its boundaries which...bears relation to its planning (Government Code Section 65300).* The role of each community’s General Plan is to act as a “constitution” for development, the foundation upon which all land use decisions are made. It expresses community development goals and embodies public policy relative to the distribution of future land use. both public and private (General Plan Guidelines June 1987, OPR). The Plan is to be used by local decisionmakers as a visionary document, a "blueprint* for the City’s future growth and development
Folsom’s General Plan is strongly oriented ward physical development of land uses, a circulation network, and supporting facilities and services. Because of this, the document is the principle tool for City use in evaluating public and private building projects and municipal service improvements. Conformance of projects and improvements with the General Plan is a
major step toward their approvaL
Another important concern of the General Plan is enhancement of Folsom’s quality of life. This is perhaps the single most important issue facing the City, and is the underlying goal of the local planning process. Goal 1 of the Plan reenforces the City’s commitment to maintain and enhance the quality of life.
To retain and enhance Folsom’s quality of life, separate identity and sense of community.
Folsom’s quality of life is a function of the economic, social, cultural, recreational and environmental conditions experienced by City residents. It depends on how residents perceive their home, neighborhood, and community. Their -tandard of living, personal happiness, all affect ,eir outlook and perceptions of the City’s overall
quality of life. Quality of life is a set of values based on individual experiences. Especially true is how people view change and growth in their community. Some people view change for the positive, as dynamics of urban/suburban living, others would prefer things as they were and regard any change as a negative.
The overriding issue, therefore, is whether the existing perceived quality of life will be enhanced by effective decisions dealing with the quality of growth or will it suffer.
10.1	FLAN ORGANIZATION
The City’s General Plan is divided into three major parts:
•	Master Environmental Assessment
•	Environmental Impact Report
•	Goals, Policies, and Implementation
Document
Since the City has opted to prepare a Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) along with an Environmental Impact Report (EIR), these two documents together with the more typical goals and policies document, constitute the official General Plan. State Planning Law allows a Jurisdiction this option (Government Code Section 15166,15169), although it is still somewhat uncommon, it does allow for a greater degree of flexibility and the ability to update baseline data found in the MEA. All three documents are circulated and certified as the General Plan and accompanying EIR The General Plan's Environmental Element also serves as the Draft EIR Upon its certification, the Final EIR will be made part of the Plan.
The Goals and Policies Document is organized into 10 sections. The first of which present an overview of the Plan, its organization, the City’s Urban Development Policy, update study assumptions, and Goals and Policies. Chapters 20 and 30 present the Plan’s Mandatory and Optional Elements, as defined by State of California law. The last major section. Implementation Programs. is designed to help the reader understand how the General Plan text and map should be used by government staff and private sector
10-3
interests to evaluate proposed projects or programs. This section also outlines how the Plan is to be administered and maintained. A Glossary has been included to assist the reader. Finally, the fold out map graphically depicts the City’s adopted land use map for Land Uses, circulation, and service-facility uses as currently proposed.
Chapters 20 and 30 embody the General Plan Mandatory and Optional Elements. These are:
Chapter 21.0 Land Use Element:
Discussion focusses on the distributionand development intensity of residential, commercial. industrial, and open space land uses.
Chapter 22.0 Transportation and Circulation Element:
Describes the City’s streets, parking, highways. pedestrlanways. bikeways, railroads, and future light rail needs. A separate traffic study on the Land Use Plan has been conducted and Is incorporated into the supporting technical appendix.
Chapter 23.0 Housing Element:
This section amends the 1985 adopted Element which deals with housing needs and provisions for meeting them.
Chapter 24.0 Open Space and Conservation Element:
Combined in this section are those subjects specified by State Law for the two separate Mandatory Elements. Preservation and management of limited resources is the central orientation. Parks as a form of open space are addressed in the Parks and Recreation Element.
Chapter 25.0 Safety Element:
This section includes seismic safety, flood control, fire, and noise and hazardous materials to some extent
Chapter 26.0 Noise Element:
Existing future noise sources and issues are addressed, as are noise mitigation measures.
Chapter 31.0 Parks and Recreation Element:
Discusses the City’s existing and projected inventory of open space and parklands. Includes
parkland dedication standards and the City’s \ efforts to maintain and enhance the City’s park and recreation programs.
Chapter 32.0 Air Quality Element:
This section discusses methods and programs available to the City to aid in local and regional air quality improvement efforts. This Element is closely related to the Land Use. Transportation and Circulation Elements.
Chapter 33.0 Public Facilities Element:
This section deals primarily with municipal services and facilities that support development projects. Infrastructure such as water, sanitary sewer, and drainage is discussed; as well as schools, police’and fire protection, libraries, and others. Additional material can be found in the MEA
Chapter 34.0* Hazardous Materials Element:
Presents a discussion on hazardous materials and wastes in today’s regulatory environment, and actions and programs that are available to the City to help reduce risks of exposure.
(
In addition, the City will have a Fiscal Element prepared that will discuss financing mechanisms to pay for future and on-going public facilities and services. Once completed and adopted, the General Plan will be amended to include this Element
State Planning Law establishes certain minimum requirements which local j urisdictions must meet regarding the substance and content of a General Plan (Government Code Section 65300 et. seq.). Folsom considers this General Plan, incorporating the MEA and EIR. to meet all of these requirements.
State guidelines for the preparation of a General Plan also suggest a certain format or structuring of elements and their content; however. reorganization is permissible, as are Optional Elements, as long as there is internal consistency within the entire General Plan. Folsom has chosen to organize the various elements and achieve internal consistency as demonstrated in Table 10-1. This illustrates the relationship between the City’s General Plan Elements and the mandated and optional State (
1
10-4
Elements. It should also be mentioned that the ccompanylng MEAand Draft EER( Chapter 50.0.
Environmental Element) play an important role in determining the consistency and completeness of Folsom's General Plan. Potential significant environmental impacts and mitigation
measures are cross-referenced with specific policies and Implementation measures, thus creating a valuable document which lays a foundation for future environmental analyses. These documents are Incorporated into the General Plan by reference.
TABLE 10*1
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FOLSOM GENERAL PLAN AND STATE MANDATORT/OPTIONAL ELEMENTS
STATE ELEMENTS	LAND USE	TRANS. &CSR.	FOLSOM GENERAL PLAN			ELEMENTS		AIR QUALITY	PUBLIC FACILITIES
			HOUSING	OPEN SPACE &CONSER	SAFETY	• NOISE	PARKS & REC.		
MANDATORY-									
Housing	X		X			•			
Land Use	X		X	X			X	X	X
Circulation		X							
Conservation				X					
Open Space	X			X			X		
Safety					X	X		X	
Noise					X	X			
OPTIONAL									
Parks and Rec.	X			X			X		
Hazardous Mat					X				
Public Facilities	X			X					X
Air Quality					X			X	
X
Background data on these topics can also be found in the MEA and technical appendix.
SKHild
10-5
I
Planning Commission Resolution No. 83-2 Approved April 11, 1983
City Council Resolution No. 1616 Approved June 6, 1983
October 31, 1988


URBAN DEVELOPMENT POLICY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
11.1	APPLICATION........................................ 11-2
11.2	STATEMENT OF POLICY BASIS........................... 11-2
11.3	POLICY ON DEVELOPMENT OF UNINCORPORATED AREAS...... 11-2
11.4	ANNEXATION POLICY.................................. 11-2
11.5	POLICY FOR APPROVAL OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT PLANS..... 11-3
11.6	POLICY ON MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND FACILITIES FEES... 11-J
11.7	POLICY FOR AREA FACILITIES PLAN.................... 11-4
11.8	DEFINITIONS........................................ 11-4
URBAN DEVELOPMENT POLICY
11.1	APPLICATION
This Urban Development Policy shall be applicable to the Folsom General Plan Area. A distinction is made in the Policy for incorporated and unincorporated areas and for agricultural uses.
11.2	STATEMENT OF POLICY BASIS
11
The City of Folsom seeks to implement its General Plan, to direct the orderly growth of the City of Folsom (versus haphazard or leapfrog development), and to provide an adequate level of service to the community. To this end, the City of Folsom has found it to be both timely and appropriate to set forth its Policy for urban development in its General Plan area to ensure that the City can cany out its role as provider of urban services in the northeastern portion of the County of Sacramento. This Policy is set forth in recognition of the following:
1.	The State planning policy disfavors clement of Incorporated Cities with urban development which lacks adequate and mm-prehenslve urban services.
2.	The City of Folsom is a general law City and such political subdivisions have limited authority and means to generate funds under State Law.
3.	There has been a further reduction of available revenue for urban development resulting from the fiscal constraints of Articles xm A and B of the Constitution of the State of California, otherwise known as Propositions 13 and 4.
4.	Planned, orderly urban development decreases the cost of urban services while simultaneously improving the environment for urban development.
11.3	POLICY ON DEVELOPMENT OF UNINCORPORATED AREAS
To insure the orderly growth of the City, to enable the logical and most economic extension of services and to better ensure a quality living
environment, it is the policy of the City of Folsom to encourage urban development within the City Limits and to discourage urban development in the unincorporated sections of the General Plan area and to coordinate with the County of Sacramento to implement this Policy.
11.4	ANNEXATION POLICY
It is the policy of the City of Folsom to annex all areas within its General Plan area and Sphere of Influence at the earliest time consistent with the Goals and Policies of the Folsom General Plan, the orderly extension of the Folsom City Limits and the provision of public services and facilities in accordance with Sections VI and vn of this Urban Development Policy. In conjunction with this Policy, it is the policy of the City to continue to actively develop additional sources and capacities for services for newly annexed lands. Annexation does not imply development approval.
Section 56076 of the Government Code states that a Sphere of Influence is to be a plan for the probable ultimate physical boundaries and service area of a local governmental agency. A copy of the City’s currently adopted Sphere of Influence is shown in Figure 11-1. Itlsthepolicy of the City of Folsom to request that LAFCO expand the City’s current Sphere of Influence to include areas south of U.S. 50 in a manner consistent with the City’s General Plan which will foster orderly urban development and discourage leapfrog development and urban sprawl.
It is the policy of the City of Folsom to encourage annexations which:
1.	Are consistent with the City’s General Plan,
State Law and LAFCO standards and criteria.
2.	Constitute fiscally sound additions to the existing City.
3.	Ensure the provision of adequate public facilities and services.
4.	Are part of a planned and orderly annexation program.
11- 2
It Is the policy of the City of Folsom to prezone all properties proposed for annexation in a manner consistent with the City’s General Plan. Generally this will involve use of the Agricultural Reserve District (A-l-A) until such time as public facilities and services are available for urban development. However, the City may utilize the County of Sacramento General Plan designation or the existing zoning as a basis for determining pre-zoning consistency so long as the proposed annexation is consistent with and furthers the goals and policies of the City’s General Plan.
It is the policy of the City of Folsom that prior to the approval of a tentative map, building permit or other development permit, properties located within the annexation area shall comply with the provisions of Sections VI and VII of this Urban Development Policy to the extent deemed applicable by the City Engineer.
11.5	POLICY FOR APPROVAL OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT PLANS
It is the policy of the City of Folsom to approve development proposals for urban development (not including agricultural development) only when such development is consistent with the General Plan and when full urban services can be logically provided, expanded, and/or extended to serve such development. To insure the logical extension of services in an economically feasible manner, it is the policy of the City of Folsom to restrict development without full services except under extraordinary circumstances. Extraordinary circumstances may be found to exist when the City Council, after considering the recommendation from the Planning Commission finds that:
1.	This Policy would cause extreme hardship on the property owner: or
2.	The type and extent of the development will not impede implementation of this Policy.
In every case where an exception is granted, there must be a finding of consistency with the General Plan and a finding that the use can function in a safe and healthful manner. The property owner must provide information to the City to support the health and safety finding.
The property owner for whom an exception is granted must:
1.	Pay all fees associated with the normal provision of services.
2.	Enter into a binding agreement with the City, recorded in the County of Sacramento Recorder’s Office, whereby the property owner, his successors, heirs and assigns agree to extend line(s) and connect to services when the adjacent property develops or at the request of the City Council, whichever occurs first.
Agricultural development includes the uses set forth in the A- 1-A Zone. These uses, in areas zoned A-l-A, are not governed by this Section of the Urban Development Policy, except as stated
in the text of that District, which includes a statement regarding General Plan consistency.
11.6	POLICY ON MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND FACILITIES
It is the policy of the City of Folsom to require new development to bear the cost of its Increased demand/efiect on municipal services and facilities so as not create a greater burden on existing residents. Development contributes to the need for the expansion and extension of the City’s circulation, water, sewer, storm drainage, and parks systems and other capital improvements. facilities, and equipment to adequately serve the development area. Service expansion and extension is not necessarily site-specific: rather, it is generally related to a larger area and the City as a whole. In order to accommodate the new development, maintain an acceptable level of service, and alleviate the effects of the increased demand on City services, it is the policy of the City of Folsom to require certain necessary improvements as a part of the development and/ or the payment of municipal services and facilities fees consistent with the proportional effect of the development on such services.
The City of Folsom has previously adopted various fees for financing facilities, including roads, water, sewer, drainage, capital improvements, and parks. The fees, in effect prior to 1983, do not. for the most part, provide sufficient
11- 3
11
revenue for Improvements needed and for the provision of adequate and acceptable levels of services. The City will periodically update its fees to reflect the cost of providing municipal services and facilities. Also, the City of Folsom is addressing the need for adequate and acceptable educational facilities during the City’s urban growth and development by considering an impact fee ordinance.
11.7	POLICY FOR AREA FACILITIES FLANS
In order to assure an adequate funding level for municipal services and facilities in developing areas of the City and in recognition of the possible need for special financing plans to provide such services and facilities, it is the policy of the City of Folsom to formulate and adopt Area Facilities Plans as part of a Public Facilities Element of the Folsom General Plan. Such Area Facilities Plans shall identify the necessary services and facilities and the means to finance such improvements.
It is the policy of the City of Folsom to require the preparation of an Area Facilities Plan or other suitable substitute as approved by the City Council, for a particular area of the City when:
1.	Development of an area necessitates provision. extension, and/or expansion of municipal services and facilities which are not customarily constructed by a developer, or
2.	There is a need for services or facilities not otherwise funded by the regular City fees, or
3.	The construction of the necessary services and facilities cannot be logically or economically provided by one landowner/developer in the normal sequence of orderly development as directed by this Urban Development Policy.
An Area Facilities Plan shall be prepared for and shall apply to all properties within the identified plan area, unless a parcel is specifically excluded in the adopted text of the plan. Where a development proposal covers property which is within an Area Facilitles Plan boundary as established by the City Council and such Plan has not been adopted nor has ary suitable substitute
been approved by the City Council, no tentative subdivision map or development permit shall be approved for such property until the Area Facilities Plan has been adopted. This restriction shall not. however, preclude the approval of final subdivision maps which are in substantial compliance with unexpired tentative subdivision maps which were approved prior to the City Council’s determination to require an Area Facilities Plan for the area encompassing such property. The City Council may require the applicant to bear or to share in the cost of the preparation of the Area Facilities Plan.
The adoption of Area Facilities Plans shall not Umit the City’s authority to impose fees in other areas of the City nor shall it limit the City’s or another jurisdiction's authority to impose additional fees in the plan areas for other public facilities when found to be needed in the future.
An Area Facilities Plan shall include, but not be limited to those topics listed in the Public Facilities Element of the General Plan.
11.8	DEFINITIONS
1.	Agricultural Development maana the types of uses provided for in the City’s A-l-A District in areas zoned A-l-A.
2.	Development means the act, process, or result of securing approval of a use permit, variance, and/or land division, including a subdivision map, parcel map. land division plat, building permit or the like.
3.	Municipal Services and Facilities means those services and related facilities including, but not limited to, water, sewer and storm drainage systems, circulation and transportation systems, parks, police, fire, administration, and other similar services.
4.	Urban Development means land development which generatesa need for municipal services and facilities as defined. The following development activities typically do not generate a need for services and, therefore. are specifically excluded from the term ‘urban development" as addressed In this Urban Development Policy:
11-4
A.	Agricultural development as defined herein.
B.	The operation, repair or minor alteration of existing public or private structures, facilities, or mechanical equipment which does not involve physical expansion of the use.
C.	The construction of minor structures such as carports, patios, swimming pools, or fences which are accessory and appurtenant to existing residential uses.
D.	The construction or placement of minor structures such as on-premise signs, small parking lots, or fences which are accessory and appurtenant to existing commercial, industrial, or Institutional facilities.
E.	Re-occupancy of existing vacant structures by uses which are found by the City to be ' consistent with the land use designation of the site.
F.	Reconstruction of a damaged, destroyed, or unsafe building which involves no expansion of the previously existing use when that use presently is consistent with the Folsom General Plan.
G.	Such other development as may be found and declared by resolution of the City Council not to constitute urban development because such development does not generate a need for development improvements and/or City services.
FIGURE 11-1
ADOPTED SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
PRIMARY URBAN SERVICE ' AREA (1982)
[«»• j SECONDARY URBAN SERVICE AREA (19871
J SPHERE OF INFLUENCE (1997)
11-s
i
STUDY ASSUMPTIONS FOR GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EAST FOLSOM PLANNING STUDIES
The following major assumptions will be used by staff and consultants to prepare the General Flan Update and East Folsom Planning Studies:
1.	The Quality of Life in the City will be maintained as reflected by the policies of the Mayor's Citizen’s Advisory Committee.
2.	The City will have adequate supplies of water to serve future development when needed.
3.	The General Plan Update and East Folsom Planning Studies will show urbanization of the entire City Limits.
4 A stable, local and regional economy is assumed throughout the Planning Period.
5.	The Planning Period for the City General Plan Update and East Folsom Planning Studies will be the year 2010. All land use alternatives will be assumed to have been built-out by that time.
I:
6.	It is assumed that there will be no constraints for development due to a lack of adequate public services, facilities or Infrastructure.
7.	Vehicular traffic on surface streets will be accommodated at a Level of Service (LOS) “C" or better in accordance with current City policies.
8.	Construction of additional vehicle capacity over the American River (i.e.. Bridge Construction) will occur prior to or simultaneous with traffic demand created by new development.
SOURCE: May 18. 1987 Memo to the City Council from the Community Development Department.
13- 1


October 31, 1988
GENERAL PLAN GOALS & POLICIES
x 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES...........................2
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES...18
HOUSING ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES..........................22
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES......24
SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES..............................27
NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES............................28
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES......................30
PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.............33
PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES................38
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES..............40
FISCAL ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES ."........................40
LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 1
POLICY 1.4
This Is the key Goal of the Plan and this sets the tone of the Plan.
To retain and enhance Folsom’s quality of life, separate identity and sense of community. Folsom’s identity and quality of life are defined by;
1.	The diverse natural setting, including the
American River, its tributary streams, natural vegetation, topography, native wildlife, and other unique features of the landscape.
2.	Developed parks and open space.
3.	The historic district and other historic places throughout the community.
4.	The State prison site, which provides a large, visual open area in the City.
5.	The physical form of Folsom’s neighborhoods.
6.	Ease of movement.
7.	Public access to pedestrianandbicycle trails.
POLICY 1.1
New development shall preserve and/or enhance to the maximum degree feasible, the existing natural vegetation, landscape features I and open space, consistent with the Goals and Policies of this Plan.
I POLICY 1.2
Existing vlewsheds and opportunities for | vlewsheds should be Incorporated Into the design of new developments.
POLICY 1.3
Each residential neighborhood should be planned with at least one park/recreational/ school area within approximately one half mile of ach residential unit.
Each new residential development shall be encouraged to provide pedestrian and bicycle access to parks or schools located within or near the development.
POLICY 1.3
Each new residential development shall be designed with a system of local streets, collector streets, and access to an arterial road that protects the residents from through traffic.
POLICY 1.6
Folsom's historic district shall be enhanced and maintained through the Improvement of public facilities.
POLICY 1.7
Historic buildings or locations shall be preserved or Incorporated Into the design of new developments.
POLICY 1.8
The City shall prepare an Inventory of historically and culturally significant buildings and sites. The City should Investigate measures for Historic Preservation of these building sites.
POLICY 1.9
Development proposed along streams shall be-in conformance with a comprehensive development and management plan to be prepared for stream waterbeds prior to project approval.
POLICY 1.10
When development Incentives are required for the preservation of identified resources and open spaces, the City and public shall cumulatively receive the greater short-term and longterm benefits of such incentives.
15-2
3
GOAL 4
To provide opportunities for residents to live, work, shop, and enjoy leisure activities within the City.
POLICY 4.1
The City will plan for additional housing needs as determined in the Housing Element for the next 5 to 25 years.
POLICY 4.2
The City will plan for a central community shopping district and a regional shopping center.
POLICY 4.3
Neighborhood business areas will be allowed. subject to size and business use restrictions. The location of such business areas should be based on area or community plans covering the projects to be served by the neighborhood business area. Neighborhood business areas should be pedestrian-oriented, that is. drawing their customers primarily from the residences in the immediate vicinity of the businesses.
POLICY 4.4
The City will expand its system of parks, open spaces, and recreational facilities as new development proceeds.
POLICY 4.5
Industrial and office employers should be encouraged to locate in Folsom to provide more job opportunities for Folsom residents.
GOAL 5
To Influence land use decisions of Sacramento. Placer, and El Dorado counties and other governmental agencies which may impact Folsom.
POLICY 5.1
The City shall request to participate in the planning process of other governmental agencies whose Jurisdiction includes areas within the city limits of Folsom.
POLICY 5.2
The City shall request copies of proposed plans prepared by other government agencies outside of Folsom but which could affect land in Folsom. City officials should respond in a timely manner to such proposed plans and participate In public meetings or hearings as appropriate.
POLICY 5.3
The City will continue to participate in the Sacramento Area Council of Governments and the Sacramento Local Agency Formation Commission.
GOAL 6
To expand Folsom’s Sphere of Influence based on the ultimate boundaries of development that the City can reasonably control and service and to discourage premature development in unincorporated areas surrounding the City.
POLICY 6.1
The Sphere of Influence shall include those parcels of land adjacent to the city limit whose development could have significant visual, traffic, service, and environmental impacts on Folsom so that the City may influence the ultimate development of those parcels.
POLICY 6.2
The' City shall consider existing roads or natural features which might logically define a new Sphere of Influence boundary.
POLICY 6.3
A new Sphere of Influence boundary shall include only those lands to which road, water, sewer and other facility/service connections can be extended within the next . 25 to 30 years and. therefore, to those areas which will ultimately be annexed to the City.
GOAL 7
To provide for the orderly annexation and development. of unincorporated areas within Folsom’s Sphere of Influence.
15-4
POLICY 7.1
The City shall only annex those lands which can be developed In accordance with the City’s General Plan, are fiscally sound additions to the City, can be adequately served by municipal (or acceptable alternative) facilities and services, and are part of a planned, orderly annexation program.
POLICY 7.2
All properties proposed for annexation shall be pre-zoned by the City in a manner consistent with the General Plan. Until facilities and services can be provided, such properties will be designated as agricultural reserve. The existing County zoning or General Plan designation which applies to a property may be considered In determining the appropriate pre-zoning of the subject land which is served by on-site facilities or connected to County facilities.
POLICY 7.3
Prior to the annexation of lands to the City, the applicant shall submit a plan demonstrating the financial feasibility of providing services and facilities to the area proposed for annexation, (refer to Goal 40 and its policies)
POLICY 7.4
The General Plan and zoning designations for annexed lands should consider the following criteria:
1.	The capacity of facilities and municipal services.
2.	The environmental effects that development on lands proposed for annexation may have on properties within the existing city limits.
3.	Existing land uses, if any. on and in the vicinity of the annexed land.
4.	The extent of any natural habitats and features of the landscape which should be preserved.
5.	The demonstrated need for additional housing, retail commercial uses, other commercial uses, and Industrial uses.
GOAL 8
To allow a variety of housing types which provides living choices for Folsom residents.
POLICY 8.1
Average residential densities shall be calculated as the mimber of dwelling units divided by the total area of the project, excluding any commercial. business and professional or industrial uses. Areas devoted to open space, public parks, roads, public schools and other miscellaneous land uses shall be Included in the calculation.
Mote.'. ^EE Pa&e 15-Z3A Fofc-POLICY 8.2 AWTiCnI
In order to promote a more diverse housing stock and to allow for a greater mix of compatible densities, five residential density ranges shall be established and applied to the various residential areas. Table 21-5 illustrates these densities and compatible housing types. Examples of these housing types are defined in Figure 21-1.
13
----------TABLE 21-5---------~~~
GENERAL PLAN RESIDENTIAL DENSITIES
	SF	SFHD	MLD	MMD	MHD
HOUSING TYPE	(2-3.9)	(4-6.9)	(7-11.9)	(12-17.9)	(18-25)
SF Detached	♦	♦			
SF Zero Lot Line		♦	♦		
SF Patio		♦	♦		
Duplex		♦	♦		
Halfplex		♦	♦		
Townhouse			♦	♦	
Condominiums			♦	♦	
Garden Apartments			♦	♦	♦
Conventional Apartments Mobile Home Parks		♦		♦	♦
15-5
PARAGRAPH TO BE ADDED TO POLICY 8.1
In any development in which land is reserved for acquisition by a public agency for open space, parks, public schools, or other public purposes such land shall be taken into account in calculating the allowable residential desnsity on the remaining land, provided no building permit shall be issued covering residential units attributing to such reserved land, until the reserved land has been acquired by the public agency for which such land was reserved.
Page 15-5A Resolution No. 3012 Adopted 7/6/90
POLICY 8.3
Open space will be required as part of each residential development except in residential estates, multifamily parcels of less than 10 acres and parcels of less than 20 acres for single family uses surrounded by existing development Open space includes required park lands, common areas, landscaped areas, pedestrian paths, plazas and similar public or private areas, but not areas devoted to vehicle parking and streets. To achieve the open space guidelines, a developer may be allowed to group the homes at somewhat smaller lot sizes than would otherwise be permitted, provided the average density does not Increase. (See Policy 8-7 and the Goals and Policies of the Open Space and Conservation Element)
POLICY 8.4
AU residential development or residential portions of multi-use developments shall con-
tain a minimum of 30 percent of the land In natural or improved open space, exclusive of roadways and parking lots.
Buffering shall be required between adjacent multi-family projects and single family developments along common boundaries.
POLICY 8.S
Sufficient off-street parking for residents shall be Included In the design of all residential projects. Off-street parking for guests shall be included In the design of all multifamily prqj ects. The City shall review its parking standards to ensure that resident and guest parking Is adequate to accommodate the anticipated average demand per dwelling unit. Surface lots for off-street parking should be landscaped to reasonably screen the parking area from street view and from adjacent properties.
FIGURE 21-1
VARIOUS TYPES OF HOUSING
15-6
FIGURE 21-1
z—:-----------------——~---------------------\
Single Family- Patio Homes
•	One House (unit) per Lot
•	Each House and Lot Individually Owned
•	Flex Building Setbacks. Building Orientation and Lot Sizes
•	Emphasis on Creating Gardens and Patios ' through Use of Fences and Screening
•	Sometimes a Development Includes Common Open Spaces Owned by All Residents under a Home Owners Association
\___________________________________________)
Z--------------------------\
\__________________________/
Z----------------------\
Duplex
•	Two Units per Lot
•	Single Ownership of both Units and Lot
•	Conventional Building Setbacks Rear and Side Yard Separate for Each Unit
•	A Common Wall Between Units
•	Often Located on Comer Lots
\/
13
Half-Plex
•	One House (unit) per Lot
•	Each House and Lot Individually Owned
•	Conventional Building Setbacks. Rear and Side Yards Separate for Each Unit
• A Common Wall Between Units. The Wall is also Located on the Property Line.


15-7
FIGURE 21-1 .
----------.------------------------------
Townhouse- Condominium
•	A Housing Style with each Unit having Two Stories and usually Attached with Other Units by Common Walls
•	Each Unit and Lot Individually Owned
•	Usually Includes Common Oven Spaces Owned by All Owners Association
I_______________________;__________________>
(—	Conventional Apartment	A
•	Rental Units Grouped wlthlnBulldlngs which are Usually Two or More Stories In Height
•	Each Unit Usually Takes Up One Floor.Hence Separate Units are Available on Each Level of the Building
•	Single Ownership of All Units and Land
•	Higher Density which Generally means Less Emphasis on Landscaping and Recreational
^Facilities
(————————\
Air Space Condominium/
Garden Apartment*
•	Units are Grouped within Buildings which are Two or More Stories In Height
•	Each Units taxes up only One Floor, hence Separate Units Are Available on Each Level of the Building
•	Common Walls between Units
•	Greater Emphasis on Landing and Providing
Amenities such as Recreational Facilities
•	Condominiums- Each Unit Individually
Owned but All Land Beneath Units and Surrounding Area Owned in Common
•	Apartments- Single Ownership of All Units and Land and Units are Rented. Usually Less Dense than Conventional Apartments
I)
f-’"	■	A
STREET

15-8
POLICY 8.6
The City should develop a package of incentives and encourage the following:
1-Additional active parkland.
2.Development of parkland.
3.1ncreased historic preservation.
4.	Additional open space.
5.	Preservatlon of natural habitat
6.	Preservatlon of Savanna Oak Clusters.
7-Additional items as desired.
Policies and Guidelines by Residential Classification
POLICY 8.7
Residential densities for each land use category will be based upon the range of densities which is established for each category of residential use as hereafter set forth. The lower number in each range is allowed as a matter of right. Units in excess of the lower number of each range, up to the top of each range, are permitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission/ City Council in exchange for the provision of special benefits which satisfy a City need over and above the minimum requirements of the General Plan and other City policies and regulations. Examples of special benefits which may qualify the project for densities in excess of the lower number include:
1.	Additional park or open space set asides.
2.	On-site recreation facilities.
3.	The planting of additional trees or other landscaping in excess of the minimum required.
4.	The provision of transit facilities or services.
The density bonus allowed for qualifying seniors and low or moderate or lower income family residents pursuant to California Code Section 65915 is to be calculated based upon the lower number of each density range and no additional bonus or other incentive is to be provided; irrespective of whether such project also qualifies for special benefits. In other words, under no circumstances shall the maximum number in each density range be exceeded.
A.	Single-Family (SF 2-3.9 Dwelling Units
Per Acre)
Single family detached homes at low to medium densities (maximum of two dwelling . units per acre). Up to 3.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. The following standards shall apply:
1)	The project should be located adjacent to an existing single family development or should be of sufficient size to ensure that a single family residential environment can be maintained within the project
2)	Internal roads should be designed to serve the project or connect with adjacent developments and access to through-traffic should be discouraged.
3)	No more than 40% of a lot shall be covered.
B.	Single-Family High Density/Mobile Home
Park (SFHD 4-6.9 Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Single-family homes at high densities (marl-mum of four dwelling units per acre) are permitted. Up to 6.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. Halfplexes, mobile home parks, and attached homes may be included. The following standards shall apply:
1)	Lands located near neighborhood commercial centers, along public transit routes, or adjacent to low or medium density multifamily areas would be appropriate for this type of housing.
2)	With the exception of mobile home parks, a development may Include amixofhous-ing types within the average density allowed including attached homes, zero lot-line homes and halfplexes.
3)	Each home must have its own lot.
4)	No more than 35% of a lot shall be covered.
13
15-9
a
5)	Internal roads should be designed to serve the proj ect or connect with adjacent developments and access to through-traffic should be discouraged.
6)	A Planned Development Permit shall be required for development within this category.
C.	Multi-Family Low Density (MLD 7-11.9
Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Low density multi-family developments at a maximum density of seven dwelling units per acre. Up to 11.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. The following standards shall apply:
1)	Appropriate locations are along arterial roads and public transit routes, adjacent to neighborhood commercial centers, or in undeveloped areas where the pro) ect is of sufficient size to provide any needed buffers for adjacent or proposed single family developments.
2)	Homes should generally be in one or two story buildings, with some three story buildings allowed on sloped sites.
3)	Project entrances and exits shall be designed with access to a collector or arterial road.
4)	Buildings on hillsides shall be sited with respect to existing native vegetation or landscaping to reduce their visual prominence.
5)	A design review procedure shall be established to evaluate the proposed use of building and landscaping materials with respect to the natural features of a site.
6)	Buildings of multiple stories shall follow the contour of the site and be “stepped" or terraced.
7)	Proj ects shall generally consist of smaller, multiple buildings rather than a few large multifamily buildings.
D.	Multi-Family Medium Density (MMD 12-
17.9	Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Multi-family medium density at a maximum density of 12 dwelling units per acre are permitted. Up to 17.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. The following standards shall apply:
1)	Appropriate locations Include parcels along arterial roads and public transit routes, lands near commercial centers and major public institutions, and as a buffer between Industrial or commercial areas and single family neighborhoods.
2)	Parcels shall be of sufficient size to allow the placement of buffers along any project boundary adjacent to an existing or proposed single family development.
3)	Buildings should be mainly one or two stories, with three story buildings allowed on sloped sites or to provide parking under a building.
4)	Project area shall include adequate open space.
5)	Project entrances and exits should be designed with direct access to a collector or arterial road.
6)	Buildings on hillsides should be sited with respect to existing native vegetation or landscaping to reduce their visual prominence.
7)	Design review of materials and landscaping shall be Included in the application process.
8)	Buildings of multiple stories should follow the contour of the site andbe “stepped" or terraced.
9)	PrqJ ects shall consist of clusters of smaller buildings (typically 4 to 12 dwelling units per building) and not a few large buildings.
10)	Open spaces shall be dispersed throughout a project, unless it is necessary to create a single large open space to preserve an important natural habitat.
15-10
11)	A landscaping and project maintenance plan shall be submitted to the City. The City will adopt an ordinance detailing the requirements of such a plan.
12)	Locations for this type of housing should be selected to reinforce the customer base of a central commercial area, and the proximity of housing to major employment centers.
13)	Amenities shall be Included In larger projects such as swimming pools and onsite recreation.
E.	Multi-Family High Density (MHD 18-25
Dwelling Units Per Acre)
High density multi-family at a maximum density of 18 units per acre are permitted. Up to 25 dwelling units per acre may be permitted In exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. The following shall apply:
1)	Locations shall generally be limited to areas near a central commercial center or regional commercial center, but may also Include parcels at the Intersection of arterial roads, along transit routes, adja- ■ cent to public institutions, and as part of a commerdal/lndustrlal development compatible with residential uses.
2)	Locations of this type of housing shall be selected to reinforce the customer base of a central commercial area, and the proximity of housing to major employment centers.
3)	The Internal road system shall be designed to ensure that traffic from the project does not use local streets In any adjacent or nearby single family areas.
4)	At least 30 percent of the project area shall be reserved for open spaces.
5)	Open spaces shall be dispersed through out the project, unless it is necessary to create a single large open space or to preserve an important natural feature.
6)	Buildings shall be predominantly two and three stories. Buildings of four or five stories may be permitted In exchange for the preservation of more open space than
' the minimum required and to allow for the placement of parking underneath buildings.
7)	Any hillside or hilltop areas that may be Included In the project shall be reserved for open spaces or one and two story buildings that can be Integrated with the natural landscape.
8)	Buildings on hillsides shall follow the contour of the site and shall be “stepped* or terraced.
9)	The use of materials on hillside buildings will be part of a design review process.
10)	A landscaping and project maintenance plan shall be submitted to the City. The City will adopt an Ordinance detailing the requirements of such a plan.
11)	Recreational facilities for the use of the residents shall be included in the project design Including swimming pools and other amenities In larger projects.
12)	Turnouts and shelters for buses shall be Incorporated Into project design for projects along existing or proposed transit routes.
13)	Landscaping, especially trees, shall be provided around the boundaries of the project to lessen the visual Impact of the development.
POLICY 8.8
Elderly and convalescent housing facilities providing health care shall be encouraged. The Zoning Code shall guide the placement and standards for development of such facilities. Proposed facilities shall be evaluated based on the location. Impacts on services and neighboring properties and not on a density basis.
15-11
3
POLICY 8.9
All multiple family projects will be required to obtain a planned development permit In accordance with the City’s Zoning Code. Similar development approvals, such as Specific Plans, that cover the same requirements as the planned development permit shall be considered a substitute.
POLICY 8.10
Residential densities within an area plan or specific plan may vary, provided 1) that the overall dwelling unit buildout within the plan area shall not exceed that authorized by the Land Use Element of the General Plan and 2) In no event shall densities within any portion of the Plan area exceed 25 dwelling units per acre. An area plan or specific plan Is defined as a large development area typically over 100 acres with an overall master development plan.
POLICY 8.11
Residential density shown on the land use map shall be consistent with General Plan Policies 8.1 and 8.10 for the purpose of calculating density.
GOAL 9
To set criteria which would allow for flexibility In the siting of land uses within a planned area.
POLICY 9.1
A planned area consists of acreage containing one or more projects for which a comprehensive site plan Is prepared showing the location of proposed land uses, the configuration of roads within the planned area, public land uses and open spaces, and other aspects of site design.
POLICY 9.2
For planned developments covering large areas, the project applicant may exercise some discretion In locating school, park, and other public facility sites within approximate boundaries specified by the General Plan. However, the locations should reflect:
1.	The ability of project residents to walk or bicycle to parks or schools without crossing uncontrolled crossings on arterial roads.
2.	The preservation of significant features of the natural landscape, such as trees. Important wildlife habitats, and streams or ponds.
3.	The usability of school and park sites with respect to terrain, flooding, and access to and from the site.
POLICY 9.3
To encourage the preservation of open spaces and natural features of the landscape, a project applicant may be allowed to concentrate the proposed development on a portion of the site through the clustering of buildings, smalls- lot sizes, or taller buildings, provided that the overall unit buildout within the Plan area shall not exceed that authorized by the Land Use Element of the General Plan.
POLICY 9.4
In large-scale residential projects which Include a neighborhood commercial center, the proposed location of the centermayvary from the approximate location Indicated by the General Plan if, based on the proposed street layout and design. Improved traffic circulation would result, and there are no significant negative impacts.
GOAL 10
To provide for a commercial and industrial base of the City to encourage:
1.	A strong tax base.
2.	More Jobs within the City
3.	A greater variety of commercial goods and services.
4.	A regional shopping center.
5.	Businesses and Industries compatible with
Folsom’s quality of life.
POLICY 10.1
The City shall have a variety of commercial uses such as:
15-12
1.	Home occupations in which a resident operates a small business within the home in compliance with City regulations and standards.
2.	Individual businesses outside of a commer-. dal area, serving a commercial or Industrial
project or providing highway-oriented services.
3.	Small commercial centers serving Individual neighborhoods.
4.	A central business district with offices and retail establishments serving the entire community.
5.	A regional retail center serving Folsom residents and others from outside the community.
6.	An historic business district serving residents and tourists.
7.	Specialty commercial areas.
POLICY 10.2
The City should designate lands for a variety of Industrial land uses such as:
1.	Warehousing/storage facilities for supplies serving other businesses.
2.	Industrial parks providing space for research and product development firms.
3.	Manufacturing of electronic equipment or components; and manufacturing on a small scale of products to be sold on the premises.
POLICY 10.3
The City should encourage the development of campus-like industrial developments with low-rise buildings and landscaped or natural open spaces.
POLICY 10.4
The City should implement facilities plans to finance the provision of municipal facilities and services to the industrial areas.
POLICY 10.5
The City should preserve and enhance the tourist-oriented, historic commercial uses In the Sutter Street commercial area.
POLICY 10.6
The use or storage of flammable, volatile, or toodc substances as part of an Industrial or commercial establishment shall be strictly controlled.
POLICY 10.7
Allowfor the continued operation of existing arterial-oriented commercial uses along Folsom-Aubum Hoad and Natoma Street from Riley Street to Fargo Way.
POLICY 10.8
New commercial uses shall be subject to design and parking standards to be developed by the City for:
1.	The number of location of allowed curb cuts.
2.	landscaping or parking areas.
3.	The location, size, number and construction of signs.
4.	The configuration and design of commercial buildings.
POLICY 10.9
-Commercial centers and Industrlal/office parks when feasible should be served by public transit, and when appropriate public transit centers should be Incorporated Into the project
POLICY 10.10
Industrlal/office parks shall be designed with Internal circulation and Incorporate buffering and landscaped setbacks to minimize potential adverse Impacts on adjacent land uses.
POLICY 10.11
Child care centers shall be encouraged In the central commercial district, commercial centers, and office parks, when appropriate.
13
15-13
POLICY 10.12
POLICY 11.3
The City should develop an Industrial development strategy that identifies the City’s Indus- . trial market segment and promotional opportunities.
POLICY 10.13
Buffer zones shall be established around existing and proposed industrial areas to prevent encroachment of incompatible uses. The City shall prepare an implementation study to provide notice requirements to users in the buffer zones and identify Incompatible uses.
GOAL 11
To plan for a central commercial district which includes retail, office, and service establishments. and cultural and entertainment facilities.
POLICY 11.1
The central commercial district shall be located to incorporate existing community-wide commercial services, and shall generally Include properties along East Bidwell Street, generally between Coloma Street and the west side of Blue Ravine Road and south of Riley Street generally west of Glenn Drive.
POLICY 11.2
The purpose of the central commercial district shall be to provide a location for businesses with a city-wide market, to provide a focus for cultural and entertainment activities (public and private), and to provide a City financial center.
POLICY 11.3
“Strip” commercial uses, characterized by shallow commercial frontage on arterial streets and multiple curb-cuts.- shall not be allowed.
POLICY 11.4
Circulation within the central commercial district shall allow for convenient automobile access and parking, public transit routes, bicycles. and safe pedestrian access among the businesses within the district.
Each block within the district shall contain usable public open space in the form of public plazas, mini-parks, or landscaped pedestrian pathways. Maintenance programs for public and community improvements should be required for commercial areas in order to provide long term maintenance.
POLICY 11.6
In general, the height of buildings in the central commercial district shall not exceed 4 stories. Additional height may be allowed for the provision of open space. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on a site shall not exceed 2:1. Additional height or a higher floor area ratio may be allowed in exchange for the provision of open space or other specified benefits meeting a City need that are above and beyond the minimum requirements of the General Plan policies and other applicable City policies and regulations.
POLICY 11.7
Public improvements should be provided to support a central commercial area, such as landscaping on existing commercial streets, street furniture (benches, waste receptacles, planters, etc.), and uniform street and other public signing.
POLICY 11.8
A plan for the central commercial district shall be-prepared in conjunction with the redevelopment plan to address issues discussed in Goal 11 and support policies including development standards and circulation.
POLICY 11.9
All commercial development or commercial portions of multi-use development shall contain at least ten percent of land area in natural, improved or functional open space, exclusive of roadways and parking lots.
POLICY 11.10
A public transit service center shall be established within the central commercial district.
15-14
GOAL 12
To plan for regional commercial centers.
POLICY 12.1
Regional commercial centers shall be primarily highway-oriented retail commercial areas. The purpose of the centers shall be to provide locations for businesses whose customers come primarily from outside the City of Folsom, although businesses may also provide goods and services to Folsom residents.
POLICY 12.2
Regional centers should be located close and accessible to Highway 50, preferably near an interchange.
POLICY 12.3
A ring-road or limited access parkway should define the boundaries of regional centers. A parking and circulation plan should ensure that trees and landscaping are provided to break up the amount of paved surfaces and that traffic entering and exiting centers do not adversely affect any future residential developments nearby. POLICY 12.4
Regional centers shall Include landscaped public open spaces.
POLICY 12.5
Highway-commercial areas shall be designated adjacent to U.S. 50 In order to support the travelling public at major Interchanges.
POLICY 12.6
Regional commercial centers should • be served by public transit and developed In conjunction with public transit service centers.
POLICY 12.7
In general, the height of buildings in a regional commercial center shall not exceed four stories. Additional height may be allowed for the provision of open space. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on a site shall not exceed 2:1.
POLICY 12.8
In general, the height of buildings In a highway commercial site shall not exceed four stories. Additional height may be allowed for the provision of open space. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on a site shall not exceed 2:1. with a maximum lot coverage of 60 percent.
GOAL 13
To plan for small, neighborhood-oriented convenience commercial areas which provide goods and services that may meet the dally needs of nearby residents.
POLICY 13.1
Neighborhood convenience commercial areas should be located so that residents in each neighborhood may meet their dally needs for commercial goods and services.
POLICY 13.2
Neighborhood commercial areas shall in general be limited to five acres or less.
POLICY 13.3
Neighborhood centers should be designed to minimize impacts on adjacent uses through site design, access and parking, landscaping and lighting standards.
POLICY 13.4
Neighborhood commercial areas may be adjacent to future public transit stations.
POLICY 13.5
In general, the height of buildings in a neighborhood commercial center shall not exceed two stories. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on site shall not exceed .5:1. and 30 to 40 percent lot coverage.
POLICY 13.6
Neighborhood commercial centers shall be developed under the Planned Development Process.
13
15-15
3
GOAL 14
To plan for and preserve specialty commercial areas.
POLICY 14.1
The City should preserve and enhance the historic business district centered on Sutter Street. The purpose of the district is to provide a tourist-oriented location for businesses offering goods and services consistent with the historic setting of the area. An historic district plan for the area should be prepared by the City containing:
1.	Design guidelines for the restoration and/ or modification of buildings or sites identified as having historic or cultural significance and for the design and placement of buildings within or adjacent to identified historic buildings or sites.
2.	The City should adopt design guidelines to ensure that signage is consistent and harmonious with the theme of the historic business district
POLICY 14.2
The City should provide for offices, retail, and restaurant uses associated with a hospital when appropriate.
POLICY 14.3
■ Additional specialty commercial centers for specified commercial uses containing a grouping of businesses offering one or several related goods or services may be considered according to I the following standards:
I 1 - Thr enmmerrifll renter must serve a pur-I	pose not fulfilled by the central commercial
I district, the regional commercial center, or other designated commercial areas.
2.	A plan for the area proposed for commercial uses must be submitted by the landownerf s) clearly stating the purpose of the commercial area: the location of proposed commercial uses, public improvements, landscaping, parking, and open spaces: and a proposed circulation plan.
3.	New specialty commercial areas will not be designated on the Folsom General Plan Land Use Map in advance of a specific request for such a designation.
4.	The commercial center may not be a “strip" commercial project characterized by one or more long, shallow lots, multiple curb cuts, and a variety of unrelated businesses.
5.	Access to and from the commercial center is via an arterial street
6.	The proposed commercial area shall be located and designed to minimize negative traffic, noise, and visual impacts on nearby residential areas.
GOAL 15
To plan for community commercial areas providing goods and services for large neighborhood areas.
POLICY 13.1
Community commercial centers shall in general range in size from five to ten acres.
POLICY 13.2
Community commercial centers should be designed to minimize impacts on adjacent uses through site design, access and parking, landscaping and lighting standards.
POLICY-13.3
Community commercial centers should be developed adjacent to future public transit stations.
POLICY 13.4
Community commercial centers should be developed adjacent to higher density residential, offices, and public uses.
POLICY 13.3
Community commercial centers shall be developed under the Planned Development Proc-
ess.
15-16
POLICY 13.6
In general, the height of buildings on a community commercial center shall not exceed, two stories. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings shall not exceed .5:1 and 30 to 40 percent lot coverage.
GOAL 16
To allow for public and quasi-public land uses meeting the governmental service, education, cultural, recreational, and religious needs of Folsom residents.
POLICY 16.1
Fire and Police department substations shall be planned and located so that a maximiun response time goal as set by the City Council ran be maintained.
POLICY 16.2
Public facilities, such as utility substations, water storage or treatment plants, pumping stations, and sewer treatment plants, should be located, designed, and maintained so that noise, light, glare, or odors associated with these facilities will not negatively impact nearby land uses. Building materials and landscaping shall be used to make these land uses less visually obtrusive from neighboring properties.
POLICY 16.3
The City shall work closely with the school district(s) serving Folsom to ensure that school sites are dedicated or reserved for purchase by the districts) so that:
1.	Each residential neighborhood will contain or have access to the appropriate elementary school according to school district standards.
2.	Children do not have to cross an uncontrolled intersection on an arterial road to reach an elementary school.
3.	The school can be reached on foot by most
'	of the neighborhood's residents (for elemen-
tary schools only).
4.	A Joint park/school site can be developed wherever possible.
POLICY 16.4
The acreage recommended for new schools should be set according to school district standards.
POLICY 16.3
If a school will serve more than one development. and the subject development will not contain the school site, the applicant must clearly show that a school site has been or will be dedicated elsewhere or that a school already exists with capacity to serve the project and is accessible to the project according to the standards in Policy 16-3.
POLICY 16.6
In determining the number and location of new school sites, standards established by the district shall be used. These standards are based on the assumed average number of students per household for each grade level (varies for different types of housing) and the average size of an elementary school. Junior high school, and high school.
POLICY 16.7
The City shall develop standards for the location of proposed private schools. Standards will address:
1.	Required off-street parking and street frontage for the dropping off and picking up of students.
2.	Access to the proposed school via City streets.
3.	Noise, according to the Noise Element of the Folsom General Plan.
4.	Size of the parcel on which a proposed school is to be located in relation to the pupil capacity of the school.
5.	Required landscaping and other visual/ noise barriers if the proposed school is to be located in a residential area.
13
15-17
POLICY 16.8
Utility company rights-of-way may be considered for their use as public or private open space, trails, parkland, or other compatible recreational uses.
POLICY 16.9
Religious institutions may be allowed in residential neighborhoods if sufficient off-street parking is provided and the design of the facility is consistent with the residential character of the neighborhood, and includes:
1.	Access to the properly via an arterial or collector street.
2.	The screening of parking with landscaping and/or materials that will blend with surrounding natural and constructed features of the neighborhood.
3.	The shielding of adjacent residential properties from direct light and glare from the property.
POLICY 16.10
Clubs and fraternal organizations shall generally be limited to commercial areas. The use of a single family home in a residential area for a club or fraternal organization may be permitted subject to the following standards:
1.	Noise levels shall meet the requirements of the Noise Element of the Folsom General Plan.
2.	One small exterior sign will be allowed, subject to City standards.
3.	No external modification to the house will be permitted except to provide handicapped access.
4.	Off-street parking will be required, according to City parking standards for clubs and fraternal organizations.
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
3
GOAL 17
To develop a comprehensive transporta-tion/circulation system which includes as a minimum:
1.	Freeways, highways, and/or expressways designed to route through-traffic away from Folsom’s neighborhoods.
2.	Arterial roads which provide access among Folsom’s neighborhoods, major cross-town links, and links between Folsom and adjacent communities.
3.	Additional crossing(s) over the American River.
4.	Pathways and designated routes for bicycle and pedestrian traffic.
5.	Designated routes for commercial vehicles.
6.	The protection of residential neighborhoods from through-traffic.
7.	Public transportation routes.
POLICY 17.1
The City shall plan for an integrated circulation system which provides for travel by private vehicles, commercial vehicle routes, a public transportation system, and for pedestrian and bicycle routes.
POLICY 17.2
The City should establish a hierarchy of roads consisting of the following:
15-18
1.	Freeways or limited access highways. Such roads shall be grade separated at each intersection with another road. The major purpose of such roads is to route traffic around Folsom, with as few interruptions to the surface street system as possible. U. S. Highway 50 currently meets the definition of a freeway. The City has made a firm commitment that a new freeway would not bisect the City.
2.	Expressways. Allow for moderate- to highspeed travel within the City. The purpose of an expressway Is to carry cross-town traffic from other communities or between neighborhoods within the City. An expressway may contain some grade-separated intersections. but this type of road would be mainly a surface street. Expressways should be located to allow for controlled intersections spaced at one-half mile intervals or more. Only arterial and collector roads should intersect with an expressway.
3.	Arterial roads (or major streets). Serve to connect neighborhoods within the City and the City with surrounding communities. Arterials would normally define the boundaries of neighborhoods, not provide internal access to a neighborhood.
4.	Collector (or secondary) roads. Serve to route traffic from local streets within a neighborhood to an arterial road. Collector streets would not normally serve as "through* roads formore than one area, but would circulate throughout a neighborhood.
5.	Local (or tertiary) roads. Serve a portion of a neighborhood only and route traffic to a collector street.
6.	Street-ends (cul-de-sacs, dead-end streets, etc.). Limited In length and serve only a few residences.
POLICY 17.3
Arterial roads serving new developments shall be aligned with existing arterial roads when ever possible.
POLICY 17.4
Routes for additional bridge crossings over the American River shall be designated on the Plan Map. Because the Proposed Oak Avenue and Folsom-Aubum Road crossings will serve a significant amount of regional through traffic with distinctly different origins and destinations, financing and construction of the bridges should be considered as a package rather than separately.
POLICY 17.5
The City should locate and improve existing arterial roads to provide direct access between a central commercial district, a regional commercial center, and major public institutions (hospital site, community college site. Civic Center).
POLICY 17.6
The City should require that new arterial roads or extensions or widening of existing arterial roads that are needed to serve a new development are planned and constructed in accordance with the Plan Map and standards contained herein. Land must be set aside by dedication for sufficient rights-of-way and landscaping in accordance with standards contained herein, and a planting strip or other buffer shall be required in single family developments to ensure that homes do not back directly onto the arterial road.
POLICY 17.7
The City shall require the establishment of landscape maintenance assessment agreements or districts for new developments adjacent to arterial roads to ensure that planting strips are required and properly maintained.
POLICY 17.8
A five-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) for road improvements should be prepared and implemented by the City. The road improvement plan shall be updated at least every other year subsequent to its initial adoption. The road improvements plan shall establish a schedule for needed road repair and construction and identify sources of funding for road improvements. The
13
15-19
five-year CIP should be consistent with the Fiscal Element of the General Plan which will be prepared to Identify total Citywide public facility funding mechanisms.
As part of this program the City should update the Folsom Area Traffic Study on a regular basis (at least annually) as part of a regular traffic monitoring program to attempt to achieve that at least a traffic Level of Service “C” is achieved throughout the City.
POLICY 17.9
The City should plan for the expansion of future public transit routes (bus and fixed rail service).
1.	Transit routes should coincide with major destinations for employment and shopping, the location of major institutions, concentrations of multifamily housing, and other land uses likely to attract public transit ridership.
2.	The City should preserve existing railroad rights-of-way for their potential future use as public transit routes. The City should work with Regional Transit to determine other rights-of-way which could be preserved for rail transit use. Proposed light rail alignments and station locations are designated on the Plan Map and dedication of land for the required right-of-way shall be required as part of the approval process for development of adjoining parcels.
3.	Bus routes should follow major roads with service to residential neighborhoods via collector streets.
POLICY 17.10
The City should develop and maintain a bikeways and pedestrian master plan that links residential developments with sources of employment. public open spaces, parks, schools, neighborhood shopping areas, the central commercial district, other major recreational destinations, and adjoining communities.
1.	The City should ensure that new residential developments incorporate pedestrian and bicycle paths or routes when there are nearby
schools, parks, public open spaces, sources of employment or other destinations for such travel. Such paths orroutes should be designed so that schools and parks are accessible to area residents. Pedestrian/bi-cycle over- or under-crossings may be provided when necessary to cross arterial roads or expressways.
2.	The existing bicycle and pedestrian paths along theAmerican River shall be preserved.
3.	The City should establish and maintain an internal pathway system that links parks sources of employment and public open spaces using rights-of-way and parkways.
4.	Where on-street bikeways are not feasible, the City should provide for Class I off-street bikeways.
5.	The City should endeavor to provide routes paralleling the major arterial routes for long distance bicycle travel.
6.	The City should endeavor to provide routes for recreational travel, providing access to important recreational areas of the City, including Folsom Lake.
POLICY 17.11
Whenever any major repair, alteration, or construction of roads are undertaken, immediate consideration of incorporating and providing bicycle routes and facilities should occur, as designated by the City of Folsom Bikeway Master Plan, and state specifications for bikeways.
POLICY 17.12
The City of Folsom should establish an ongoing public education program on bicycle safety and encourage bicycle safety programs for cyclists and motorists.
POLICY 17.13
The Master Plan includes four typical bike lane cross sections which shall be used where appropriate.
15-20
1.	Class-1 bikeways, separated bicycle paths will be the preferred bikeway, wherever feasible. This form of bike lane win be encouraged In areas such as the Willow Creek-Humbug Creek Parkway, and along the Lake Natoma frontage, and along major boulevards, such as Folsom Boulevard.
2.	Class-2 bike lanes, which Include a five foot stripped bike lane on the outside of an eight foot parking lane, win be encouraged In areas where on-street parking Is likely to occur. Such areas would be In the vicinity complexes.
3.	Class 3 & 4 bike lanes, which include fbur foot and dghtfoot stripped bike lanes on the edge of pavement, should be utilized on city arterial. collector, and other roads as Indicated on the bikeways master plan.
POLICY 17.14
The City shall require facilities for parking bicycles in accordance with the Zoning Code.
POLICY 17.13
The City shall review parking requirements to ensure that adequate off-street parking can be provided for new development projects.
POLICY 17.16
The City shall designate locations for park and ride lots and adopt standards for their development. Several such lots are designated on the Plan Map and dedication of land for each site shall be required as part of the approval process for development of adjoining parcels.
POLICY 17.17
The City should strive to achieve at least a traffic Level of Service “C" throughout the City. During the course of Plan buildout it may occur that temporarily higher Level of Service result where roadway improvements have not been adequately phased as development proceeds. However, this situation will be minimized based on annual traffic studies and monitoring programs.
POLICY 17.18
The City will work with the California Department of Transportation In planning for and funding freeway interchange Improvements and additional Interchanges along U.S. Highway 50. A specific study should be prepared by the City to determine the -required phasing of construction of freeway and Interchange improvements based upon buildout of land uses designated on the Plan Map.
POLICY 17.19
Because the Traffic Studies upon which this Transportation and Circulation Hlrmmtare based shows various Intersections which will not achieve Level of Service *C’. the City should adopt a mandatory TSM program that applies to existing as well as future development and will ensure the assumed reduction in peak hour trips. Prior to adoption of the Program by the City, all discretionary development permits issued by the City should require the applicants to participate in the TSM program when enacted. Specific Studies should be conducted to determine the most desirable methods for achieving the required level of trip reduction.
I
POLICY 17.20
The City shall develop a long range public transit plan for Folsom. Such a Plan shall be developed In cooperation with SACOG and Regional Transit, and shall Include a study to determine the feasibility and financing requirements of:
1.	Continued City operated intra-community bus service.
2.	Continued City operated commuter bus service to downtown Sacramento and/or service to the nearest RT Metro Rail Station.
3.	Extending RT Metro service to Folsom and the preservation of future rights-of-way.
POLICY 17.21
Establishment of speed limits for streets within residential areas should include consideration of the potential traffic noise reduction
13
15-21
which may be achieved through lower speeds. In some cases it may be appropriate to establish a lower speed limit than may be allowed by roadway design to accomplish the goal of maintaining acceptable traffic noise levesl within a neighborhood.
POLICY 17.22
The City shall require a minimum two lanes of arterial roads to be installed adjacent to or in the- vicinty of new subdivisions.
HOUSING ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 18
To provide for the City’s regional share of new housing for all income groups.
POLICY 18.1
Maintain sufficient land zoned at a range of residential densities to accommodate the City’s regional share of housing.
POLICY 18.2
Identify sites that are suitable for multifamily housing and residential redevelopment.
POLICY 18.3
To encourage home builders to use multifamily-designated land for the highest allowed density housing consistent with the City’s low- and moderate-income housing needs.
the applicant. As one of its first implementation actions, the City will identify available, funded programs, determine which of those programs could be used in Folsom (based on the purpose and eligibility requirements for each program), and determine the most appropriate public agency or private entity to take primary responsibility for applying for funding.
POLICY 19.2
The City will also investigate the feasibility of issuing tax-exempt bonds or mortgage credit certificates to provide low-interest financing for affordable housing.
POLICY 19.3
The City will provide density bonuses to home builders proposing to include at least 10% very low-income housing or 20% low-income housing in their residential developments.
13
GOAL 19
To encourage the provision of affordable housing.
POLICY 19.1
The City will make use of state and federal programs for which it would be the applicant, and work with non-profit and for-profit developers to make use of those programs for which the developer must be
POLICY 19.4
The City will work with non-profit organizations, to identify potential projects and sources of funding to develop low- and moderate-income housing.
POLICY 19.5
The City will identify surplus government property that could be used for construction of housing affordable to
3*7 LZ Housing
15-22
low- and moderate-income households and encourage interested developers to make use of such land.
POLICY 19.6
The City will develop a plan for the use of redevelopment tax increment funds set-aside for the construction and rehabilitation of housing for low- and moderate-income households.
GOAL 20
To improve the existing supply of housing.
POLICY 20.1
Provide property owners with assistance to inspect and identify code violations in residential buildings.
POLICY 20.2
Continue to apply for state and federal assistance for housing rehabilitation for low-income households. Rental housing that is repaired with government assistance shall remain affordable to low-income households for a specified period of time.
POLICY 20.3
Require the abatement or demolition of substandard housing that is not economically feasible to repair and which represents a health and safety threat.
POLICY 20.4
Seek, through code enforcement, the private rehabilitation of substandard dwelling units and provide financial assistance, when available, to owners of dwelling units occupied by low-income
households. In applying this policy, the City shall seek to avoid the displacement of low-income households.
POLICY 20.5
Periodically survey housing conditions in the to maintain a current data base on housing repair needs.
POLICY 20.6
Allocate a portion of the City’s redevelopment tax increment set-aside funds for preserving substandard housing occupied by lower-income households.
GOAL 21
To ensure equal housing opportunity
POLICY 21.1
The City will provide information and referral to individuals with fair housing complaints.
GOAL 22
To promote energy conservation
POLICY 22.1
Continue to implement state energy-efficient standards.
POLICY 22.2
Include energy conservation guidelines as part of the development standards for the specific plan area.
POLICY 22.3
Provide weatherization assistance to low-income households.
13

15-23
GOAL 22-A
To promote the preservation of historic residences.
POLICY 22-A.l
The City will encourage the preservation of residential buildings with historic or architectural value.
GOAL 22-B
To develop a plan for the use of redevelopment housing set-aside funds.
POLICY 22-B.l
The City will prepare a plan to guide the use of redevelopment tax-increment funds set aside to support low- and moderate-income housing programs.
ReSo # 3“l G'Z- Hougj
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
13
GOAL 23
To preserve existing heritage trees through a City Ordinance.
POLICY 23.1
The City shall continue to enforce the Tree Preservation/Landscape Ordinance and identify heritage trees to be preserved. Site designs shall consider building and parking configurations which will preserve as many heritage trees as possible.
POLICY 23.2
Replacement trees shall be required whenever existing trees are removed.
POLICY 23.3
The City may allow proposed development to be concentrated on a
portion of a site and include taller buidlings or smaller lot sizes to preserve a greater number of existing trees.
GOAL 24
To ensure that projects contain landscaping and trees that compliment the City’s natural character.
POLICY 24.1
Development projects shall contain landscaping of common or public areas, surface parking areas, and streets bordering the project.
POLICY 24.2
Prior to the granting of a buidling permit, a project must have an approved landscaping plan showing the location, type, and proposed maintenance of landscaping.
15-24
POLICY 24.3
The developer or property owners shall be responsible for maintaining landscaping required as part of the project approval for residential developments where there are common areas, and for all commercial and Industrial developments'. The City will require the establishment of a landscaping maintenance district or other legally binding maintenance agreement and will reserve the power to enforce the maintenance agreement through appropriate means.
POLICY 24.4
The City shall adopt a landscaping ordinance with standards for:
1.	Preferred types of plants and materials.
2.	Agreements to ensure the continued maintenance of landscaped areas.
3.	Minimum size of trees upon planting.
4.	Amount of landscaping area.
GOAL 25
Wherever feasible, to preserve, acquire, rehabilitate, enhance and maintain the identified resources for the use and enjoyment of present and future generations. The Identified resources Include, but are not limited to:
1.	NorthemHardpan Vernal Pools and Associated Sensitive Flora
2.	Valley Bunch Grasslands and Associated
Sensitive Flora
3.	Freshwater Marshlands and Associated
Sensitive Flora
4.	Riparian Forests and Woodlands and Associated Sensitive Flora
5.	Oak Savannah and Woodlands and Associated Sensitive Flora
6.	Permanent and Seasonal Wetlands and
Associated Sensitive Flora
7.	American River Corridor
8.	Humbug Creek
9.	Blue Ravine Creek
10.	Hinkle Creek
11.	Willow Creek
12.	Lake Natoma
13.	Folsom Lake
14.	Willow Hill Reservoir. If feasible
15.	Tricolored Blackbird
16.	Swainson's Hawk
17.	Tiger Salamander
18.	Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle
19.	Folsom Boulevard Scenic Corridor, from
Highway 50 to Sutter Street
20.	Greeriback Lane Scenic Corridor, from the
Folsom City Limits to Riley Street
21.	East Natoma Street Scenic Corridor, from
Oak Avenue Parkway to the El Dorado
County Line
22.	Folsom-Aubum Road Scenic Corridor, from the Folsom City Limits to Greenback Lane
POLICY 25.1
The surface and groundwater quality of Folsom shall not be degraded from City standards.
POLICY 25.2
The City may obtain fee title or protective easements of Identified resources.
POLICY 25.3
Sensitive habitat areas and open space shall have their borders defined by public access ways, and/or shall have views from adjacent buildings oriented toward the areas.
POLICY 25.4
The City shall require that a qualified biologist conduct a vegetative/wildlife field survey, and analysis prior to consideration of development applications for proj ects within or adj acent to sensitive habitat areas and potential habitats for sensitive wildlife and floral species.
POLICY 25.5
The City shall adopt standards for the designation, enhancement and maintenance of identified sensitive habitat areas.
POLICY 25.6
The City shall establish a vegetation preservation ordinance which:
1.	Specifies native or “naturalized" vegetation which should be given highest priority for preservation.
13
15-25
2.	Requires an applicant to show the approximate location of existing priority vegetation.
3.	Specifies the quantity and manner of vegetation which must be planted for replacement
POLICY 25.7
Trees and other vegetation comprising riparian or other special habitats targeted for preservation should be preserved regardless of whether they are heritage trees.
GOAL 26
The City shall actively encourage the restoration and maintenance of historic buildings or sites. •
POLICY 26.1
Identification and publication of available ~ federal, state and private funding sources and Incentive programs.
POLICY 26.2
The City should adopt consistent standards for development, public Improvements, alley utilization, and heritage Improvements for the original 50* x 140' lots situated within the original town boundaries. Including the area generally bounded by Bidwell Street. Riverway, Stafford Street and Folsom Boulevard.
13
GOAL 27
To preserve, acquire, rehabilitate, enhance and maintain the City's identified open spaces for passive and active recreational uses.
POLICY 27.1
The City shall encourage the Improvement of public access to recreational facilities and open spaces through:
1.	The publication of a trails and recreation guide which maps the trails, open spaces, and parks within the City of Folsom and
shows the Interconnection with trails and facilities in adjoining communities. The guide shall describe the facilities and hours
. of operation.
2.	The City should require the new parks and open spaces shall be easily accessible to the public. Including the mobility Impaired.
POLICY 27.2
The City shall develop parkway plans for each Identified sensitive habitat area and should Include:
1.	Provisionforpedestrian. bike and/or equestrian trall(s) with connections to adjacent trail systems.
2.	Pmvtsinn fnrtratlhead/parking areas spaced along parkways.
3.	Consideration of the development of interpretive centers or trails within parkways.
POLICY 27.3
The City shall adopt a Scenic Corridor Plan for the Identified scenic corridors Including but not limited to:
1.	Folsom Boulevard Scenic Corridor, from
Highway 50 to Sutter Street
2.	Greenback Lane Scenic Corridor, from the
City Limits to Riley Street.
3.	East Natoma Street Scenic Corridor, from Oak Avenue Parkway to the El Dorado County Line.
4.	Folsom-Auburn Road Scenic Corridor, from the City Limits to Greenback Lane.
POLICY 27.4
The City shall encourage land owners to consolidate Identified habitats, open space and park lands between separately owned development projects and Individually owned properties where feasible.
15-26
GOAL 28
To provide for the production of natural resources when compatible with the goals and policies of this General Plan.
POLICY 28.1
The City should adopt water conservation measures which reduce water consumption, by user type.
POLICY 28.2
The quality and quantity of surface water runoff from a property shall not exceed existing flows or existing quality or shall comply with City standards for off-site drainage. The City shall implement a surface-runoff water quality monitoring program to insure compliance with City standards.
POLICY 28.3
The City should maintain existing and develop new sources of water to ensure adequate. long term and high qualitywater supplies.
POLICY 28.4
The City shall when feasible require new development on dredge tailings to reclaim the
tailings in conformance with the guidelines and regulations of the California Division of Mines and Geology.
POLICY 28.5
Where feasible, the City shall protect existing or future mining and/or gravel extraction sites from encroachment of non-compatible uses through phasing of development and performance standards. The City recognizes that, as a practical matter, the prospects for-mining and/or gravel extraction are extremely nnlikHy in view of the restrictions upon the issuance of surface mining permits imposed by Ordinance No. 613 adopted in response to an initiative measure.
POLICY 28.6
The City shall encourage community wide recycling in an effort to- conserve natural resources and reduce solid waste disposal This may be established through the development of recycling programs promoted and sponsored by the City with non-profit groups. These programs could include but not be limited to curbside recycling programs, siting of a recycling center or drop off collection centers.
SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 29
To protect lives and property from unacceptable risks resulting from natural and manmade hazards.
POLICY 29.1
Fire and Police Department personnel/resi-dent population ratios shall be maintained at adequate levels as defined by the City Council.
POLICY 29.2
The City shall maintain a fire prevention and retention program for buildings.
POLICY 29.3
The City shall develop standards for building within the 100 year floodway to assure that the water flows above stream and downstream from a property will not be altered from existing levels.
POLICY 29.4
13
The City shall work with the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers in developing standards for development within the inundation boundary resulting from a failure of Folsom Dam or the dikes retaining Folsom Lake.
15-27
POLICY 29.5
The City shall prepare, publish and coordinate an emergency response plan which addresses medical care, escape routes, mutual aid agreements, temporary housing and communications.
POLICY 29.6
The City shall encourage the preparation
and distribution to the general public of a safety guide for the use and enjoyment of Folsom's resources.
POLICY 29.7
The City shall cooperate with SMUD’s efforts in preparing and publishing an emergency evacuation plan for Rancho Seco Nuclear Power Plant
NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 30
POLICY 30.3
3
To protect the citizens of Folsom from the harmful effects of exposure to excessive noise and to protect the economic base of Folsom by preventing the encroachment of Incompatible land uses within areas affected by existing noise-producing uses.
POLICY 30.1
Provide sufficient noise exposure information in the General Plan data base so that existing and potential noise impacts may be effectively addressed in the land use planning and project review processes.
POLICY 30.2
Develop and implement effective strategies to abate and avoid excessive noise exposures in the City by requiring that effective noise mitigation measures be incorporated into the design of new noise-generating and new noise-sensitive land uses.
Protect areas within the City where the present noise environment is within acceptable limits.
POLICY 30.4
Areas within the City of Folsom shall be designated as noise Impacted if exposed to existing orprojected exterior noise levels exceeding 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or the performance standards of Table 26-3 of the Noise Element.
Noise created bynon-transportation-related noise sources associated with new projects or developments shall be controlled so as not to exceed the noise level standards as set forth below as measured at any affected residentially designated lands or land use situated in either the incorporated or unincorporated areas. New residential development shall not be allowed where the ambient noise level due to non-trans-portation-related noise sources will exceed the noise level standards as set forth below:
--------------------------- TABLE 26-3 --------------------------
NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NEW PRO JECTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS. DBA
CATEGORY	CUMULATIVE NUMBER OF MINUTES IN ANY ONE-HOUR TIME PERIOD	DAYTIME 7:00 AM. TO 10:00 P.M.	NIGHTTIME 10:00 P.M. TO 7:00 AM.
1 -	30	50	45
2	15	55	50
3	5	60	55
4	1	65	60
5	0	70	65
15-28
Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by five DBA for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises.
Noise from single occurrences such as the passage of locomotives, heavy trucks or aircraft should also be evaluated in terms of single event noise levels. The-ma-rlmnm nnt«te level CTeateri by such an event may have the potential to result in activity interference even though the cumulative noise exposure in terms of Ldn is within acceptable limits. The potential for sleep disturbance is usually of primary concern in such cases, and should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
POLICY 30.5
New development of residential or other noise sensitive land uses will not be permitted in noise impacted areas unless effective mitigation measures are incorporated into the project design to reduce noise levels to:
1.	For noise due to traffic on public roadways, railroad line operations and aircraft: 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or less in outdoor activity areas, and interior noise levels to 45 dB Ldn/ CNEL or less. ■ Where it is not possible to reduce exterior noise due to these sources to 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or less by incorporating a practical application of the best available noise-reduction technology, an exterlornoise level of up to 65 dB Ldn/CNEL will be allowed. Under no circumstances will interior noise levels be permitted to exceed 45 dB Ldn/ CNEL with the windows and doors closed.
2.	For non-transportatlonrelated noise sources: achieve compliance with the performance standards contained within Table 26-3.
3.	If compliance with the adopted standards and policies of the Noise Element will not be achieved, a statement of overriding considerations for the project must be provided.
POLICY 30.6
When industrial, commercial land uses or other uses including non-transportation related noise sources are proposed which would affect
areas containing noise sensitive land uses, noise levels generated by the proposed use shall not exceed the performance standards contained within Table 26-3.
POLICY 30.7
Prior to approval of proposed development of residential or other noise-sensitive land uses in a noise impacted area, an Acoustical Analysis may be required. The acoustical analysis shall;
1.	Be the responsibility of the applicant.
2.	Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
3.	Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and locations to adequately describe local conditions.
4.	Include estimated noise levels in terms of Ldn/CNEL and/or the standards of Table 3 for existing and projected future (20 years hence) conditions, with a comparison made to the adopted policies of the Noise Element.
5.	Include recommendations for appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies and standards of the Noise Element Where the noise source in question consists of intermittent single events, the report must address the effects of maximum noise levels in sleeping rooms in terms of possible sleep disturbance.
6.	Include estimates of noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been Implemented.
POLICY 30.8
The City of Folsom shall endeavor to develop and employ procedures to ensure that requirements imposed pursuant to the findings of an acoustical analysis are implemented as part of the project review and building permit processes. The appropriate time for requiring an acoustical analysis would be as early in the project review process as possible so that noise mitigation may be an integral part of the project design.
13
15-29
POLICY 30.9
Noise level criteria applied to land uses other than residential or other noise sensitive uses shall be consistent with the standards In Figure 26-5.
POLICY 30.10
The City of Folsom shall enforce the State Noise Insulation stanriaTdw (California Administrative Code. Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code (UBC). Title 24 requires that an acoustical analysis be prepared for all new developments of multi-family dwellings, condominiums, hotels and motels proposed for areas within the 60 dB Ldn/CNEL contour of a major noise source for the purpose of documenting that an acceptable Interior noise level of 45 dB Ldn/CNEL or below will be achieved. UBC Chapter 35 requires that common wall and floor/ ceiling assemblies within multi-family dwellings comply with minimum standards concerning the transmission of airborne sound and structure-bome impact noise.
existing sections of the California Vehicle Code relating to adequate vehicle mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
POLICY 30.13
- The findings and specific policies of the Noise Element shall be incorporated Into the City of Folsom Zoning Code as appropriate.
POLICY 30.14
The City of Folsom shall periodically review and update the Noise Element to ensure that noise exposure information and specific policies are consistent with changing conditions within the community and with noise control regulations enacted after the adoption of this Element.
POLICY 30.13
If noise barriers are required to achieve the noise level standards contained within this Element. the following construction practices are recommended:
POLICY30.il
The City of Folsom shall adopt a community noise control ordinance to address noise complaints and to provide local Industry with performance standards for future development and equipment modifications. The ordinance should be consistent with the model noise control ordinance contained in the data base of the General Plan.
POLICY 30.12
The City of Folsom shall actively enforce
1.	Noise barriers exceeding six feet in height relative to the roadway should Incorporate an earth berm so that the total height of the solid portion of the barrier (such as masonry or concrete) does not exceed six feet.
2.	The total height of a noise barrier above roadway elevation should normally be limited to 12 feet
3.The-noise barriers should be designed so that their appearance is consistent with other noise barriers in the project vicinity.
3
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
GOAL 31
To improve the air quality of the City of Folsom including:
1.	Achievement and maintenance of ambient air quality standards established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the California Air Resources Board.
GOALS AND POLICIES
2.	Minimizing public exposure to toxic or hazardous air pollutants.
3.	Limiting visibility reducing particulate matter in the atmosphere.
4.	Minimizing public exposure to air pollutants which create a public nuisance through Irritation to the senses or unpleasant odor.
13-30
FIGURE 26-5
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY FOR COMMUNITY NOISE ENVIRONMENTS
LAND USE CATEGORY
COMMUNITY NOISE Ldn orCNELdB 55 60 65 70 75 80
INTERPRETATION
FT NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
Residential - Single Family Duplex, Mobile Home
Residential - Multi-Family
Transient Lodging -Motel, Hotel
School, Library, Church, Hospital, Nursing Home
Audtorium, Concert Hall, Amphitheatre
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
Playground, Neighborhood Park
Golf Course, Stable, Water Recreation, Cemetery
Office Budding, Business, Commercial & Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture
ry, CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
M NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
I' I"................
New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
CONSIDERATIONS IN DETERMINATION OF NOISE - COMPATIBLE LAND USE
A.	NORMALIZATION NOISE EXPOSURE
INFORMATION DESIRED
Where sufficient data exlsta, evaluate land use suitable with respect to a "normalized" value of CNEL or L^. Normalized values are obtained by adding or subtracting the Constanta described in Table 1 to the measured or calculated of CNEL or Lfc.
B.	NOISE SOURCE CHARACTERISTICS
The land use-noise compatibility recommendations should be viewed In relation to specific source of the noise. For example, aircraft and railroad noise Is normally made up of higher single noise events than auto traffic but occurs less frequently. Therefore, different sources yielding the same composite noise exposes do not necessarily create the same noise environment. The State Aeronautics Act uses 65 dB CNEL as the criterion which airports must eventually meet to protect existing residential communities from unacceptable exposure to aircraft noise. In order to facilitate the purposes of the Act. one of which to encourage land compatible with the 65 dB CNEL criterion wherever possible, and in order to facilitate the ability of airports to
comply with the Act. residential uses located In Community Noise Rxpoamc Areas greater than 65 dB should be discouraged and considered located within normally unacceptable areas.
C.	SUITABLE INTERIOR ENVIRONMENTS
One objective oflocatlng residential units relative to a known noise source is to maintain a suitable Interior noise environment at no greater than 45 dB CNEL of Lta. This requirement, coupled with the measured or calculated noise reduction performance of the type of structure undcconsid era tian, should govern the minimum acceptable distance to noise source.
D.	ACCEPTABLE OUTDOOR ENVIRONMENTS
Another consldaation. which in some communities Is an overriding factor, is the desire for an acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, more restrictive standards for land use compatibility, typically below the maximum considered "normally acceptable* for that land use category, may be appropriate.
Source: California Office of Noise Control
13
15-31
POLICY 31.1
Because the City of Folsom shares the air basin with other Jurisdictions, and suffers from poor air quality due to regional ozone violations, the City shall work cooperatively with other members of the Sacramento Area Council of Governments, the Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District, the California Air Resources Board. CALTRANS, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency toward the development of a consistent and effective approach to the regional air pollution problem. The City will participate In the updating of the 1982 Air Quality Plan, and incorporate Air Quality Plan update measures into the General Plan.
POLICY 31.2
The City shall use consistent and accurate procedures approved by the California Air Resources Board In the review of projects which may have air quality Impacts. Comments on the analysis shall be solicited from the Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District and the Air Resources Board.
buses with buses powered by alternative fuels, such as methanol and electric.
4.	Commercial/Industrial project sponsored daycare and employee services at the employment site.
5.	Park and ride lots.
POLICY 31.5
The City shall work with the Air Resources Board or Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District In establishing a carbon monoxide monitoring program In order to accurately determine the status of carbon monoxide air quality and to quantify the Impacts of growth and development In the Folsom area.
POLICY 31.6
Non-retail Industrial and non-retail commercial projects which directly emit air pollutants should be located in areas designated for Industrial development, and separated from residential mixed use areas.
POLICY 31.3
POLICY 31.7
The City shall encourage the adoption of more stringent vehicle emission standards and enhancements to the Smog Check program through active participation In hearings held by the State Legislature, the CaliforniaAir Resources Board and the Bureau of Automotive Repair.
13
POLICY 31.4
To minimize air quality Impacts mitigation measures shall be required for transportation emissions associated with all development estimated to generate 2,000 or more trips per day. Measures may Include:
1.	Project proponent funding of roadway Improvements.
2.	Commercial/lndustrial project proponent sponsorship of van pools or club buses.
3.	Project proponent funded transit subsidies sufficient to reduce emissions from transit through the substitution of diesel-fueled
All employers of 50 or more full time employees per shift shall develop and Implement incentive-based trip reduction programs for their employees. Incentives may include:
1.	Provision of reserved and preferentially located parking spaces forthe exclusive use of employees who actively participate In rlde-sharlng.
2.	Provision of secure bicycle storage facilities.
3.	Provision of shower and locker facilities for use by employees who commute by non-motorlzed means.
4.	Distribution by employers of current Information regarding the availability, cost and schedules of public transit.
5.	Employer provision of economic incentives to maximize the use of transit, ridesharing, van pooling and non-motorized transportation.
15-32
POLICY 31.8
Hie City shall participate in the development of a regionally consistent transportation emissions accounting system so that transportation emission reductions are accounted for, and those responsible receive appropriate credit
POLICY 31.9
The City should encourage bicycle usage through the development and maintenance of a safe and comprehensive bikeway system which includes:
1.	The provision of securely anchored bicycle racks.
2.	Sidewalks in residential development with protective curbing and adequate lighting.
POLICY 31.10
The City of Folsom shall develop, as part of its transportation plan and the Transportation and Circulation Element of the General Plan, a transit development plan so that Folsom residents may safely and conveniently use transit for work, school, shopping, recreational and other trips within the City and outside of the City.
GOAL 32
To minimize public exposure to toxic or hazardous air pollutants.
POLICY 32.1
Reference Policy 31.6.
GOAL 33
To minimize visibility-reducing particulate matter in the atmosphere.
POLICY 33.1
Reference Policy 31.7.
POLICY 33.2
Reference Policy 31.9.
GOAL 34
To mintmtae public exposure to air pollutants which create a public nuisance through irritation to the senses or unpleasant odor.
PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 35
To achieve and maintain quality parks which provide optimum satisfaction to the leisure and recreation needs of the citizens.
POLICY 33.1
The City shall construct parks with originality and innovation in design that provide challenge and self-renewal to the user and viewer.
POLICY 35.2
The City shall develop a listing of equipment standards and design guidelines for parks and recreation facilities.
POLICY 35.3
The City shall maintain its parks and recreation facilities in accordance with City adopted maintenance standards.
POLICY 35.4
The City shall encourage, where appropriate, the inclusion of bikeways, walkways, and equestrian trails in parks, parkways, and open space acreage.
POLICY 35.5
Where feasible, park sites throughout the City shall be integrated with the Bikeways Mas-
13
15-33
ter Plan and bicycle trails outside the City such as the American River Bike Path.
POLICY 35.6
The City shall encourage the development of parks with night-use capability.
POLICY 35.7
The City shall encourage construction of shelters, such as pavilions, arbors, lattice canopies, etc. to form shade and shelter for year round use. In conjunction with the shelters, the planting of trees shall be encouraged to increase the shade areas and aesthetics of the parks.
POLICY 35.8
Parkland shall be accepted by the City, if judged to be useful for passive and/or active uses. Land constrained by drainage, slopes or structures which limit the full recreational use of the site shall not be accepted for lull credit under the City Parkland Dedication Ordinance. Such lands may be accepted as open space or parkway acreage. Partial credit for constrained lands may be allowed if they are found to be usable or can be made usable in compliance with standards for parkland dedication Included in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
POLICY 35.9
Lands designated as open space on the Land Use Map of this General Plan may be used for parks, but shall not be credited as parkland pursuant to the Parkland Dedication Ordinance.
Open spaces are an existing resource within
3
to credit these lands for parkland would reduce the full potential of open space that the City requires in order to achieve and maintain the desired quality of life.
POLICY 35.10
The City shall actively encourage the protection and preservation of natural habitats identified in the Open Space and Conservation Element.
POLICY 35.11
The City shall strive to acquire and develop parklands within existing neighborhoods which comply with the standards of this Element and the General Plan.
POLICY 35.12
The following standards are the minimum acceptable standards for parks, open space and recreation facilities in the City of Folsom:
PARK ACREAGE STANDARD
Five acres per thousand population (5 acres per 1,000 persons).
PARKLAND
Areas are generally designated on the Land Use Map of the General Plan for park acreage credit. Those lands which are consistent with the goals and policies of this Element and the General Plan and the Park and Recreation Master Plan shall be credited as parkland.
PARK CATEGORIES
In order to provide a balance, parks have been categorized in terms of their function and sizes. The acreages listed are approximate desirable sizes. The categories are:
• Mini Parks (1 to 2 Acres): Specialized facilities that usually serve a concentrated or limited population or specific group such as tots or senior citizens. Mini parks may feature children’s play areas, quiet game areas, landscaping and some sport activities such as multi-purpose courts if space allows. Ideal in close proximity to apartment complexes, townhouses, or elderly housing. May be used to enhance beauty of the City.
• Neighborhood Parks (10 to 20 Acres): A recreation area which provides for indoor and outdoorprograms and activities. Neighborhood recreation parks should serve one neighborhood, and be centralized within that neighborhood, a park which can be walked to by children. Where possible they
15-34
should be located next to schools to avoid duplication and achieve joint use advantages. Neighborhood recreation parks should primarily serve the needs of the neighborhood residents.
•	School/Parks (10 to 20 Acres): A neighborhood park located adjacent to a school. See Neighborhood Park.
•	Schools (10 to 20 Acres): School playing fields and facilities can be shared with the City Parks and Recreation program to maximize facilities use. Conversely, parks and other recreational facilities can be shared with schools to enhance school facilities and reduce the need for duplicate facilities and programs.
•	Special Use Areas (Undetermined): Within the City there are special use areas which do not fit easily In the other categories.
•	Community Parks (20 to 60 Acres): A recreation area which provides recreational opportunities for several neighborhoods. Community parks should avoid duplication of facilities already provided In neighborhood recreation parks, and where suitable, be located adjacent to a secondary school. It should Include such facilities as an aquatic center, provision for evening recreation. Indoor facilities, amphitheater, specialized athletic fields, tennis, handball, basketball courts, large and small picnic areas, and barbecue facilities, convenient parking, tot play apparatus and restrooms.
•	Regional Parks (200+ Acres): A recreation area which provides some remoteness from the urban setting or has features of regional significance including opportunities not possible In other parks within the City park system. This type of park serves a population within a large region, usually those within an hour’s travel time. A regional park may be the joint effort of more than one government agency. It should be developed to preserve existing natural areas, areas of great scenic beauty, or areas of historical interest. A regional park could include such facilities as arboretums, camping areas.
boating and fishing facilities, bicycling, equestrian and hiking trails, and other special use facilities.
• Open Space/Natural Areas/Parkways (Undetermined): Natural habitat areas, stream courses, utility easements or other corridors designated in the Open Space and Conservation Element and/or Circulation Elementforpurposeofpreservatlonofnatur-al features or circulation. Open space is clearly distinguished from park acreage and shall not be calculated or credited as parkland acreage. Parkways shall be preserved inthelrnatural state with a network of trails for walking, cycling and horseback riding. Parkways are classified as open space for the preservation of natural resources and shall not be credited as parkland acreage.
SPACE STANDARDS
Park sites and related standards are based Table 31-2. User distribution, user preference, accessibility, availability, and economic factors are to be individually considered.
GOAL 36
To acquire and Improve land and facilities recreational use In pace with local needs.
POLICY 36.1
The City shall acquire and develop sufficient lands to meet the recreational needs of the citizens.
POLICY 36.2
The City shall encourage the creation of a series of parks that serve as focal points for surrounding neighborhoods.
POLICY 36.3
13
The City shall encourage the development of parkways and greenbelts as an Integral link between the Citywide park system.
15-35
3
TABLE 31-2
PARK ACREAGE STANDARDS
PARK	SERVICE DESIRABLE ACRES/1000 POPULATION
CATEGORY	AREA	SIZE	POPULATION	
Mini Park	Less than 1/4 mile radius	1-2 acres	.5 to 1 acre -	1.000-2.000
Neighborhood Park	l/4-l/2mile radius	15 acres	2.5 to 3.5	2.000-5.000
Community Park	Several Neighborhoods 1-2 miles	45 acres	2.5 to 3.5	12,000-25.000
Special Use Recreation Area/ Natural Area/ Wildlife Area/ Parkway	Not applicable standard	Variable depending on desired size	Variable	Within community 25.000 - 50.000
Regional	Several communities within one hour driving time	200 + acre	5 to 10	Contiguous to or encompassing natural resources
radius
POLICY 36.4
The City shall monitor the condition of all facilities in order to repair and replace equipment as needed, and Insure that State safety standards and guidelines are being met
POLICY 36.5
The City shall develop programs to identify and attain alternative sources of funding for the acquisition and development of parklands and financing of recreation programs.
POLICY 36.6
The City shall improve undeveloped and developed parkland as financially feasible.
POLICY 36.7
The City shall develop and maintain a capital Improvement program for long term and short term recreation projects.
GOAL 37
To achieve and maintain quality recreation activities which provide optimum satisfaction to the leisure and recreation needs of the citizens.
POLICY 37.1
The City shall encourage the provision of programs and activities designed to meet the recreational needs of the residents of Folsom.
POLICY 37.2
The City shall continue to develop facilities and programs for indoor and outdoor activities directed toward the needs of the neighborhood served.
POLICY 37.3
The City shall encourage the incorporation into parks and recreation planning the needs of all age groups, handicapped, and special Interest groups.
15-36
POLICY 37.4
The City shall encourage the expansion of services to senior citizens and latch key kids.
POLICY 37.8
The City shall encourage and/or co-sponsor various ethnic programs and activities of local Interest.
POLICY 37.6
The City shall encourage that residents of Folsom be given first priority in participation of recreation sponsored programs, activities, and leagues.
POLICY 37.7
The City shall encourage or co-sponsor programs that Involve the entire family, e.g.. Family Fun Falre, Sports and Field Day. commu-nity picnics, and Kite Day.
GOAL 38
To Involve and inform the residents, merchants, and visitors of the need for public participation In planning, development, and proper maintenance of recreation facilities.
POLICY 38.1
The City shall strive to implement registration procedures which require minimal paperwork for individuals and groups.
POLICY 38.2
The City shall encourage citizen participation In park and recreation planning through the Park and Recreation Commission.
POLICY 38.3
The City shall encourage neighborhood beautification projects, anti-pollution drives, recycling and other conservation activities that enhance the environment.
POLICY 38.4
The City shall develop a handbook of facility use and maintenance for groups and Individuals using City facilities.
POLICY 38.5
The City shall continue to publish and advertise recreation programs, leagues and special events at a minimum of three times per year.
GOAL 39
To effectively use the resources of the City of Folsom and other governmental entitles (such as school districts, county, state and federal agencies) to accomplish coordinated, effective planning of recreation and leisure activities.
POLICY 39.1
The City shall encourage those agencies actively providing recreational programs and activities to continue those programs and activities.
POLICY 39.2
The City shall encourage the use of college interns in all areas of parks and recreation.
POLICY 39.3
The City shall encourage the use of community residents to Instruct special Interest programs: e.g., fishing, fly-tying, gun safety, dance, etc. The City may serve as coordinator for such programs by providing facilities, public rda-tions, Instructors, and by paying instructor fees.
POLICY 39.4
The City shall encourage the aid of State or County park rangers. i.e., Folsom Lake State Recreation Area, to provide leadership in programs that Inform the community on topics such as conservation and fire safety.
13
15-37
POLICY 39.5
The City shall continue the execution of a joint use. and development arrangement with the Folsom Cordova Unified School District, and encouraging an agreement with the Los Rios Community College District
POLICY 39.6
The City shall work cooperatively with the County Department of Parks and Recreation. State Department of Parks and Recreation, State Department of Corrections and State Department of Fish and Game in coordinating facility development and program offerings.
PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
3
GOAL 40
To set targets for the ultimate build-out of the City, to plan for the provision of public facilities and services to meet this level of development. and to phase development according to the capacity of public facilities and services to meet those targets.
POLICY 40.1
No permit for construction shall be issued for any new development not served by existing municipal facilities until the following condition have been met
1.	The applicant can provide for the installation and/or financing (through fees or other means) of needed public facilities.
2.	The project is included in the area covered by an existing facilities plan approved by the City.
3.	The project can be served by on-site or private facilities meeting City and County health and safety requirements.
POLICY 40.2
The City shall require the preparation of a facilities plan for an identified area when:
1.	Development of an area necessitates the provision, extension, and/or expansion of municipal services and facilities which are not customarily constructed by a developer: or
2.	There Is a need for services or facilities not otherwise funded by regular City fees: or
3.	The construction of the necessary services and facilities cannot be logically or economically provided by one landowner/developer in the normal sequence of orderly development.
POLICY 40.3
An area facilities plan shall include, but not be limited to the following:
1.	The description of the plan area and the basis for the selection of the proposed boundaries and the development potential of the area whenit is based ona comprehensive land use map.
2.	A statement of the plan’s consistency with the Folsom General Plan and the City's Urban Development Policy.
3.	Identification of the nature and extent of facilities necessary to serve the area and a schedule of estimated time within which facilities must be constructed.
4.	Engineer’s estimate of the total cost of such improvements (including plan preparation).
5.	A plan for the equitable apportionment of costs among benefltted properties and adjustments thereofbased upon the time such costs are paid.
6.	The nature of the obligation of each land owner or developer.
7.	Discussion of the options available to finance the improvements, including, but not limited to, construction by developers.
15-38
not limited to. construction by developers, an assessment district, fees, or a combination of these and/or other provisions.
8.	Provisions for amendments to the Plan, which may result from changes in the plan area, development patterns, etc.
9.	Provisions to refund or reimburse land -owners who construct facilities with capacity beyond the ultimate need of their developments.
2.	Sanitary sewer lines of appropriate size to accommodate the project and that will tie into the City's main lines.
3.	Public or private roads that can accommodate at least two lanes of traffic.
4.	Parking anddrculation systems that accommodate emergency vehicles and equipment.
POLICY 40.8
lO.Provisions for administration of the area plan and the collection and distribution of funds.
11A statement which recognizes that the financial commitments required pursuant to such plans are not in lieu of othermunldpal service and facilities fees. The financial commitments of land owners/developers shall be taken into account by the City in determining the extent of the imposition of such other municipal service and facilities fees.
12. A statement which recognizes that the Area Facilities Plan is not Intended to be responsible for the provision of all possible public facilities that will be needed in the future and that there are or may be additional costs/fees established by the City and other Juristictions (such as school districts) that may apply to the area. However, the plan must address the need for all public facilities which may reasonably be assumed to be necessary during buildout of the area.
POLICY 40.4
All new development projects shall be planned for an urban level of services:
1.	Sidewalks, gutters, and storm drains constructed to standards established by the City, except forresidential estates and other projects when appropriately excluded.
The City shall annually monitor the City’s available municipal water supply to ensure adequate reserves exist to serve projected water demand. In the event projected demand exceeds supply, the City may take the following actions to prevent the anticipated shortfall.
1.	Condition development approvals on the availability of identified water supplies.
2.	Building permits covered by the former General Plan area should be restricted until such time as the City determines adequate supplies exist to allow unrestricted hookups to the municipal water system.
3.	Seek to renegotiate municipal water contracts with large water demand users.
4.	Within the area known as the East Area Facilities Plan Area consisting of approximately 3.900 acres, and any area south of U.S. Highway 50 which could be annexed to the City, the City shall not approve a final subdivision map or final parcel map, or . other, entitlement which would permit the commencement of construction until such time as the City has acquired an additional water supply which is adequate to supply such development as required under the Urban Development Policy. This prohibition shall not preclude the approval of final parcel maps covering all or a portion of the property covered by an approved tentative subdivision map, where multiple final subdivision maps are to be filed pursuant to Government Code Section 66456.1.
13
15-39
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 41
To protect the health and welfare of the residents of Folsom through the management and regulation afhazaxdous materials in a manner that will focus on preventing problems.
POLICY 41.1
The City shall endeavor to work with Industry, community groups, and government agencies to develop an effective, workable, and fair hazardous materials management system. POLICY1 41.2
As much as feasible, the City shall provide information to the general public and Interested parties on technical and administrative developments in the field of hazardous materials management
POLICY 41.3
The City shall endeavor to develop and implement with Sacramento County, a comprehensive hazardous materials management program.
POLICY 41.4
The City shall expand and strengthen existing Folsom programs where appropriate, to fill in gaps in the current federal, state and local hazardous materials management efforts.
POLICY 41.S
The City shall encourage the effective implementation of workplace safety regulations.
and to assure that hazardous material Information Is available to users and employees.
POLICY 41.6
The City shall Improve cooperation. Information gathering, and information availability within existing Folsom programs.
POLICY 41.7
The City shall support a household hazardous waste disposal program.
POLICY 41.8
The City shall endeavor to develop land use standards that will reduce the risk of health or environmental damage through industrial or commercial use of hazardous materials.
POLICY 41.9
The City shall endeavor to protect residents and sensitive facilities from avoidable incidents In the transportation of hazardous materials In the county.
POLICY 41.10
The City shall endeavor to protect residents from avoidable accidents and mishandling of hazardous materials in industrial and commercial facilities.
POLICY 41.11
The City shall support local enforcement of hazardous materials regulations.
FISCAL ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
Goals and Policies will be added upon adoption of the Fiscal Element.
15-40
o
•9
4
Prepared For The City of Folsom Community Development Department
Connerly and Associates
October 31, 1988

V.
21.0 LAND USE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
21.1	INTRODUCTION..................................................2
21.1.1	State Policy and Authorization..........................
21.1.2	Related State Regulations...............................
21.2	SETnNG/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES.....................................
21.2.1	Setting.................................................
21.2.2	Assumptions.............................................
21.2.3	Issues..................................................
d ci co co m <o
21.3	LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES......................8
21.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES..............................24
21.5	IMPLEMENTATION..........................................24
21.0 LAND USE —
21.1	INTRODUCTION
The Use Element of a City’s General Plan brings together policies and considerations from the other Elements (resources, geology, natural and human created hazards, traffic and circulation) to determine the most appropriate mix and distribution of land uses. The Land Use Element addresses all aspects of land use: housing, commercial, industry, parks, schools and open spaces. This Element must, therefore, consider the land use implications of each of the other nine Elements.
During the preparation of this Element, extensive consideration was given to existing land uses and future land uses on sites with approved development proposals. The policies developed by the Citizen’s Advisory Committee stressed sensitivity to the historical development of Folsom and the relationships among existing land uses. The land use policies strongly favor the preservation of existing single family neighborhoods: the preservation and enhancement of Folsom’s Historic District: and the strengthening of the City’s existing commercial core, centered on East Bldwell Street
The policies also envision substantial expansion of the City’s commercial and industrial base to meet the City's internal business needs, provide employment to residents who will live in the Folsom area, meet regional commercial and industrial needs, and improve the City’s revenue base.
Because of the dose economic and social links between jobs, commerce, and housing, the land use policies have been developed to promote a Jobs and housing balance. The Citizen’s Advisory Committee sought to ensure that all Folsom residents would have access to neighborhood and community-wide commercial goods and services, that residents who so desired could | both live and work in Folsom, and that Folsom I could serve regional commercial needs along I Highway 50.
I Although many of the land use policies I address the built environment much attention I is also devoted to the maintenance of Folsom's ■ natural environment. The Open Space and
Conservation Element (Section 24) contains more specific policies and implementation measures directed to the preservation and enhancement of important natural features. In setting forth land uses, the protection of natural features, waterways, vernal pools, riparian habitats, trees, ridge lines, scenic vistas and other special natural features were given high priority.
The land use policies in this Element establish the standards for development and the direction of development in Folsom. These written policies are further interpreted in the form of a Land Use Map, which illustrates the location of all land uses envisioned in the Folsom General Plan. The Land Use Map is an integral part of the General Plan and the Land Use Element. A change in the Land Use Map must be consistent with the policies of this Element and the other Elements. Conversely, any policy changes could imply changes to the Land Use Element.
21.1.1	STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
State Law (Government Code Section 65302(a)) requires that the Land Use Element of a General Plan designate the proposed general distribution and general location of housing, business. Industry, open space, including agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public and private uses of land.
The Land Use Element must also include standards for population density and building intensity for each district, and identify areas subject to flooding.
21.1.2	RELATED STATE REGULATIONS
SITING OF HAZARDOUS WASTE STORAGE (GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 6593.1)
The State Department of Health Services maintains a list of sites known or designated to contain hazardous wastes. Any new sites which will store or process hazardous wastes must be approved by the Department of Health Services as well as the City of Folsom.
1
21-2
DESIGNATION OF AGRICULTURAL LAND (GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 65370)
The State Director of Conservation complies “Important farmland series" maps based on Information from the United States Soli Conservation Service. These maps show the several designations of land suited to agricultural uses based on soil quality and characteristics. These maps may be consulted by local agencies in determining areas which should be designated for agriculture or grazing.
DENSITY BONUSES (GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 65915)
Notwithstanding the maximum number of dwelling units otherwise permitted in a residen-tially designated area. State Law provides for density bonuses of 25 percent of the number of homes otherwise allowed for the provision of low ormoderate income housing. The density bonus or equivalent financial incentives must be offered when a developer proposes to build at least 25 percent of the homes In a project for low and/or moderate Income households, or ten percent of the homes for lower Income households, or 50 percent of the homes for qualifying elderly or disabled residents.
SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION ACT
See Section 24.1.2 of the General Plan.
family day care homes and homes FOR MENTALLY DISORDERED. HANDICAPPED PERSONS. OR DEPENDENT AND NEGLECTED CHILDREN (CHAPTERS 3.4 AND 3.6, DIVISION 2 OF THE HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE: SECTION 5115 ET. SEg. OF THE WELFARE AND INSTITUTIONS CODE)
Certain child day care, elderly care, family care, foster home, group home, alcoholic recovery home and other similar facilities are to be considered residential uses allowed In any resi-dentially designated area, notwithstanding any local standards which may define such land uses as commercial or Institutional.
21.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES
21.2.1	SETTING
Volume m. Chapter 82.0 of the General Plan and the Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) describe the setting of the Folsom area and the data base upon which the General Plan has been prepared. A summary of the community setting Is provided below as it relates to the Land Use Element.
LAND USE
There are approximately 15.200 acres (23.7 square miles) within the City of Folsom, most of which is presently undeveloped. However, the City is undergoing rapid change and urban development In May 1987. there were about 7,264 homes completed or under construction in Folsom. The most recent evaluation of the City’s development status as of November 1987 shows:
TABLE 21-1 EXISTING LAND USES
LAND USE	GROSS ACRES	
Residential	1,700
Commercial	179
Industrial	152
Schools/Publlc Facilities	350
-Parks	222
Open Space	854
Folsom Prison	848
Undeveloped and Water	10.415
Under Construction Various Uses	440
TOTAL	15.160
Folsom's population growth relative to Sacramento County Is a good Indicator of its urbanizing character. The following table compares population growth in the City versus the County.
21
21-3
TABLE 21-2
POPULATION GROWTH TRENDS
1970 POPULATION
Folsom
Sacramento County
1980 POPULATION PERCENT CHANGE*
5.810** (48%) 631.498 (25.6%)
1988 POPULATION PERCENT CHANGE*
11.003(89.4%) 783.381 (24.1%)
PERCENT CHANGE*
23.300(112%) 930.100 (18.7%)
SOURCE: U.S. Census. Department of Finance, May 1988
* From previous decade or period.
** Excluding Folsom Prison population.
The distribution of land uses under this Element reflects the more urban nature of development In Folsom. The prior General Plan, prepared during the late 1960s and updated peri-
odically, called for more low density residential development, fewer residential categories, and a maximum residential density of 12 units per acre. The proposed distribution, as reflected In the Land Use Map, provides for fewer residential acres but at higher densities. Commercial acreage Is Increased by 71 percent, and open space by 43 percent. The following comparison summarizes the changes between the prior and the adopted General Plan land use distribution.
TABLE 21-3
LAND USE DlSTRIBU*nON
LAND USE CATEGORY	PRIOR GENERAL PLAN ACRES/DWELLING UNITS	ADOPTED GENERAL PLAN ACRES/DWELLING UNITS
Residential Density		
Single Family Low/Low (0.5 du/ac)	2.563	N/A
Single Family Low (2 du/ac)	752	N/A
Single Family (2-3.9 du/ac)	2.345	4.392
Single Family Medium (5 du/ac)	841	N/A
Single Family High (4-6.9 du/ac)	N/A	836
Mobile Home (7 du/ac)	149	N/A
Multi Family Low (7-11.9 du/ac)	N/A	648
Multi Family (12 du/ac)	743	N/A
Multi Family Medium (12-17.9 du/ac)	N/A	146
Multi Family High (18-25 du/ac)	N/A	110
SUBTOTAL RESIDENTIAL	7.393/22.875	6.132/28.184
Commercial	700	1.329
Industrial	1.686	1.531
Schools/Publlc	389	580
Park	250	300
Open Space	1.541	3030
Prison	848	848
Water	1410	1410
Projected Employment	87.040	99.680
Average Residential Density	3.09/acre	4.60/acre
Estimated Population (Excluding Prison)	56.273		69.333
21-4
ASSUMPTIONS:
Population projections are based on an average household size of 2.46.
Dwelling units projections are based on the density range average. Employment projections are based on an average employee density per acre of 28 for commercial developments and 40 for industrial developments.
PHYSICAL SETTING
The natural environment of Folsom presents few development constraints. There are site specific environmental considerations which will affect the building location and density of some projects on hillsides and along ridge lines, riparian habitats, vernal pools, and other localized environmentally sensitive areas, for example. Much of these areas would be preserved for open space (see Chapters 2.3.4 and 5 of the MEA for discussion of these environmentally sensitive areas).
The mining of significant mineral beds, especially sand and gravel, could also present a localized constraint to development in some areas of Folsom (see Chapter 2 of the MEA for a discussion of the locations of mineral deposits). Policy 28.5 of the Open Space and Conservation Element requires the protection of mining and/ or gravel extraction sites so that sand and gravel can be extracted prior to the use of these sites for other purposes.
This policy may require a phasing of development on or near extraction sites to ensure the priority of mineral extraction prior to other development.
Finally, localized soil conditions in the hillside areas of East Folsom may require special development techniques to reduce slope erosion and to ensure slope stability. Most of the eastern hillsides consist of weathered bedrock. Site specific development conditions could ensure that proper erosion control and slope stability techniques are followed.
AREAS SUBJECT TO FLOODING
The General Plan Maps show the general location of designated open spaces and recreation areas. For properties located in areas sub-
ject to flooding, special conditions may be attached to reduce flooding potential and to reduce the risks of property damage or injury. These conditions may include underground storm drainage systems to reduce surface runoff from areas that drain into streams and reservoirs and that are capable of handling run-off from a 100-year storm, limits on the amount of paved and other impermeable surfaces, and drainage fees to help pay for downstream improvements needed as a result of the development.
Development proposals located within potential flood prone areas will be required to submit hydrological/drainagc studies to determine flood water elevations, water runoff violations and acceptable mitigations as a condition of project approval.
21.2.2	ASSUMPTIONS
The policies contained in this Element are based on several assumptions which were discussed by the Citizen’s Advisory Committee. These assumptions are listed below.
PRESERVATION OF IMPORTANT HABITATS
Important natural habitats, such as riparian corridors and vernal pools. canremain viable for wildlife if preserved.
BALANCE OF LAND USES
Folsom can achieve a balance of land uses that will allow residents to live. work, shop, and enjoy recreational activities within the City.
HOUSING
The predominate housing demand will be for single family homes and other affordable ownership housing. Thus, more land is devoted to high density single family housing and low density multi family housing, rather than low and very low density single family housing.
COMMERCIAL SERVICES
As Folsom’s resident and worker population grows, the City will be able to support additional neighborhood shopping areas, at least one additional community-level commercial center, and an expanded central commercial district.
2
21-5
JOBS HOUSING BALANCE
ECONOMIC BASE
1
Many future residents will live and work in Folsom, reducing the level of inter community travel that would otherwise occur If Folsom were a predominantly “bedroom" community.
REGIONAL SERVICES
Folsom has a strategic location and access with respect to the growing population of eastern Sacramento County, western El Dorado Hills and South Placer County. The City would be well suited for regional-serving co mine i clal establishments.
CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Folsom Is capable of supporting a multifunction commercial core which contains retail, offices, financial services and cultural/enter-talnment establishments. These uses will have a community wide market area. In addition to being supported in part by nearby residents.
INSTITUTIONS
Large Institutional uses (hospital, community college) will provide a local focusfor commercial activities and higher density housing.
21.2.3	ISSUES
Several Issues were identified during the development of the land use policies. These include:
VIABILITY OF COMMERCIAL AREAS
Without controls on the size and number of neighborhood and community commercial centers, the viability of a central commercial district could be compromised.
VARIETY OF HOUSING TYPES
The prior General Plan provided mainly for low to medium density single family housing. To ensure that Folsom meets its regional housing responsibilities, the City has attempted to expand the number and types of homes that can be constructed while preserving important environmental features.
The allocation of land uses has important economic Implications for its residents as well as financial Implications for the City's revenue base. The City’s land use policies provide for commercial and industrial uses which can improve Folsom’s tax base. The need to assure an adequate financial base is balanced against the City’s responsibility to plan for housing that will serve workers and other new residents.
DEFINING SENSITIVE AREAS
One of the most difficult Issues facing the City Is to define those areas of the city which are most important to preserve in their natural state. There are many areas that deserve high priority, and these areas are listed In the policies.
21.2.4	LAND USE STANDARDS
State Planning Law requires that the Land Use Element Incorporate standards for population density and building intensity. All development projects are governed by General Plan goals and policies, zoning and building code regulations. as well as other applicable City regulations.
Residential development Is more adaptable to an application of population and building standards with minimum lot sizes (inning) and density ranges (General Plan), thannon-residen-tlal development. Given the wide variety of uses and activities that are permitted In the non-residenilal zones. It Is more difficult to apply strict development standards to commercial and Industrial projects. Building intensity and employment density will vary by activity. The Zoning Code regulates actual building Intensity (lot coverage) for specific projects through the application of minimum setbacks, maximum lot coverage, height restrictions, parking and landscaping requirements.
As a general rule however, the following building intensities and population/employment densities will be used in analyzing community wide development impacts. Project specific environmental analysis will be used in determining impacts of individual projects. These standards. therefore, are to be used as a guide on a case-by-case basis for project review.
21-6
The generalized standards recommended below are based on the policies applicable to each land use designation:
TABLE 21-4
RECOMMENDED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DWELLING UNITS LAND USES	PER ACRE Residential1		POPULATION PER ACRE	BUILDING HEIGHT	BUILDING COVERAGE	FLOOR AREA RATIO
Single Family	2-3.9	6-12	30-35’	30-35%	-
Single Family High Density	4-6.9	10-17	35’	35%	-
Multi Family Low Density	7-11.9	15-26	35’	40%	-
Multi Family Medium Density	12-17.9	24-36	50’	60%	-
Multi Family High Density	18-25	27-38	35-50’	50-60%	-
		EMPLOYEES	NUMBER OF	BUILDING	FLOOR AREA
		PER ACRE	STORIES	COVERAGE	RATIO
Non-Residential1 2 Commercial-					
Neighborhood		20-25	1-2	35%	-
General/Cammunity		25-30	1-2	30-40%	-
Regional		30	3-4	-	2:1
Central District		30-35	4	-	2:1
Specialty3		-	-	-	-
Industrial/Office Park		10-40	3-4	40-50%	2:1
Publlc/Quasl Public 4 -		-	-	-	
Parks/Recreatlon		-	-	10%	-
Open Space		-	-	10%	-
1	An average household size of 2.46 has been assumed for General Plan and EIR purposes.
2	An average employee density of 28 for com-
mercial uses and 40 for industrial uses has been assumed for General Plan and EIR purposes.
3.	SpetfialtyCommercialArea: Building intensity and employment density will vary by type of commercial project. These standards will be determined on a case-by-case
basis through a planned development process. Land uses within these designations Include: Sutter Street Historic District. Specialty Commercial District. Business/ Professional Offices and other identified areas as appropriate.
4.	Publlc/Quasl - Public Land Uses: Standards will vary depending on the type of use. Development standards will be applied on a case-by-case basis.
2
21-7
21.3	LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 1
This is the key Goal of the Plan and this sets the tone of the Plan.
To retain and enhance Folsom’s quality of life, separate Identity and sense of community. Folsom's identity and quality of life are defined by;
1.	The diverse natural setting, including the
American River, Its tributary streams, natural vegetation, topography, native wildlife, and other unique features of the landscape.
2.	Developed parks and open space.
3.	The historic district and other historic places throughout the community.
4.	The State prison site, which provides a large, visual open area in the City.
5.	The physical form of Folsom’s neighborhoods.
6.	Ease of movement
7.	Public access to pedestrlanandbicycle trails.
POLICY 1.1
New development shall preserve and/or enhance to the maximum degree feasible, the existing natural vegetation, landscape features and open space, consistent with the Goals and Policies of this Plan.
POLICY 1.2
Existing vlewsheds and opportunities for vlewsheds should be incorporated into the de-■ sign of new developments.
1
Each residential neighborhood should be planned with at least one park/recreatlonal/ school area within approximately one half mile of each residential unit.
POLICY 1.4
Each new residential development shall be encouraged to provide pedestrian and bicycle access to parks or schools located within or near the development.
POLICY 1.3
Each new residential development shall be designed with a system of local streets, collector streets, and access to an arterial road that protects the residents from through traffic.
POLICY 1.6
Folsom’s historic district shall be enhanced and maintained through the improvement of public facilities.
POLICY 1.7
Historic buildings or locations shall be preserved or incorporated into the design of new developments.
POLICY 1.8
The City shall prepare an inventory of historically and culturally significant buildings and sites. The City should investigate measures for Historic Preservation of these building sites. POLICY 1.9
Development proposed along streams shall be in conformance with a comprehensive development and management plan to be prepared for stream waterbeds prior to project approval.
POLICY 1.10
When development Incentives are required for the preservation of Identified resources and open spaces, the City and public shall cumulatively receive the greater short-term and. longterm benefits of such incentives.
POLICY 1.11
The location, configuration, and extent of open space and parkway designated on the land use map shall be determined on a project by
21-8
project basis through site specific mapping approved by the City and consistent with mitigation of environmental impacts and implementation of the overall goals and policies of the General Flan.
The lines depicting the location of Humbug and Willow Creeks on the General Plan are for illustrative purposes and shall be consistent with the Humbug/WiHow Creek Management Plan when adopted.
GOAL 2
To ensure that the City exercise appropriate controls over the planning process.
POLICY 2.1
The General Plan sets the overall guidelines for the location and intensity of development In Folsom.
POLICY 2.2
The City will prepare area or specific plans as appropriate to further refine the standards and regulations for development.
POLICY 2.3
when the applicant has successfully indicated substantial benefit could be derived from the project
1.	Requests for higher residential densities must Include a demonstration of need for higher density housing.
2.	Requests for land use changes must Include an evaluation of economic, social and environmental factors which would be enhanced by a change In the land use.
3.	Design features for open space, improved recreational facilities, protection of natural features and sensitivity to surrounding development shall be carefully evaluated.
POLICY 2.4
The City shall adopt a grading ordinance which prohibits any substantial grading ormodl-
fication of the topography prior to approval of a tentative map, planned development or other land use permit. The ordinance shall provide for performance bonds or similar measures acceptable to City and a specific time period for construction to commence. The City shall require slope analysis maps early in the project review process in order to judge future grading activity. GOAL 3
To address comprehensively Folsom’s development issues on the basis of communitywide needs.
POLICY 3.1
The City shall evaluate the community-wide impact of each development on the need for public facilities and services, the circulation and housing Impacts from the project, and the effects on the City’s identified resources.
POLICY 3.2
Developments should be compatible with the natural features and the buildings that surround them. Compatibility will be measured by the size and configuration of buildings m a project the use of materials and landscaping, the preservation of existing vegetation and landscape features, and the location of entrance and exit routes on the project site.
POLICY 3.3
Development standards shall be prepared for large land holdings prior to approval of tentative maps or Planned Development permits. Development standards may consist of standards adopted by resolution of the Planning Commission describing standards for development and relationships among land uses within the area covered by the plan. Development standards may be Included In specific plans, area plans, or by reference as a condition of approval.
GOAL 4
To provide opportunities for residents to live, work, shop, and enjoy leisure activities within the City.
21
21-9
POLICY 4.1
The City will plan for additional housing needs as determined in the Housing Element for the next 5 to 25 years.
POLICY 4.2
The City will plan for a central community shopping district and a regional shopping center.
POLICY 4.3
Neighborhood business areas will be allowed. subject to size and business use restrictions. The location of such business areas should be based on area or community plans covering the projects to be served by the neighborhood business area. Neighborhood business areas should be pedestrian-oriented, that is. drawing their customers primarily from the residences in the immediate vicinity of the businesses.
POLICY 4.4
The City will expand its system of parks, open spaces, and recreational facilities as new development proceeds.
POLICY 4.S
Industrial and office employers should be encouraged to locate in Folsom to provide more job opportunities for Folsom residents.
GOAL 5
To influence land use decisions of Sacramento. Placer, and El Dorado counties and other governmental agencies which may impact Folsom.
POLICY S.1
The City shall request to participate in the planningprocess of other governmental agencies whose jurisdiction includes areas within the city limits of Folsom.
POLICY 5.2
The City shall request copies of proposed plans prepared by other government agencies outside of Folsom but which could affect land in
Folsom. City officials should respond in a timely manner to such proposed plans and participate in public meetings or hearings as appropriate.
POLICY 5.3
The City will continue to participate in the Sacramento Area Council of Governments and the Sacramento Local Agency Formation Commission.
GOAL 6
To expand Folsom’s Sphere of influence based on the ultimate boundaries of development that the City can reasonably control and service and to discourage premature development in unincorporated areas surrounding the City.
POLICY 6.1
The Sphere of Influence shall Include those parcels of land adjacent to the city limit whose development could have significant visual, traffic. service, and environmental impacts on Folsom so that the City may influence the ultimate development of those parcels.
POLICY 6.2
The City shall consider existing roads or natural features which might logically define a new Sphere of Influence boundary.
POLICY 6.3
A new Sphere of Influence boundary shall Include only those lands to which road, water, sewer and other facllity/service connections can be extended within the next 25 to 30 years and. therefore, to those areas which will ultimately he annexed to the City.
GOAL 7
To provide for the orderly annexation and development of unincorporated areas within Folsom’s Sphere of Influence.
POLICY 7.1
The City shall only annex those lands which
21-10
can be developed In accordance with the City’s General Plan, are fiscally sound additions to the City, can be adequately served by municipal (or acceptable alternative) facilities and services, and are part of a planned, orderly annexation program.
POLICY 7.2
AU properties proposed for annexation shall be pre-zoned by the City in a manner consistent with the General Plan. Until facilities and services can be provided, such properties will be designated as agricultural reserve. The existing County zoning or General Flan designation which applies to a property may be considered In determining the appropriate pre-zoning of the subject land which is served by on-site facilities or connected to County facilities.
POLICY 7.3
Prior to the annexation of lands to the City, the applicant shall submit a plan demonstrating the financial feasibility of providing services and facilities to the area proposed for annexation, (refer to Goal 40 and its policies)
POLICY 7.4
The General Plan and zoning designations for annexed lands should consider the following criteria:
I.	The capacity of facilities and municipal services.
2.	The environmental effects that develop-
ment on lands proposed for annexation may have on properties within the existing city limits.
3.	Existing land uses, if airy, on and in the vicinity of the annexed land.
4.	The extent of any natural habitats and features of the landscape which should be preserved.
5.	The demonstrated need for additional housing. retail commercial uses, other commercial uses, and industrial uses.
GOAL 8
To allow a variety of housing types which provides living choices for Folsom residents.
POLICY 8.1
Average residential densities shall be calculated as the number of dwelling units divided by the total area of the project, excluding any commercial. business and professional or industrial uses. Areas devoted to open space, public parks, roads, public schools and other miscellaneous land uses shall be Included in the calculation.
■6EE.	a pbe. Apoi'tioO
POLICY 8.2
In order to promote a more diverse housing stock and to allow for a greater mix of compatible densities, five residential density ranges shall be established and applied to the various residen-
TABLE 21-5
GENERAL FLAN RESIDENTIAL DENSITIES
HOUSING TYPE	SF (2-3.9)	SFHD (4-6.9)	MLD (7-11.9)	MMD (12-17.9)	MHD (18-25)
SF Detached	♦	♦			
SF Zero Lot Line		♦	- ♦		
SF Patio		♦	♦		
Duplex		♦	♦		
Halfplex		♦	♦		
Townhouse			♦	♦	
Condominiums			♦	♦	
Garden Apartments			♦	♦	♦
Conventional Apartments				♦	♦
Mobile Home Parks		♦			
21-11
PARAGRAPH TO BE ADDED TO POLICY 8.1
In any development in which land is reserved for acquisition by a public agency for open space, parks, public schools, or other public purposes such land shall be taken into account in calculating the allowable residential density on the remaining land, provided no building permit shall be issued covering residential units attributing to such reserved land, until the reserved land has been acquired by the public agency for which such land was reserved.
Page 21 -11 A Resolution No. 3012 Adopted 7Z6/90
tial areas. Table 21-5 Illustrates these densities and compatible housing types. Examples of these housing types are defined In Figure 21-5.
POLICY 8.3
Open space will be required as part of each residential development except in residential estates, multifamily parcels of less than 10 acres and parcels of less than 20 acres for single family uses surrounded by existing development. Open space includes required park lands, common areas, landscaped areas, pedestrian paths, plazas and similar public or private areas, but not areas devoted to vehicle parking and streets. To achieve the open space guidelines, a developer may be allowed to group the homes at somewhat smaller lot sizes than would otherwise be permitted. provided the average density does not Increase. (See Policy 8-7 and the Goals and Policies of the Open Space and Conservation Element)
FIGURE 21-1
VARIOUS TYPES OF HOUSING
Single Family Detached
•	One House (unit) per Lot
•	Each House and Lot Individually Owned
•	Conventional Building Setbacks from Front, Rear and Side Property Lines
<_____________________________________________>
POLICY 8.4
All residential development or residential portions of multi-use developments shall contain a minimum of 30 percent of the land in natural or improved open space, exclusive of roadways and parking lots.
Buffering shall be required between adjacent multi-family projects and single family developments along common boundaries.
POLICY 8.S
Sufficient off-street parking for residents shall be Included In the design of all residential projects. Off-street parking for guests shall be included In the design of all multifamily projects. The City shall review its parking standards to ensure that resident and guest parking is adequate to accommodate the anticipated average demand per dwelling unit. Surface lots for off-street parking should be landscaped to reasonably screen the parking area from street view and from adjacent properties.
f——————————v
□	□	D	D


f Single Family-Zero Lot Line
•	One House (unit) per Lot
•	Each House and Lot Individually Owned
•	Zero Setback on One Side of all Lots Leaving Yard on Three Sides of House
•	Permits more Usable Sldeyard, Smaller Lots and Units, and thus Greater Overall Unit Density
/	s


v	)
21-12
FIGURE 21-1
Single Family- Patio Homes
•	One House (unit) per Lot
•	Each House and Lot Individually Owned
•	Flex Building Setbacks. Building
Orientation and Lot Sizes
•	Emphasis on Creating Gardens and Patios through Use of Fences and Screening
•	Sometimes a Development Includes Common Open Spaces Owned by All Residents under a Home Owners Association
S._____________________________________________/
Duplex
•	Two Units per Lot
•	Single Ownership of both Units and Lot
•	Conventional Building Setbacks Rear and Side Yard Separate for Each Unit
•	A Common Wall Between Units
•	Often Located on Corner Lots
\>
Half-Plex
•	One House (unit) per Lot
•	Each House and Lot Individually Owned
•	Conventional Building Setbacks. Rear and Side Yards Separate for Each Unit
•	A Common Wall Between Units. The Wall is also Located on the Property Line.
k
J
21-13
r

Townhouse- Condominium
•	A Housing Style with each Unit having Two Stories and usually Attached with Other Units by Common Walls
•	Each Unit and Lot Individually Owned
•	Usually includes Common Oven Spaces Owned by All Owners Association
\__________________________________/
r	Conventional Apartment
•	Rental Units Grouped wlthlnBulldlngs which are Usually Two or More Stories in Height
•	Each Unit Usually Takes Up One Floor.Hence
Separate Units are Available on Each Level of the Building
•	Single Ownership of All Units and Land
•	Higher Density which Generally means Less
Emphasis on Landscaping and Recreational Facilities
{———————
Air Space Condominium/
Garden Apartments
•	Units are Grouped within Buildings which are Two or More Stories In Height
•	Each Units taxes up only One Floor, hence Separate Units Are Available on Each Level of the Building
•	Common Walls between Units
•	Greater Emphasis on Landing and Providing Amenities such as Recreational Facilities
FIGURE 21-1
• Condominiums- Each Unit Individually Owned but All Land Beneath Units and
Surrounding Area Owned In Common
• Apartments- Single Ownership of All Units and Land and Units are Rented. Usually Less Dense than Conventional Apartments
y
21-14
POLICY 8.6
The City should develop a package of incentives and encourage the following:
1.	Additional active parkland.
2.	Development of parkland.
3.	Increased historic preservation.
4.	Additional open space.
5.	Preservation of natural habitat.
6.	Preservation of Savanna Oak Clusters.
7.	Additional items as desired.
POLICIES AND GUIDELINES BY RESIDENTIAL CLASSIFICATION
POLICY 8.7
Residential densities for each land use category will be based upon the range of densities which is established for each category of residential use as hereafter set forth. The lower number in each range is allowed as a matter of right. Units in excess of the lower number of each range, up to the top of each range, are permitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission/ City Council in exchange for the provision of special benefits which satisfy a City need over and above the minimum requirements of the General Plan and other City policies and regulations. Examples of special benefits which may qualify the project for densities in excess of the lower number include:
1.	Additional park or opsxs. space set asides.
2.	On-site recreation facilities.
3.	The planting of additional trees or other landscaping in excess of the minimum required.
4.	The provision of transit facilities or services.
The density bonus allowed for qualifying seniors and low or moderate or lower income family residents pursuant to California Code Section 65915 is to be calculated based upon the lower number of each density range and no additional bonus or other incentive is to be provided: irrespective of whether such project also qualifies for special benefits. In other words, under no circumstances shall the maximum number in each density range be exceeded.
A.	Single-Family (SF 2-3.9 Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Single family detached homes at low to medium densities (maximum of two dwelling units per acre). Up to 3.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. The following standards shall apply:
1)	The pro) ect should be located adjacent to an existing single family development or should be of sufficient size to ensure that a single family residential environment can be main. tained within the project.
2)	Internal roads should be designed to serve the project or connect with adjacent developments and access to through-traffic should be discouraged.
3)	No more than 40% of a lot shall be covered.
B.	Single-Family High Denslty/Mobile Home Park (SFHD 4-6.9 Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Single-family homes at high densities (maximum of four dwelling units per acre) are permitted. Up to 6.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. Halfplexes, mobile home parks, and attached homes may be included. The following standards shall apply:
1)	Lands located near neighborhood commercial centers, along public transit routes, or adjacent to low or medium density multifamily areas would be appropriate for this type of housing.
2)	With the exception of mobile home parks, a development may Include a mix of housing types within the average density allowed including attached homes, zero 1 o t -1 ine homes and halfplexes.
3)	Each home must have its-owrrlot
4)	No more than 35% of a lot shall be covered.
5)	Internal roads should be designed to serve the project or connect with adjacent developments and access to through-traffic should be discouraged.
2
21-15
1
6)	A Planned Development Permit shall be required for development within this category.
C.	Multi-Family Low Density (MLD 7-11.9 Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Low density multi-family developments at a maximum density of seven dwelling units per acre. Up to 11.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. The following standards shall apply:
1)	Appropriate locatlonsarealangarterlalroads and public transit routes, adjacent to neighborhood commercial centers, or in undeveloped areas where the project Is of sufficient size to provide any needed buffers for adjacent or proposed single family developments.
2)	Homes should generally be in one or two story buildings, with some three story buildings allowed on sloped sites.
3)	Project entrances and exits shall be designed with access to a collector or arterial road.
4)	Buildings on hillsides shall be sited with respect to existing native vegetation or landscaping to reduce their visual prominence.
5)	A design review procedure shall be established to evaluate the proposed use ofbuild-ing and landscaping materials with respect to the natural features of a site.
6)	Buildings of multiple stories shall follow the contour of the site and be “stepped* or terraced.
7)	Projects shall generally consist of smaller, multiple buildings rather than a few large multifamily buildings.
p. Multi-Family Medium Density (MMD 12-
17.9	Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Multi-family medium density at a maximum density of 12 dwelling units per acre are permitted. Up to 17.9 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the
specified benefits as described above. The following standards shall apply:
1)	Appropriate locations include parcels along arterial roads and public transit routes, lands near commercial centers and major public institutions, and as a buffer between industrial or commercial areas and single family neighborhoods.
2)	Parcels shall be of sufficient size to allowthe placement of buffers along any project boundary adjacent to an existing or proposed single family development
3)	Buildings should be mainly one or two stories, with three story buildings allowed on sloped sites or to provide parking under a building.
4)	Project area shall Include adequate open space.
5)	Project entrances and exits should be designed with direct access to a collector or arterial road.
6)	Buildings on hillsides should be sited with respect to existing native vegetation or land scaping to reduce their visual prominence.
7)	Design review of materials and landscaping shall be included in the application process.
8)	Buildings of multiple stories should follow the contour of the site and be “stepped* or terraced.
9)	Projects shall consist of clusters of smaller buildings (typically 4 to 12 dwelling units per building) and not a few large buildings.
10)	Open spaces shall be dispersed throughout a project, unless it is necessary to create a single large open space to preserve an
- important natural habitat v-	-
11)	Alandscaping and project maintenance plan shall be submitted to the City. The City will adopt an ordinance detailing the requirements of such a plan.
12)	Locations for this type of housing should be
21-16
selected to reinforce the customer base of a central commercial area, and the proximity of housing to major employment centers.
13)	Amenities shall be included in larger projects such as swimming pools and on-site recreation.
E. Multi-Family High Density (MHD 18-25 Dwelling Units Per Acre)
High density multi-family at a maximum density of 18 units per acre are permitted. Up to 25 dwelling units per acre may be permitted in exchange for the provision of the specified benefits as described above. The following shall apply:
1)	Locations shall generally be limited to areas near a central commercial center or regional commercial center, but may also include parcels at the intersection of arterial roads, along transit routes, adjacent to public institutions, and as part of a cammerdal/ln-dustrlal development compatible with residential uses.
2)	Locations of this type of housing shall be selected to reinforce the customer base of a central commercial area, and the proximity of housing to major employment centers.
3)	The internal road system shall be designed to ensure that traffic from the project does not use local streets in any adjacent or nearby single family areas.
4)	At least 30 percent of the project area shall be reserved for open spaces.
5)	Open spaces shall be dispersed throughout the project, unless it is necessary to create a single large open space or to preserve an important natural feature.
6)	Buildings shall be predominantly two and three stories. Buildings of four or five stories maybe permitted in exchange for the preservation of more open space than the minimum required and to allow for the placement of parking underneath buildings.
7)	Any hillside or hilltop areas that may be
included In the project shall be reserved for open spaces or one and two story buildings that can be integrated with the natural landscape.
8)	Buildings on hillsides shall follow the contour of the site and shall be “stepped" or terraced.
9)	The use of materials on hillside buildings will be part of a design review process.
10)	Alandscaping and project maintenanceplan shall be submitted to the City. The City will adopt an Ordinance detailing the requirements of such a plan.
11)	Recreational facilities for the use of the residents shall be included in the project design including swimming pools and other amenities in larger projects.
12)	Turnouts and shelters for buses shall be incorporated into project deslgnforprqjects along existing or proposed transit routes.
13)	Landscaping, especially trees, shall be provided around the boundaries of the project to lessen the visual impact of the development.
POLICY 8.8
Elderly and convalescent housing facilities providing health care shall be encouraged. The Zoning Code shall guide the placement and standards for development of such faculties. Proposed facilities shall be evaluated based on the location, impacts on services and neighboring properties and not on a density basis.
POLICY 8.9
All multiple family projects will be required to obtain a planned development permit in accordance with the City’s Zoning Code. Similar development approvals, such as Specific Plans, that cover the same requirements as the planned development permit shall be considered a substitute.
2L
21-17
POLICY 8.10
1
Residential densities within an area plan or specific plan may vary, provided 1) that the overall dwelling unit buildout within the plan area shall not exceed that authorized by the Land Use Element of the General Plan and 2) in no event shall densities within any portion of the Plan area exceed 25 dwelling units per acre. An area plan or specific plan is defined as a large development area typically over 100 acres with an overall master development plan.
POLICY 8.11
Residential density shown on the Land Use Map shall be consistent with General Plan Poll* cles 8.1 and 8.10 for the purpose of calculating density.
GOAL 9
To set criteria which would allow for flexibility in the siting of land uses within a planned area.
POLICY 9.1
A planned area consists of acreage containing one or more projects for which a comprehensive site plan is prepared showing the location of proposed land uses, the configuration of roads within the planned area, public land uses and open spaces, and other aspects of site design.
POLICY 9.2
For planned developments covering large areas, the project applicant may exercise some discretion In locating school, park, and other public facility sites within approximate boundaries specified by the General Plan. However, the locations should reflect:
1.	The ability of project residents to walk or •	bicycle to parks or schools without crossings
I uncontrolled crossings on arterial roads.
2.	The preservation of significant features of the natural landscape, such as trees, important wildlife habitats, and streams or ponds.
3.	The usability of school and park sites with respect to terrain, flooding, and access to and from the site.
POLICY 9.3
To encourage the preservation of open spaces and natural features of the landscape, a project applicant may be allowed to concentrate the proposed development on a portion of the site through the clustering of buildings, smaller lot sizes, or taller buildings, provided that the overall unit buildout within the Plan area shall not exceed that authorized by the Land Use Element of the General Plan.
POLICY 9.4
In large-scale residential projects which include a neighborhood commercial center, the proposed location of the centermay vary from the approximate location indicated by the General Plan if, based on the proposed street layout and design, improved traffic circulation would result, and there are no significant negative impacts.
GOAL 10
To provide for a commercial and industrial base of the City to encourage:
1.	A strong tax base.
2.	More jobs within the City
3.	A greater variety of commercial goods and services.
4.	A regional shopping center.
5.	Businesses and industries compatible with Folsom’s quality of life.
POLICY 10.1
The City shall have a variety of commercial uses such as:
1 rHomeoccupatlons in whieh-a resident oper- - • ates a small business within the home in compliance with City regulations and standards.
2.	Individual businesses outside of a commercial area, serving a commercial or industrial project or providing highway-oriented services.
21-18
3.	Small commercial centers serving individual neighborhoods.
4.	A central business district with offices and retail establishments serving the entire community.
5.	A regional retail center serving Folsom residents and others from outside the community.
6.	An historic business district serving residents and tourists.
7.	Specialty commercial areas.
POLldV 10.2
The City should designate lands for a variety of industrial land uses such as:
1.	Warehousing/storage facilities for supplies serving other businesses.
2.	Industrial parks providing space for research and product development firms.
3.	Manufacturing of electronic equipment or components: and manufacturing on a small scaleofproductstobe sold on the premises.
POLICY 10.3
The City should encourage the development of campus-like industrial developments with low-rise buildings and landscaped or natural open spaces.
POLICY 10.4
The City should implement facilities plans to finance the provision of municipal facilities and services to the industrial areas.
POLICY 10.3
The City should preserve and enhance the tourist-oriented, historic commercial uses In the Sutter Street commercial area.
POLICY 10.6
The use or storage of flammable, volatile, or
toxic substances as part of an industrial or commercial establishment shall be strictly controlled.
POLICY 10.7
Allowforthe continued operation of existing arterial-oriented commercial uses along Folsom-Auburn Road and Natoma Street from Riley Street to Fargo Way.
POLICY 10.8
New commercial uses shall be subject to design and parking standards to be developed by the City for:
1.	The number of location of allowed curb cuts.
2.	Landscaping or parking areas.
3.	The location, size, number and construction of signs.
4.	The configuration and design of commercial buildings.
POLICY 10.9
Commercial centers and Industrlal/office parks when feasible should be served by public transit, and when appropriate public transit centers should be Incorporated into the project POLICY 10.10
Industrlal/office parks shall be designed with internal circulation and incorporate buffering and landscaped setbacks to minimi^ potential adverse Impacts on adjacent land uses.
POLICY 10.11
Child care centers shall be encouraged in the central commercial district, commercial centers, and office parks, when appropriate.
POLICY 10.12
2
The City should develop an Industrial development stragety that identifies the City’s industrial market segment and promotional opportunities.
21-19
1
POLICY 10.13
Buffer zones shall be established around existing and proposed Industrial areas to prevent encroachment of incompatible uses. The City shall prepare an implementation study to provide notice requirements to users in the buffer zones and identify incompatible uses.
GOAL 11
To plan for a central commercial district which includes retail, office, and service establishments, and cultural and entertainment facilities.
"policy 11.1
The central commercial district shall be located to incorporate existing community-wide commercial services, and shall generally include properties along East Bidwell Street, generally between Coloma Street and the westslde of Blue Ravine Road and south of Riley Street generally west of Glenn Drive.
POLICY 11.2
The purpose of the central commercial district shall be to provide a location for businesses with a city-wide market, to provide a focus for cultural and entertainment activities (public and private), and to provide a City financial center.
POLICY 11.3
“Strip" commercial uses, characterized by shallow commercial frontage on arterial streets and multiple curb-cuts, shall not be allowed.
POLICY 11.4
Circulation within the central commercial district shall allow for convenient automobile access and parking, public transit routes, bicycles. and safe pedestrian access among the businesses within the district.
POLICY 11.8
Each block within the district shall contain usable public open space in the form of public plazas, mini-parks, or landscaped pedestrian pathways. Maintenance programs for public and
community improvements should be required for commercial areas in order to provide long term maintenance.
POLICY 11.6
In general, the height of buildings in the central commercial district shall not exceed 4 stories. Additional height may be allowed for the provision of open space. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on a site shall not exceed 2:1. Additional height or a higher floor area ratio may be allowed in exchange for the provision of open space or other specified benefits meeting a City need that are above and beyond the minimum requirements of the General Plan policies and other applicable City policies and regulations. POLICY 11.7
Public improvements should be provided to support a central commercial area, such as landscaping on existing commercial streets, street furniture (benches, waste receptacles, planters, etc.), and uniform street and other public signing.
POLICY 11.8
A plan for the central commercial district shall be prepared in conjunction with the redevelopment plan to address Issues discussed in Goal 11 and support policies including development standards and circulation.
POLICY 11.9
All commercial development or commercial portions of multi-use development shall contain at least ten percent of land area in natural, improved or functional open space, exclusive of roadways and parking lots.
POLICY 11.10
A public transit service center shall be established within the central commercial district.
GOAL 12
To plan for regional commercial centers.
21-20
POLICY 12.1
POLICY 12.8
Regional commercial centers shall be primarily highway-oriented retail commercial areas. The purpose of the centers shall be to provide locations for businesses whose customers come primarily from outside the City of Folsom, although businesses may also provide goods and services to Folsom residents. POLICY 12.2
Regional centers should be located close and accessible to Highway 50, preferably near an interchange.
POLICY 12.3
Artng-roadorllmltedaccessparkwayshould define the boundaries of regional centers. A parking and circulation plan should ensure that trees and landscaping are provided to break up the amount of paved surfaces and that traffic entering and exiting centers do not adversely affect any future residential developments nearby. POLICY 12.4
Regional centers shall Include landscaped public open spaces.
POLICY 12.S
Highway-commercial areas shall be designated adjacent to U.S. 50 in order to support the travelling public at major Interchanges.
POLICY 12.6
Regional commercial centers should be served by public transit and developed in conjunction with public transit service centers. POLICY 12.7
In general, the height of buildings- in a regional commercial center shall not exceed four stones. Additional height may be allowed for the provision of open space. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on a site shall not exceed 2:1.
In general, the height of buildings in a highway commercial site shall not exceed four stones. Additional height may be allowed for the provision of open space. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on a site shall not exceed 2:1. with a maximum lot coverage of 60 percent.
GOAL 13
To plan for small, neighborhood-oriented convenience commercial areas which provide goods and services that may meet the dally needs of nearby residents.
POLICY 13.1
Neighborhood convenience commercial areas should be located so that residents In each neighborhood may meet their dally needs for commercial goods and services.
POLICY 13.2
Neighborhood commercial areas shall In general be limited to five acres or less.
POLICY 13.3
Neighborhood centers should be designed to minimize Impacts on adjacent uses through site design, access and parking, landscaping and lighting standards.
POLICY 13.4
Neighborhood commercial areas may be adjacent to future public transit stations.
POLICY 13.5
In general, the height of buildings in a neighborhood commercial center shall not exceed two stones. The combined floor area ratio of all buildings on site shall not-exceed-. 5^1v and -30 to 40 percent lot coverage.
POLICY 13.6
Neighborhood commercial centers shall be developed under the Planned Development Process.
2
21-21
GOAL 14
To plan for and preserve specialty commercial areas.
POLICY 14.1
The City should preserve and enhance the historic business district centered on Sutter Street. The purpose of the district Is to provide a tourist-oriented location for businesses offering goods and services consistent with the historic setting of the area. An historic district plan for the area should be prepared by the City containing:
1.	Design guidelines for the restoration and/ or modification of buildings or sites Identified as having historic or cultural significance and for the design and placement of buildings within or adjacent to identified historic buildings or sites.
2.	The City should adopt design guidelines to ensure that signage is consistent and harmonious with the theme of the historic business district
POLICY 14.2
The City should provide for offices, retail, and restaurant uses associated with a hospital when appropriate.
POLICY 14.3
Additional specialty commercial centers for specified commercial uses containing a grouping of businesses offering one or several related goods or services maybe considered according to the following standards:
1.	The commercial center must serve a purpose not fulfilled by the central commercial district, the regional commercial center, or other designated commercial'areas. -
2.	A plan for the area proposed for commercial uses must be submitted by the landownerfs) clearly stating the purpose of the commercial area; the location of proposed commercial uses, public Improvements, landscaping. parking, and open spaces: and a pro-
I posed circulation plan.
3.	New specialty commercial areas will not be designated on the Folsom General Plan Land Use Map In advance of a specific request for such a designation.
4.	The commercial center may not be a “strip” commercial project characterized by one or more long, shallow lots, multiple curb cuts, and a variety of unrelated businesses.
5.	Access to and from the commercial center is via an arterial street.
6.	The proposed commercial area shall be located and designed to minimize negative traffic, noise, and visual Impacts on nearby residential areas.
GOAL 15
To plan for community commercial areas providing goods and services for large neighborhood areas.
POLICY 15.1
Community commercial centers shall In general range In size from five to ten acres.
POLICY 15.2
Community commercial centers should be designed to minimize impacts on adjacent uses through site design, access and parking, landscaping and lighting standards.
POLICY 15.3
Community commercial centers should be developed adjacent to future public transit stations.
POLICY 15.4
Community commercial centers should be 'developed adjacent to higher density residential; offices, and public uses.
POLICY 15.5
Community commercial centers shall be developed under the Planned Development Process.
1
21-22
POLICY 13.6
In general, the height of buildings on a community commercial center shall not exceed two stories. The combined floor area ratio of all biddings shall not exceed .5:1 and 30 to 40 percent lot coverage.
GOAL 16
To allow for public and quasi-public land uses meeting the governmental service, education. cultural, recreational, and religious needs of Folsom residents.
POLICY 16.1
Fire andPollce department substatlonsshall be planned and located so that a Tna-firm-rm response time goal as set by the City Council can be maintained.
POLICY 16.2
Public facilities, such as utility substations, water storage or treatment plants, pumping stations, and sewer treatment plants, should be located, designed, and maintained so that noise, light, glare, or odors associated with these facilities will not negatively impact nearby land uses. Building materials and landscaping shall be used to make these land uses less visually obtrusive from neighboring properties.
POLICY 16.3
The City shall work closely with the school districts) serving Folsom to ensure that school sites are dedicated or reserved for purchase by the districts) so that:
1.	Each residential neighborhood will contain or have access to the appropriate elementary school according to school district standards.
2.	Children do not have to cross an uncontrolled Intersection on an arterial road to reach an elementary school.
3.	The school can be reached on foot by most of the neighborhood’s residents (for elementary schools only).
4.	A joint park/school site can be developed wherever possible.
POLICY 16.4
The acreage recommended for new schools should be set according to school district standards.
POLICY 16.S
If a school will serve more than one development. and the subject development will not cantalnthe school site, the appllcantmust clearly show that a school site has been or will be dedicated elsewhere or that a school already exists with capacity to serve the project and Is accessible to the project according to the standards in Policy 16-3.
POLICY 16.6
In determining the number and location of new school sites, standards established by the district shall be used. These standards are based on the assumed average number of students per household for each grade level (varies for different types of housing) and the average size of an elementary school, junior high school, and high school.
POLICY 16.7
The City shall develop standards for the location of proposed private schools. Standards will address:
1.	Required off-street parking and street frontage for the dropping off and picking up of students.
2.	Access to the proposed school via City streets.
3.	Noise, according to the Noise Element of the Folsom General Plan.
4.	Size of the parcel on which a proposed school Is to be located In relation to the pupil capacity of the school.
5.	Required landscaping and other visual/ noise barriers if the proposed school Is to be located In a residential area.
2
21-23
PGUCF16S
Utility company rights-of-way may be considered for their use as public or private open space, trails, parkland, or other compatible recreational uses.
POLICY 16.9
Religious institutions may be allowed in residential neighborhoods If sufficient off-street parking is provided and the design of the facility is consistent with the residential character of the neighborhood, and includes:
1.	Access to the property via an arterial or collector street
2.	The screening of parking with landscaping and/or materials that will blend with surrounding natural and constructed features of the neighborhood.
3.	The shielding of adjacent residential properties from direct light and glare from the property.
POLICY 16.10
Clubs and fraternal organizations shall generally be limited to commercial areas. The use of a single family home in a residential area for a club or fraternal organization may be permitted subject to the following standards:
1.	Noise levels shall meet the requirements of the Noise Element of the Folsom General Plan.
21.8 IMPI.EMENTATION
2.	One small exterior sign will be allowed, subject to City standards.
SPECIFIC PLANS AND MASTER PLANS FOR LARGE DEVELOPMENT AREAS
3.	No external modification to the house will be permitted except to provide handicapped access.
1
4.	Off-street parking will be required, according to City parking standards for clubs and fraternal organizations.
Specific plans meeting the requirements of State Planning Law and Implemented by local guidelines. Large properties generally over 1G0 acres will utilize Specific Plans as an Implementation tool.
Procedures, requirements and contents of specific plans shall be incorporated Into the Folsom Municipal Code.
21-24
The specific plans must include the following:	ESTIMATED COST
1.	The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan.
2.	The types and configurations of building to be included in all developments within the plan area.
3.	The location of and types of streets.
4.	Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve developments within the specific plan areas.
5.	A parking and circulation plan for off-street parking areas showing the location of parking lots, the approximate number of spaces, and the approximate location of entrances and exits.
6.	Proposed conservation, open space and/or recreation areas, if any.
7.	In the Historic Folsom area, an historic preservation program and building design guidelines to ensure compatibility of new construction with the existing land uses.
8.	Any other programs, guidelines, or standards that are appropriate for the area covered by the plan.
IMPLEMENTS: GOALS 2. 3,11, 12 AND 14
•	Fundlng:General Fund and Plan Fees (from land owners within the specific plan areas)
•	Responsible Agencies .
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989 Complete: March 1990 (Historic Folsom) June 1990 (Central Commercial District) September 1990 (Regional Commercial Center)
$40.000-$100,000 per plan, depending on area covered and level of detailed required.
GRADING ORDINANCE -
SUBSTANTIAL GRADING
The existing City Grading Ordinance will be amended to prohibit the substantial grading of land prior to the approval of a tentative map, planned development, or use permit Performance bond requirements will be specified in greater detail and required time periods for commencement of construction will be added. Substantial grading will be defined in the amended Ordinance and should be based on the volume and area of land to be graded, any changes in topography, and any removal of existing trees or vegetation.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 2 - POLICY 2.4
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 14
•	Responsible and Implementing Agencies
Public Works Department Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: June 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR			
Person Hours/ Dollars	Printing Direct	Total	Funding
10/5450	$25	$475	General Fund
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS
Include in the Subdivision Ordinance incentives to property owners (density bonuses, height bonuses etc.) to facilitate consolidation of identified habitat areas, open space and park lands.
2
21-25
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICY 27.4
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Cross Referenced To: Title 16
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/ Organizations
Developers
Realtors
Banks
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: June 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct	Total Funding
Dollars____________________________________
80/$3,600	$1,000	$900	$5,500 Developer
Fees
Community Development Department
• Target Dates:	Start: January 1989 Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COST	
Person Hours/ Printing Dollars	Direct Total Funding
1,000/545,000 $4,500	$49,500 General Fund
SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Specialty commercial zones will be included In the new Zoning Code. Initially, three specialty commercial areas will be zoned: the Sutter Street Historic business district and the Folsom Auto Plaza, and the business professional facilities district. Zoning standards will be based on the following considerations:
1.	Deslgnguidelinesfortherestorationofand/ or modifications to historic buildings.
2.	Guidelines for the design of new buildings in keeping with the historic character and architectural styles of the district
3.	The height and bulk of existing buildings in the district.
REVISION OF ZONES AND ZONING STANDARDS
Revise the Zoning Code and Zoning Map to reflect the new Land Use Element of the General Plan. Where possible, existing zoning categories and boundaries will be retained if they correspond with the General Plan designations to which the zoning categories are applied. New Zoning Code Standards will be developed to reflect the types of allowed uses for each district and the General Plan policies for height, density, and other development standards.
IMPLEMENTS: GOALS 8. 10. 11. 12, 13. 14. 15 AND 16
• Responsible and Implementing Agency
For other specialty commercial areas:
1.	The-specialty commercial area will be limited to one or more businesses or institutions providing related goods and services (such as the Folsom Auto Plaza). Supporting commercial services may also be included (such as child care establishment for employees in the district or a restaurant).
2.	A specialty commercial area may be designated only in response to a specific proposal- - -by a landowner or his/her representative.
3.	The commercial center may not be a strip commercial area characterized by long, shallow lots, multiple curb-cuts, and a number of unrelated businesses.
21
21-26
4.	The proposed commercial area shall be located and designed to minimize negative traffic, noise, and visual impacts on nearby residential areas.
The Zoning Code will also contain procedures for designating new specialty commercial areas. A development plan will be required which states the purpose of the district, the location and type of proposed commercial uses, proposed public improvements, landscaping, parking, internal circulation, access to public rights-of-way. and proposed open spaces.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 14
•	Funding: General Fund and Permit Fees (for project review)
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
•	Estimated Cost
Part of Zoning Code revision cost
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
New commercial uses or conversions of existing commercial buildings will be allowed in arterlal-orlented commercial districts. These commercial areas will not be allowed to expand beyond their current boundaries, however. New commercial uses will be subject to design and parking standards to be included in the Zoning Code for:
1.	The number and location of allowed curb-cuts.
2.	Landscaping of parking areas.
3.	The location, size, number and construction of signs.
4.	The configuration and exterior design of the buildings themselves.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL IS
•	Funding: General Fund and Permit Fees (for project review)
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
•	Estimated Cost
Part of Zoning Code revision cost.
USE PERMITS
The revised Zoning Code will contain standards for the conditional permit approval of private schools, religious institutions, and fraternal organizations and social clubs in residen-tially zoned areas.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 16 - POLICIES 16.7; 16.9; AND 16.10
•	Funding: General Fund and Permit Fees (for project review)
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
•	Estimated Cost
Part of Zoning Code revision cost.
PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES
Development Plan Review Procedures:
Expand the Development Plan Review procedures of the Community Development Department and Building Inspection Department to
2
21-27
address physical facilities which are necessary for the handling of hazardous materials.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41 - POLICY 41.10
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Cross Referenced To: Title 13 and Title 9
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/ Organizations
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department State Air Resources Board
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agencies
Building Inspection Department Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: March 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars ________________________________________
40/$1,800	$200	$200	S2J200 Development
Application Building Permit Fees
21
PROJECT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Modify the Code to require a qualified biologist conduct a vegetattve/wildlife survey, analysis. and mitigation measures if applicable to be submitted with development applications for projects within or adjacent to sensitive habitat areas and potential habitats for sensitive wildlife and floral species.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 25 - POLICY 25.4
• Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
• Resource Groups/Agencies/ Organizations
State Department of Fish and Game U.S. Department of Fish and Wildlife U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department City Council
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/$1,800	$200	$200	$2,200 Application
Fees
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Amend the current planned development provisions of the Zoning Code to reflect the policies of the revised General Plan. The overriding purpose of the planned development process is to encourage the comprehensive planning of a large area under one ownership. The planned development process will be used for individual developments, whereas the specific plan process will be used for multiple projects on sites that have more than one owner. The planned development process will allow flexibility in the location of residences, schools and other public facilities, and neighborhood commercial areas to be Included in a development Residential densities may be distributed within the planned development area differently than would otherwise be permitted for each individual property.
The planned development provisions in the Zoning Code will contain standards to address the criteria in Policy 9.2.
[
21-28
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 9
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars______________________________________
40/$1,800 Included in $1,800 General Fund Zoning
Code Revision
PRE-ZONING PROCEDURES
The City shall adopt procedures governing the pre-zoning of areas within Folsom’s Sphere of Influence to be annexed to the City. These procedures shall be included in the revised Zoning Code. Criteria for pre-zoning shall consider existing land uses, if any, on the site to be annexed, existing County zoning, the land uses, if any, on sites adjacent to or nearby the area to be annexed, existing circulation patterns, and environmental conditions on and near the site to be annexed.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 7 - POLICY 7.2
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COST		
Person Hours/ Dollars	Printing	Direct	Total Funding
20/$900	included in Zoning Code Revision	$900 General Permit Fund Fees (for project review)
Include in the Zoning Code incentives to property owners (density bonuses, height bonuses etc.) to facilitate consolidation of identified habitat areas, open space and park lands.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICY 27.4;-GOAL 8 - POLICIES 8.6 AND 8.7
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Cross Referenced To: Title 16
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/ Organizations
•	Conservancy
•	State Office of Planning and Research
•	Responsible Agencies
•	Community Development Department
•	Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency
•	Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars __________________________
80/33,600 $1,000	$900	$5,500 Developer
Fees
UPDATE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The City of Folsom Development Standards will be revised to include greater detail in the following areas:	,
1.	Street standards, including roadway width, right-of-way width, bike lanes, moving and parking lane dimensions, sidewalks, median strips and turn lanes, and planting strips.
2
21-29
21
2.	The bulk and height of buildings in relation to surrounding uses and topography, vehicular entrances and exits on commercial and industrial properties, and the incorporation of natural landscaping features and vegetation into new developments.
3.	Location and design criterlaforpublic facilities: utility substations, water or sewage storage, water or sewer treatment plants, and similar facilities.
4.	Screening of any mechanical equipment or processes within buildings, behind landscaping, or behind walls or fences of approved design.
5.	Establishment of minimum setbacks or lot line distances for any mechanical equipment or processes that may impact the adjoining properties visuallythrough objectionable odors, or through noise.
6.	Use of filters, building design, or other processes or materials to reduce excessive noise or odors from, the facility.
7.	Location and design of exits and entrances to parking lots on non-residentlal developments to minimize the use of residential streets in adjoining neighborhoods.
8.	Screening of refuse facilities behind walls, fences, or landscaping or within solid enclosures of an approved design.
9.	Lighting and landscaping districts or similar maintenance programs shall be provided where feasible in order to provide long term maintenance.
IMPLEMENTS: GOALS 2, 3. 8, 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16 AND 17
•	Funding: General Fund
•	Responsible Agency
Community Development Department Public Works Department
• Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
• Target Dates: Start: June 1989
Complete: January 1990
INTER-AGENCY REVIEW AND COMMENT
The City will submit a standing written request to receive timely copies of any draft plans, policies, regulatory documents, development applications, or other similar documents which could affect land use and circulation in the City of Folsom. The City will comment on such documents in an appropriate manner, including attendance and testimony at public meetings or hearings if necessary.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 5 - POLICY 5.2
•	Funding: General Fund
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Current and On-Going
•	Estimated Cost
Depends on the number and type of plans and regulatory documents to respond to, several hours of staff time per month.
SACRAMENTO AREA COUNCIL
OF GOVERNMENTS
The City will continue to contribute financially to the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) and provide a representative from the City to serve on the Council and on the Sacramento County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). According to the Joint Powers Authority and the Folsom/Isleton/Galt Agreements, such appointments to« LAFCO will be made.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 5 - POLICY 5.3
•	Funding: General Fund
•	Target Dates: Current and On-Going
21-30
COORDINATION WITH SCHOOL DISTRICT
The City will review residential subdivision proposals for their impact on the school system. The Folsom-Cordova School District will be consulted to determine the location and acreage needed for new school sites. School district standards will be used in determining school space needs. To obtain subdivision approval, an applicant will have to provide evidence that existing schools can accommodate the expected number of students from the proposed development or that a new school has been planned for to serve the residents of that subdivision.
Locational criteria in Policy 16.4 shall apply to the determination of an appropriate school site.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 16 - POLICIES 16.3:
16.6	AND 16.7
•	Funding: General Fund
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 16
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Part of application review process.
•	Estimated Cost
Staff time to be recovered from permit fees for application review.
REGIONAL CONTROL STRATEGIES
Continue to participate through the political process to work for a regional approach to air pollution controL
1.	Continue to participate In SACOG and sup-portthoseprogramswhichwillpruvidemeth-ods of air pollution control on a regional basis.
2.	Continue to cooperate with the Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District. State
Air Resources Board. CALTRANS and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency on development project review and Incorporate recommended mitigation measures Into project design and conditions of approval.
3.	Support the adoption of more stringent vehicle emission standards and enhancements to the Smog Check program through active participation In hearings held by the State Legislature, the California Air Resources Board and the Bureau of Automotive Repair.
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW PROCESS
The City will continue to use the environmental review process and EIRs to identify the environmental and economic Impacts of developments. including effects on the natural environment. traffic, housing needs, public facilities, and other City resources and to Identify and recommend appropriate mitigation measures. IMPLEMENTS: GOALS 1. 2 AND 3
•	Funding: General Fund and Permit Fees
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Current and On-Going
•	Estimated Cost
Varies depending on the type and complexity of the EIR
USE OF UTILITY EASEMENTS
The City will evaluate each proposal for use of utility company rights-of-way for open space, park, or recreational areas based on the conditions related to each proposal.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 16 - POLICY 16.8
•	Funding: General Fund
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
21-31
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Current and On-Going
•	Estimated Cost
Cost included in Component #1: Paries and Recreation Element. Master Plan and Ordinance.
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE STUDY
The City will prepare a study for the expansion of Folsom’s Sphere of Influence south of Highway 50 and east of Hazel Boulevard. The study will recommend new Sphere of Influence boundaries. Folsom’s ultimate service area over the next 15 to 30 years, and guidelines for the annexation and servicing of lands currently outside the City limits. The study should address general municipal service needs for the area to be included in the Sphere of Influence, existing and potential land uses, and any relationships to developed areas adjacent to or near the new Sphere of Influence boundaries. IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 6
•	Funding: General Fund and Contributions from Affected Landowners
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
•	Estimated Cost
Varies depending on scope and area of study.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
The City will prepare a five-year capital improvement program for the construction, extension. and improvement of arterial and collector streets. The capital improvement program will include a description of the streets to be constructed, extended, widened, or improved over a five year period, an estimated cost of the work described, sources of funding to pay for the work, and an approximate time frame for completing the work. Any City funds or fees collected from developers for street improvements shall be clearly earmarked for this purpose and expenditures accounted for separately from other source of funding. The capital improvement program shall be updated every two years after its initial adoption by the City Council.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICY 17.8
• Responsible and Implementing Agencies
Public Works Department Community Development Department
• Target Dates: Start: January 1989 Complete: June 1989
ESTIMATED COST		
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Dollars	Total	Funding
150/56,750	$250	$7,000	General Fund
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
The City will revise the Folsom Redevelopment Plan to reflect policy and program changes in the General Plan. Specifically, the Redevelopment Plan will be revised to reflect changes in land uses and circulation, policies for the historic business district, and the development of a central commercial district.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 2 - POLICY 2.2
• Responsible Agencies
Redevelopment Agency Community Development Department Public Works Department
21
21-32
•	Implementing Agencies
Redevelopment Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: December 1989
ESTIMATED COST
Parson Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars______________________________________
100/55,000	$250	$300 $5,550 General Fund
Redevelopment Tax increment Funds
FOLSOM TOWNSHIP PLAN
The City will prepare and adopt a Plan for the original Folsom Township area, that is intended to:
1.	In order to further the quality of life goals and provide a method to preserve the unique nature of the original Folsom Township Area.
2.	Provide appropriate levels of devleopment that will allow for preservation of the original Township Area.
3.	Provide for coordination between Historic District Plan. Redevleopment Plan and a transition to the newly developing areas of the City.
4.	Provide for a transportation and circulation system appropriate to the original Township Area.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 1 - POLICIES 1.6;
1.7AND 1.8-GOAL2 -POLICIES2.1 AND 2.2-GOAL 26 - POLICIES 26.1 AND 26.2
•	Funding: General Fund and Developer Fees
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department Redevelopment Agency
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1990
Complete: July 1990
ESTIMATED COST
Parson Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars___________________________________
20059,000	$250	$300 $9,550 General
Fund and Developer Fees
The requirement may be satisfied by an expansion of the Historic District Plan currently being prepared so long as that plan carries out the above-listed goals.
21-33



•< Mr	7 By	-i
Connerly and Associates
October 31,1988
soft
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
22.1	INTRODUCTION...................................................2
22.1.1	State Policy and Authorization.........................2
22.1.2	Related State Regulations..............................2
22.1.3	Relationship to the General Plan.....................  2
22.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES.....................................2
22.2.1	Setting...............................................
22.2.2	Assumptions...........................................
22.2.3	Issues................................................
22.3	TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION
00 O) to
ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES................................9
22.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES.............................  12
22.5	IMPLEMENTATION.........................................  13
TRANSPORTATION & CIRCULATION
22.1	INTRODUCTION
The Transportation and Circulation Element of the General Plan establishes the policies and programs for the movement of people and goods through the City of Folsom. This Element addresses the City’s streets and highway system: the private, commercial, and public transit system: future public transit via fixed rail: transportation related facilities: and bicycle and pedestrian movement.
Circulation is more than the movement of nn r.ity streets. It Is the very essence of how social and economic interactions take place in a community. The Transportation and Circulation raiment must. therefore, address all related aspects of the system of movement of goods and people. These related aspects Include the parking of vehicles, transportation terminals and other facilities, bus stops, commercial delivery
policies, sidewalks, bicycle trails and more.
The Transportation and Circulation Element Is closely related to the Land Use Element In that the type, density, and distribution of land uses determine the network and needed roads. Conversely, constraints on transportation Improvements win affoot the City’s ability to accommodate the development envisioned under the General Plan.
22.1.1	STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
Section65302(b) of the California Government Code requires a Circulation Element to consist of the general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the Land Use Element of the Plan. This statutory requirement clearly requires that the Circulation Element treat all related aspects of circulation (not Just roads), and that a balance he achieved between I proposed land useswhich generate traffic demand I and the facilities required to adequately serve
22.1.2	RELATED STATE REGULATIONS
BRIDGE AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARE FEES (SECTION 66484 OF THE GOVERNMENT CODE)
Local jurisdictions may assess fees as a condition of subdivision approval to pay for bridges or major thoroughfares provided a Circulation Element has been adopted which addresses the facility for which the fee Is being charged.
22.1.3	RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The Transportation and Circulation Element most closely affects, and In turn is most closely affected by the Land Use Element. Land use and circulation are Inseparable, especially parking and roadway relationships to land uses in our private vehicle-dominated society. This Element is also closely related to the Public Facilities Element, which establishes standards and funding mechanismsforroads and otherfadllties. Bicycle circulation policies and programs In this Element also relate to the Parks and Recreation Element as most bicycling In Folsom Is currently for recreation-oriented purposes.
22.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTTONS/ISSUES
22.2.1	SETTING
The setting for traffic and circulation comes largely from the Folsom Area Traffic Study, completed In December 1987, and supplemented In July 1988. Additional Information on environmental conditions affecting circulation can be found in Chapters 2 and 5 of the MEA and Environmental Element of the General Plan. The setting for transportation and circulation is summarized below.
STREETS
Major sources and destinations of traffic In Folsom Include:
1.	Commuters along Highway 50, a four lane freeway at Folsom. The average dally traffic volume along Highway 50 between Folsom
22
22-2
BoulevardandScottRoadls29,5OO. During the yuTTTmw months, this volume increases to33,500 due to visitors atFolsomLake and the City’s Historic Business District
2.	Folsom Prison, which employs over 2,000 staff members.
3.	El Dorado County commuters using Green
Valley Road (which becomes East Natoma
Street at the Folsom City Limits). Traffic along this road will Increase as approved projects in El Dorado Hills are completed.
4.	Placer County and East Sacramento County commuters using Folsom-Aubum Road, MadlsonAvenue. Greenback Lane and Santa Juanita Road.
5.	Visitors to Folsom's Historic Business District and Folsom Lake, many of whom use Folsom Boulevard, cross Rainbow Bridge, and turn onto Folsom-Auburn Road. During the summermonths, weekend visitor traffic can be especially heavy.
Folsom’s existing system of highways, major thoroughfares (arterial roads) streets consists of the following:
1.	U.S. Highway 50
2.	Folsom Boulevard
3.	Natoma Street-East Natoma Street
4.	East Bldwell Street
5.	Folsom-Auburn Road
6.	Greenback Lane
7.OakAvenue Parkway (Under Construction)
8.Blue Ravine Road
9.Slbley Street/Pralrle City Road
10.	Riley Street
11.	American River Canyon Drive
12.	Madison Avenue
13.	Folsom Dam Road
The Land Use Map shows the location of these existing roads and their designation as highways and arterial roads. In addition to these existing roads, a number of new arterial roads would have to be constructed In conjunction with new development. The Land Use Map also shows the general location and proposed designation of these new roads. They include:
1.	Completion of the Oak Avenue Parkway.
2.	Construction of a new arterial road parallel to U.S. Highway 50.
3.	Construction of a new arterial road roughly parallel to the County Line.
4.	Extension of Glenn Drive to Folsom
Boulevard.
5.	Construction of anetworkofcollectorstreets to serve new developments in East Folsom, the South Area Assessment District, and American River Canyon.
6.	Extension of Riley Street southward from Blue Ravine to Oak Avenue Parkway, extended.
The Transportation Study reviewed traffic pattousatTSlntersectlons in Folsom, as well as probable traffic patterns in developing areas of the City. To accommodate the build out of land uses allowed under the Land Use Element, the following road widths (see Figure 22-1) would be needed based on the adopted General Plan-
Six Lanes
•	U.S. Highway 50
•	Folsom Boulevard
•	Blue Ravine Road
•	East Natoma Street
•	American Aggregates Extension (arterial parallel to U.S. Highway 50)
•	Russell Ranch Road (arterial parallel to County Line)
•	Oak Avenue Parkway (except as noted below)
•	Folsom-Aubum Road
•	Greenback Lane
•	Prairie City Road
•	East Bldwell Street-Blue Ravine Road to Highway 50
Four Lanes
•	Riley Street
•	Glenn Street Extension
•	Sibley Street - Glenn Street extension to Blue Ravine Road
•	East Bldwell Street (To Blue Ravine Road)
•	Oak Avenue Parkway (Blue Ravine to Natoma Connector)
22-3
•	Connector Road Between Russell Ranch Road and Blue Ravlne/East Natoma Intersection
•	Sibley Street - Bidwell Street to Glenn Street Extension
•	Natoma Street - From City Hall West
•	Natoma Connector
Collector Street
•	Oak Avenue Parkway - Natoma Street to Natoma Connector (Willow Creek Drive): This street extension is feasible with two
lanes, however, a feasibility study will be necessary to determine if four lanes ran be constructed.
At buildout of the adopted General Plan, the City can expect 423.500 daily trips. 43.900 trips during the AM. peak and 51,500 during the P.M. peak. Table 22-1 shows projected trafflp vnlnmp / capacity ratios and levels of service for the 45 intersections analyzed In the Transportation Study.
------------------------------------TABLE 22-1----------------------------------------
GENERAL FLAN LAND USE SCENARIO LEVEL OF SERVICE ANALYSIS Folsom Ares Transportation Study
Preferred Alternative AM Peak	PM Peak
Intersection	V/c LOS V/C LOS
1 Blue Ravine/Folsom Blvd	0.74	C	1.06	F
2 Blue RavineZPraire City	0.74	C	0.75	C
3 Blue RavineZEast Bidweli	0.69	B	0.87	D
4 Blue RavineZEast Natoma	0.66	B	0.74	C
S Folsom BhzdZUS 50 WB	0.71	C	0.57	A
6 Folsom BhzdZUS 50 EB	0.70	C	0.65	B
7 Praire City/US 50 WB	0.35	A	0.38	A
8 Praire CityAJS 50 EB	0.60	B	0.72	C
9 East BidweHZUS 50 WB	0.20	A	0.36	A
10 East BidweHZUS 50 EB	0.34	0	1.11	F
11 East BidweHZCIarksviHe	039	A	0.79	C
12 Folsom BhzdZBidweil	0.71	C	0.78	C
13 Folsom BhzdZNatoma	0.76	C	0.68	B
14 RiieyZLeidesdorff	0.38	A	0.81	0
15 Riey/Natoma	0.76	C	0.72	C
16 Riley/BkhzeH	0.55	A	0.68	B
17 NatomaZColma	0.52	A	0.64	B
18 Natoma/Prison Road	0.56	A	033	A
19 East NatomaZFolsom Dam	0.55	A	0.65	B
20 Fblsom/Aurtoum/Greenback	1.04	F	1.16	F
21 Folsom Aurtoum/Oak Ave	1.25	F	1.00	F
22 Folsom AubumZFolsom 0am	0.75	C	0.73	C
23 Am River CanyonZGreenback	0.66	B	0.74	c
24 Am River CanyonZOrangevaie	0.18	A	0.33	A
25 Am River Canyon/Oak Ave	0.48	A	0.46	C
26 Madison/QreenbackZLake Natoma	0.65	B	0.74	C
27 Oak AveZEast Natoma	1.27	F	1.45	F
28 Oak Ave/Bkie Ravine	0.96	E	1.17	F
29 Oak AveZEast BkNzeH	1.17	F	1.36	F
30 Praire City/Am Aggregate	0.93	E	0.79	C
31 Oak AveZAm Aggregate	0.72	C	0.92	E
32 Oak AveZUS 50	0.26	A	0.24	A
33 Russell Ranch/US 50	0.20	A	0.30	A
34 Russell RanchZCIarksville	0.52	A	0.76	C
35 Folsom BlvdVAmer Agg Exten	0.99	E	0.98	E
36 Riley/Blue Ravine	0.34	A	0.40	A
37 Oak ParkwayZRiely	0.72	C	0.97	E
38 Folsom BlvdZNew Parallel	0.94	E	0.99	E
39 SibleyZNew Parallel	1.03	F	1.01	F
40 Riley/New Parallel	0.25	A	0.23	A
41 BidwelIZNew Parallel	0.40	A	0.42	A
42 Oak ParkwayZNatoma Connector	1.20	F	1.41	F
43 Bridge ApproachZLsidesdorif	0.58	A	0.38	D
44 Russell Ranch ExtenZGreen Val	0.26	A	0.31	A
45 Russell Ranch ExtenZR Ranch	0.23	A	0.34	A
Source: Wilbur Smith Associates: July 1988
22
22-4
As reflected by Policy 17.17. the City has “maintained” a policy of achieving a Level of Service C or better at all intersections. As shown onTable 22-2. the following intersections would not meet this Level of Service objective at buildout of the adopted General Plan.
----------------------- TABLE 22-2 -----------------------
STREET	LEVEL OF SERVICE
Blue Ravine - Folsom Boulevard	F
Blue Ravine - East Bidwell	D
East Bidwell - U.S. 50 Eastbound	D-F
Riley - Leldesdorff	D
Folsom-Aubum - Greenback	F
Folsom-Aubum - Oak Avenue	F
Oak Avenue - East Natoma	F
Oak Avenue - Blue Ravine	E-F
Oak Avenue - East Bidwell	F
Oak Avenue - Natoma Connector	F
Oak Avenue - Riley Road	E
Oak Avenue - American Aggregate	E
New Parallel Road - Folsom Boulevard	E
New Parallel Road - Sibley Road	F
Folsom Boulevard - New Bridge Approach	D
Folsom Boulevard - American Aggregate Extension	E
Prairie City Road - American Aggregate Extension	E
PEAK PERIOD PM Peak PM Peak
AM and PM Peaks PM Peak
AM and PM Peaks AM and PM Peaks AM and PM Peaks AM and PM Peaks AM and PM Peaks AM and PM Peaks
PM Peak PM Peak
AM and PM Peaks AM and PM Peaks
PM Peak AM and PM Peaks
AM Peak
BRIDGES
There Is presently one two-lane bridge (Rainbow Bridge) across the American River In Folsom, and an additional part time crossing along Folsom Dam Road. The Traffic Study recommended aneedfortwonew six-lane bridges, one at Oak Avenue Parkway and one connecting Folsom Boulevard with Folsom-Aubum Road, to serve east/west and north/west local and regional traffic respectively. TheAmerican River Crossings Alternative Study dated January 1988 provides more information and analysis of other alternative crossings which were studied.
INTERCHANGES
There are presently three interchanges In Folsom along U.S. Highway 50: at Folsom Boulevard, at Prairie City Road, and at East Bidwell Street (Scott Road). To accommodate the expected traffic increase at build-out. the interchanges Folsom Boulevard, at Prairie City Road and East Bidwell Street would have to be upgraded. Two additional interchanges would have to be constructed: one at Oak Avenue
Parkway and one at the Sacramento-El Dorado County Line. The Land Use Map indicates the locations of these proposed Interchanges.
bictcle paths
Folsom contains a portion of the American River bikeway, which begins at Discovery Park in Sacramento and ends at Folsom Lake. There are opportunities forthe creation of additionalblcycle paths or routes along Folsom’s other waterways and scenic arterial roads (such as Folsom Boulevard the proposed Humbug/WiHow Creek Parkway and Blue Ravine Road). Preparation of a Bicycle Master Plan Is currently underway in connection with the preparation of the Parks and Recreation Element of the General Plan. The Bicycle Master Plan will provide facilities necessary to serve those who commute by bicycle to places of employment as well as those who seek recreational enjoyment.
PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
There are a number of recreational pedestrian paths along the American River and Folsom
22-5
T-akp. There is presently no pedestrian pathway system, although an opportunity exists to create such a system In conjunction with designation open spaces. Historic Folsom is predominantly a pedestrian-oriented commercial district. The commercial core along East Bidwell Street Is not laid out to encourage pedestrian circulation among the various retail centers.
PUBLIC TRANSIT
Folsom is currently served by a City operated fixed-route bus system. Folsom Stage line. The system provides scheduled service, six days a week, throughout the City. Connections to Regional Transit are made at the intersection of Main Avenue and MadlsonAvenue in Orangevale. The City also operates a dally commuter bus to downtown Sacramento. A second bus is planned to be added in the near future. Daily bus service to Sacramento and South Lake Tahoe Is also provided by Greyhound Bus Line.
RAIL TRANSIT
Folsom Is served by a spur of the Southern Pacific Railroad. The line meanders through the southern portion of the City, with a side line that ends in Folsom's Historic Commercial District. The rail line is not presently in use for regularly scheduled commercial traffic This line should, atsomefuturetime. belinked to Regional Transit’s light rail line along Folsom Boulevard (this line currently ends at Butterfield, well short ofFolsom but is proposed to be extended to Hazel).
22.2.2	ASSUMPTIONS
FOLSOM AREA TRAFFIC STUDY
The methodology and assumptions utilized in preparing the traffic analysis upon which this Circulation Element Is based include:
2
•	Comprehensive survey of1986traffic counts on all major roadways within the City;
•	Assumed buildout of the land use designations depicted on the adopted General Plan would be In addition to the 1986 baseline traffic Information.
•	The assumed residential density (du/acre)
and commercial/industrial intensity (employees or square footage/acre) at buildout of the adopted General Plan are based on factors contained In the Housing and Land Use Elements of the General Plan,
•	Since traffic generation rates are based on “Net” Acres of development, the “gross" acre calculations derived from buildout of the adopted General Plan were reduced by 25 percent for each land use category.
•	Traffic generation rates for each land use category are applied based on case studies from the Institute of Traffic Engineer (TTE). Rates used represent the “average" density or intensity of development permitted by each land use category.
•	The resulting total trip generation for the community is reduced by a factor of 29 percent to account for naturally occurring traffic reme^on and differences in “peaking* characteristics when the specific “project" level data from ITE is applied to the community as a whole.
•	The resulting total “corrected" trip generation from buildout of the adopted General Plan is then applied to the roadway system shown an Figure 22-1. Approximately 50 percent of the total generated traffic will have both an origin and destination within the community (Internal trips), and the remaining 50 percent of traffic generation will either be external or regional through trips.
U.S. HIGHWAY 80
The California Department of Transportation will add two lanes to Highway 50 and will approve the interchange upgrades and additions needed to meet projected traffic increases.
EXISTING ARTERIAL ROUTES .
Rights-of-way can be acquired and the arterials engineered to accommodate the additional lanes recommended in the Transportation Study (see Figure 22-1).
22-6
22-7
zhnk MM«W	mitigated transportation NETYVobk	22-1
W\	folsom Area Transportation S|udy	
N
Figure 22-1
NEW ARTERIAL ROUTES
Rights-of-way will be dedicated through the subdivision process to construct the new arterial roads recommended in the Transportation Study (see Figure 22-1).
FINANCING OF ROADS AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS
A facilities plan and five-year capital Improvement program will be adopted to address the financing of needed roadway, bridge, interchange, light rail and public transit Improvements.
PUBLIC TRANSIT
Folsom will be served by a level of bus and other public transit services adequate to accommodate the demand created by buildout of the General Plan. The Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way will be acquired for future public transit or other appropriate use.
BRIDGES
Additional American River crossings can be engineered and necessary rights-of-way and financing acquired.
AREA FLANS
Specific Plans (as defined by State Law) will be prepared for large scale development proposals to link land uses with transportation and circulation improvements consistent with the policies and standards contained within the General Plan and the circulation Improvements designated on the Plan Map.
22.2.3	ISSUES
REGIONAL TRAFFIC CONSIDERATIONS
The City Council hasgoneonreeord opposing the construction of “any routing of freeway extension which would bisect the City of Folsom" (see Resolution No. 1907, February 18. 1986). This position was expanded by Resolution No. 1955 (August 4, 1986). to oppose proposed “beltway" alignments which would bisect the City. The roadway system proposed by this Circulation Element (see Figure 22-1, contains
numerous six lane arterlals and two new bridges over the American River which could serve as a “de facto" “beltway" if constructed.
In particular, the philosophy of the City is to not overbuild a transportation system within the community to serve “regional" through traffic, but to route that traffic around the periphery of the community (particularly the older parts of town). As a result, through traffic from 1) South Placer County entering the community byway of Santa Juanita and Folsom-Auburn Roads, and 2) El Dorado County entering by way of Green Valley Road (East Natoma Street) must be given particular attention. The “Policy Decision" posed within the Setting section of this Circulation Element should be addressed before the issue of further bridge crossings of the American River (capacity and location) is resolved and the General Plan adopted.
RECREATIONAL USE OF
SENSITIVE HABITATS
Many of the proposed open space corridors could also serve as pedestrian and bicycle recreation areas. However, where sensitive natural habitats exist, bicycle and pedestrian routes must be carefully planned to minim toy possible environmental conflicts.
BRIDGE COSTS
The tremendous cost of even modest bridge crossings of the American River will make it difficult for the City to finance such projects. The City may need partial funding from federal. State and County to pay for their construction.
PUBLIC TRANSIT
There is no definite timetable for expansion of bus service or Light Rail Transit to Folsom. There is no guarantee that money will be available to extend the light rail line to Folsom or construct the system Within-the timeframe, the Genera)-Plan.
INTERCHANGES
CALTRANS has not yet formally approved the concept of two additional Interchanges In Folsom or the improvements of existing Interchanges. The City will have to work with CALTRANS to
22
22-8
ensure these Interchanges can meet CALTRANS standards. Current State policies and funding constraints will require that design and construction of the interchange projects befunded by the City or private sector sources.
22.3	TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 17
To develop a comprehensive transportation/ circulation system which Includes as a minimi im-
1.	Freeways, highways, and/or expressways designed to route through-traffic away from Folsom's neighborhoods.
2.	Arterial roads which provide access among Folsom’s neighborhoods, major cross-town links, and links between Folsom and adjacent communities.
3.	Additional crossingts) over the American River.
4.	Pathways and designated routes for bicycle and pedestrian traffic.
5.	Designated routes for commercial vehicles.
6.	The protection of residential neighborhoods from through-traffic.
7.	Public transportation routes.
POLICY 17.1
The City shall plan for an Integrated circulation system which provides for travel by private vehicles, commercial vehicle routes, a public transportation system, and for pedestrian and bicycle routes.
POLICY 17.2
The City should establish a hierarchy of roads consisting of the foUowing:
1.	Freeways or limited access highways. Such roads shall be grade separated at each intersection with another road. The major purpose of such roads is to route traffic
around Folsom, with as few interruptions to the surface street system as possible. U. S. Highway 50 currently meets the definition of a freeway. The City has made a firm commitment that a new freeway would not bisect the City.
2.	Expressways. Allow for moderate- to highspeed travel within the City. The purpose of an expressway is to carry cross-town traffic; from other communities or between neighborhoods within the City. An expressway may contain some grade-separated intersections, but this type of road would be mainly a surface street. Expressways should be located to allow for controlled intersections spaced at one-half mile Intervals or more. Only arterial and collector roads should intersect with an expressway.
3.	Arterial roads (or major streets). Serve to connect neighborhoods within the City and the City with surrounding commi initio Arterials would normally define the boundaries of neighborhoods, not provide internal access to a neighborhood.
4.	Collector (or secondary) roads. Serve to route traffic from local streets within a neighborhood to an arterial road. Collector streets would not normally serve as "through" roads for more than one area, but would circulate throughout a neighborhood.
5.	Local (or tertiary) roads. Serve a portion of a neighborhood only and route traffic to a collector street.
6.	Street-ends (cul-de-sacs, dead-end streets, etc.). Limited in length and serve only a few residences.
POLICY 17.3
Arterial roads serving new developments shall be aligned with existing arterial roads whenever possible.
POLICY 17.4
Routes for additional bridge crossings over the American River shall be designated on the Plan Map. Because the Proposed Oak Avenue
2
22-9
and Folsom-Auburn Road crossings will serve a significant amount of regional through traffic with distinctly different origins and destinations, financing and construction of the bridges should be considered as a package ratherthan separately.
POLICY 17.5
The City should locate and Improve existing arterial roads to provide direct access between a central commercial district, a regional commercial center, and major public Institutions (hospital site, community college site. Civic Center]. Policy 17.6
The City should require that new arterial roads or extension widening of existing arterial roads that are need to serve a new development are planned and constructed in accordance with the Plan Map and standards contained herein or traffic studies completed to the satisfaciton of Public Works Department and approved by the City of Folsom.
Land must be set aside by dedication for sufficient rights-of-way and landscaping in accordance with ; standards contained herein, and a planting strip or other buffer shall be required in single famliy developments to ensure that homes do not back directly onto the arterial road. Resolution No. 3798. POLICY 17.7
The City shall require the establishment of landscape maintenance assessment agreements or districts for new developments adjacent to arterial roads to ensure that planting strips are required and property maintained.
POLICY 17.8
I
2
A five-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) for road Improvements should be prepared and implemented by the City. The road improvement plan shall be updated at least every other year subsequent to Its initial adoption. The road improvements plan shall establish a schedule for needed road repair and construction and Identify sources of funding for road improvements' The five-year CIP shouldbe consistent with the Fiscal Element of the General Plan which will be prepared to Identify total Citywide public facility funding mechanisms.
As part of this program the City should update the FolsomArea Traffic Study onaregular basis (at least annually) as part of a regular traffic
monitoring program to attempt to achieve that at least a traffic Level of Service “C" is achieved throughout the City.
POLICY 17.9
The City should plan for the expansion of future public transit routes (bus and fixed rail service).
1.	Transit routes should coincide with major destinations for employment and shopping, the location of major Institutions, concentrations of multifamily housing, and other land uses likely to attract public transit ridership.
2.	The City should preserve existing railroad rights-of-way for their potential future use as public transit routes. The City should work with Regional Transit to determine otherrights-of-way which couldbe preserved for rail transit use. Proposed light rail alignments and station locations are designated on the Plan Map and dedication of land for the required right-of-way shall be required as part of the approval process for development of adjoining parcels.
3.	Bus routes should follow major roads with service to residential neighborhoods via collector streets.
POLICY 17.10
The City should develop and maintain a bikeways and pedestrian master plan that links residential developments with sources of employment, public open spaces, parks, schools, neighborhood shopping areas, the central commercial district, other major recreational destinations, and adjoining communities.
1.	The City should ensure that new residential developments incorporate pedestrian and blcyelepalhsnr routes when there are nearhy schools, parks, public open spaces, sources of employment or other destinations for such travel. Such paths orroutes shouldbe designed so that schools and parks are accessible to area residents. Pedestrian/ bicycle over- or under-crossings may be provided when necessary to cross arterial roads or expressways.
22-10
2.	The existing bicycle and pedestrian paths along the American River shall be preserved.
3.	The City should establish and maintain an Internal pathway system that links parks sources of employment and public open spaces using rights-of-way and parkways.
4.	Where on-street bikeways are not feasible, the City should provide for Class I off-street bikeways.
5.	The City should endeavor to provide routes paralleling the major arterial routes for long distance bicycle travel.
6.	The City should endeavor to provide routes for recreational travel, providing access to important recreational areas of the City, Including Folsom Lake.
POLICY 17.11
Whenever any major repair, alteration, or construction of roads are undertaken, immediate consideration of incorporating and providing bicycle routes and facilities should occur, as designated by the City of Folsom Bikeway Master Plan, and state specifications for bikeways.
POLICY 17.12
The City of Folsom should establish an ongoing public education program on bicycle safety and encourage bicycle safety programs for cyclists and motorists.
POLICY 17.13
The Master Plan includes four typical bike lane cross sections which shall be used where appropriate.
1.	Class-1 bikeways, separated bicycle paths will be the preferred bikeway, wherever feasible.- This form. of. bike lane win be encouraged in areas such as the Willow Creek-Humbug Creek Parkway, and along the Lake Natoma frontage, and along major boulevards, such as Folsom Boulevard.
2.	Class-2 bike lanes, which include a five foot stripped bike lane on the outside of an eight foot parking lane, will be encouraged in
areas where on-street parking is likely to occur. Such areas would be in the vicinity of apartment complexes and condominium complexes.
3.	Class 3 & 4 bike lanes, which include four foot and eight foot stripped bike lanes on the edge of pavement, should be utilized on city arterial, collector, and other roads as Indicated on the bikeways master plan.
POLICY 17.14
The City shall require facilities for parking bicycles in accordance with the Zoning Code.
POLICY 17.13
The City shall review parking requirements to ensure that adequate off-street parking can be provided for new development projects.
POLICY 17.16
The City shall designate locations for park and ride lots and adopt standards for their development. Several such lots are designated on the Plan Map and dedication of land for each site shall be required as part of the approval process for development of adjoining parcels.
Policy 17.17
The City should strive to achieve at least a traffic Level of Service "C" throughout the City. During the course of Plan buildout it may occur that temporarily higher Level of Service result where roadway improvements have not been adequately phased as development proceeds. However, this situation will be minimized based on annual traffic studies or project specific traffic studies as approved by the City of Folsom and monitoring programs. Resolution No. 3798.
POLICY 17.18
The City -will work with the. California Department of Transportation in planning for and funding freeway interchange improvements and additional interchanges along U.S. Highway 50. A specific study should be prepared by the City to determine the required phasing of construction of freeway and interchange improvements based upon buildout of land uses designated on the Plan Map.
22-11
POLICY 17.19
Because the Traffic Studies upon which this Circulation Element are based shows various intersections which will not achieve Level of Service “C", the City should adopt a mandatory TSM program that applies to existing as well as future development and will ensure the assumed reduction In peak hour trips. Prior to adoption of the Program by the City, all discretionary development permits issued by the City should renqinethe applicants to participate in the TSM program when enacted. Specific Studies should be conducted to determine the most desirable methods for achieving the required level of trip reduction.
POLICY 17.20
The City shall develop a long range public transit plan for Folsom. Such a Plan shall be developed In coooperation with SACOG and Regional Transit, and shall Include a study to determine the feasibility and financing requirements of:
1.	Continued City operated lntra-communlty bus service.
2.	Contlnued City operated commuter bus service to downtown Sacramento and/or service to the nearest KT Metro Rail Station.
3.	Extendlng RT Metro service to Folsom and the preservation of future rights-of-way.
POLICY 17.21
Establishment of speed limits for streets within residential areas should include consideration of the potential traffic noise reduction which may be achieved through lower speeds. In some cases It may be appropriate to establish a lower speed limit than may be allowed , byuoadway design .to accomplish the goalof-maintaining acceptable traffic noise levels within a neighborhood.
POLICY 17.22
The City shall require a minimum two lanes of arterial roads to be installed adjacent to or in I the vicinity of new subdivisions.
22.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 1
POLICY 1.4 POLICY 1.5
GOAL 3 POLICY 3.1
GOAL 7 POLICY 7.2 POLICY 7.3 POLICY 7.4
RELATED LAND TTRE TET.KMBINT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOALS POLICY 8.5 POLICY 8.7
GOAL 9 POLICY 9.2
GOAL 11
POLICY 11.4
GOAL 12 POLICY 12.3
GOAL 13 POLICY 13.3 POLICY 13.4
GOAL 14 POLICY 14.3
GOAL 15
POLICY 15.2
GOAL 16 POLICY 16.3 POLICY 16.8 POLICY 16.9 POLICY 16.10
RELATED HOUSING element GOALS AND POLICIES
I	GOAL 22
POLICY 22.2
RELATED OPEN SPACE AND CON. ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
. GOAL 27 - POLICY 27.1
POLICY 27.2 POLICY 27.3
RELATED NOISE ELEMENTS GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 30 POLICY 30.5
22-12
RELATED AIR QUALITY ELEMENT -----
GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 33 POLICY 33.1 POLICY 33.2
PUBLIC FACILITIES
GOAL 40 POLICY 40.1 POLICY 40.2 POLICY 40.3 POLICY 40.4
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GOAL 41
POLICY 41.9
22.S	IMPLEMENTATION
tum-outs and bus shelters along identified transit routes on arterial streets. The City’s street design and development standards will contain standards for the construction of public transit facilities along public right-of-ways. Existing ReglonalTranslt standards will be used as applicable.
4.Work with Regional Transit to identify locations for bus stops and park-and-rlde lots. These stops and lots will coincide with major employment and commercial destinations, public institutions public transit corridors, and higher density residential locations.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICY 17.9
• Resource Groups/Agendes/Organlzations
PUBLIC TRANSIT PLAN
The City will work with Regional Transit and SACOG to develop a long range public transit program. Public transit will take three forms: commuter lines, which could be served by buses, light rail transit, or a combination of the two: intra-Clty transit, and special public transit for elderly and handicapped Individuals (such as •dial-a-ride").
To Implement public transit policies, the City will do the following:
1 .Preserve the existing railroads rights-of-way In the City by not permitting development within the right-of-way or seek to create alternative future rights-of-way in conjunction with Regional Transit recommendations.
2.	Prepare a study for lntra-Clty public transit to determine the financial feasibility and cost of three alternative: continued City operation of Intra-City and shuttle buses to commuter lines, assumption*of lntra-Clty* service by Regional Transit, and the assumption of Intra-City service by a private transit company.
3.	Establish standards for tum-outs and bus stops along arterial and collector streets. Developers will be required to construct
Sacramento Regional Transit SACOG
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Sacramento ReglonalTranslt Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: October 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct total Funding Dollars ________________________________________
400/518,000	$1,000	$19,000 General Fund
Regional Transit StatB/Federal Grants Developer Contributions
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE MASTER PLAN
The City will update its Bicycle Master Plan and include a pedestrian and equestrian components, showing the location and type of route/links to schools and parks, sources of employment and other recreational destinations.
2
22-13
The City’s Development Standards will include design standards forpedestrian and bicycle paths, lanes, and routes. Road Improvements or extensions shall be designed to include bicycle and pedestrian paths, lanes, or routes where these are Indicated in the Master Plan. Bicycle paths, lanes, and routes will be clearly marked. The County of Sacramento will continue to be responsible for maintenance of the American River bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian trails.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 -	17.10;
17.11; 17.12 AND 17.13
• Resource Groups/Agendes/ Organizations
Bicycle Clubs
Equestrian Clubs
Civic Organizations Interested in
Pedestrian. Bicycling and Equestrian Issues
that are adjacent to the development. Street standards shall be based on the following considerations:
1.	For local streets, right-of-way width that would be necessary to accommodate two lanes of traffic, on-street parking on each side of street, and sidewalks on each side of the street. Exceptions may be granted for street segments that end in cul-de-sacs or that provide access for a few homes only, for developments that will provide designated areas for guest parking (either as part of the street design or off-street), or where alternative pedestrian paths are provided.
2.	For collector streets, the minimum right-of-way width needed for a local street plus additional width need for bicycle lanes, planter strips and/or planter median and right/left turn lanes at intersections with other collector streets orwith arterial streets.
•	Responsible Agencies
•	Public Works Department
•	Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agencies
•	Public Works Department
•	Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: April 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars_______________________________________
200/S9.000	$500	$9,500 General Fund
State Grants Volunteer Groups
3.	For arterial streets generally, sufficient right-of-way width to accommodate four lanes of moving traffic, bicycle lanes, sidewalks on each side of the street, planter strips and/ or planter medians, and at least one right and left turn lane at major intersections. The City may approve variations from this general profile of an arterial street or require additional lanes based on the amount of traffic the street is expected to accommodate at build out.
Plans for streets and circulation, including connections with existing streets, will continue to be required for all development applications. Detailed street design plans will continue to be required as part of a final subdivision map or prior to the Issuance of grading permits for street construction.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICY 17.2
22
SUBDIVISION STREET STANDARDS
The City shall continue to enforce engineering standards for the development of new streets and the extension of existing roads. Collector or arterial roads in new developments shall be aligned with existing collector or arterial roads
FOLSOM MUNICIPAL CODE: TITLE 18.
•	Responsible Agency
•	Implementing Agency
•	Community Development Department
•	Public Works Department
22-14
Target Dates: Start: June 1989
Complete: December 1989
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
100/$4,500	-	-	$4,500 General Fund
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Parking requirements will be reviewed in light of actual parking demand for different types of existing or proposed development In Folsom. The City will contact otherjurlsdlctlons to obtain information on actual parking demand developed in a manner compatible with surrounding land uses for different types of developments and survey the parking demands of developments In Folsom. Any changes in parking requirements will be included In the revised Zoning Code.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICIES 17.6: 17.14; 17.15 AND 17.16
FOLSOM MUNICIPAL CODE: TITLE 1
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COST		
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Dollars	Total	Funding
80/$3,600 Included in Zoning Code Revision	$3,600	General Plan
Develop and adopt a transportation systems management ordinance which incorporates the specific policies of the General PlanTransportatlon and Circulation and Air Quality Elements.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICY 17.19 GOAL 31 - POLICIES 31.4 AND 31.5;
GOAL 33 - VQHXX2& 33.1; 33.2 AND 33.3
•	Resource Groups /Agencies/ Organisations
State Air Resources Board Sacramento County Air Pollution Control
District
Sacramento Regional Transit Sacramento Area Council of Governments
•	Responsible Agencies
Public Works Department Community Development Department City Council
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Program Set-Up
Person Hours/Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
120/55,400	$500 $1,350 $7,250 Development
Fees
Genera] Fund
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN GUIDE
The City shall develop a guide for pedestrians and bicyclists showing the location and type of trails, paths, lanes, and routes. The guide will also contain guidelines for pedestrian and bicycle use and safety.
2
22-15
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICIES 17.10; 17.12 AND 17.13
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
Community Service Clubs Bicycling Clubs
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency Community Development Department
• Target Dates: Start: January 1990
Complete: March 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS	
Person Hours/ Printing	Direct Total	Funding
Dollars	
40/$1,800	$500	$2,300 General Fund Proceeds from Sale of Map/Guide
BRIDGE STUDY
The Folsom Area Transportation Study identifies additional crossings needed to accommodate future traffic from new developments. The City will prepare economic and environmental feasibility analysis to determine:
1.	The approximate design and construction costs of each of the bridges.
2.	Possible engineering problems or design problems.
r 3.The- potential environmental effects, including any grading, cutting, or filling that might be necessary: the alteration of views to and from the American River; the pUminattnn nr alteration of important natural habitats or historic sites: and other similar considerations.
I 4.EIR/EIS and Federal Permits if required.
IMPLEMENTS; GOAL 17 - POLICIES 17.4 AND 17.18
•	Responsible Agencies
Public Works Department Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agency Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: On-Going
Complete: June 1989
ESTIMATED COST
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
6,000/$300,000 $5,000	$305,000 General
Fund
Developer Fees County funds CALTRANS
FINANCING AND CONSTRUCTION OF NEEDED ROAD IMPROVEMENTS
The City win prepare, as part of its municipal facilities plan, a five-year, biennially-updated road improvement plan. This plan wfil contain a schedule for road repair, widening, and construction. The plan will also contain a schedule for U.S. Highway 50 interchange improvements and additions. The City will plan jointly with CALTRANS for these improvements. The plan will also identify funding sources. IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICY 17.8
•	Responsible Agencies
Public Works Department Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agency Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: On-Going
2
22-16
ESTIMATED INITIAL COST Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
250/511,250	$250	$11,500 General Fund Developer Fees
FUNDING PLAN AND ANNUAL UPDATE FOR TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS
The City will update Its Transportation Study on at least an annual basis to identify In greater detail the costs required for major road improvements. A funding study will also be prepared to apportion developer fees and/or assessment district charges that would be necessary to help pay for the costs of these major road improvements.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICIES 17.8;
17.9	AND 17.18
• Responsible Agencies
•	Implementing Agency Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: December 1989
ESTIMATED COST
Person Houre/Printing Direct Total	Funding
Dollars____________________________________
500/S22.000 $500	$22,500	General
Fund (For Study) Developer Fees (For Road Improvements) Assessment District Fees (For Road Improvements) CALTRANS (For U.S. Highway 50 Improvements)
Public Works Department Community Development Department
2
22-17
I
Prepared For The City of Folsom Community Development Department
By
Connerly & Associates, Inc.
August 25, 1992
HOUSING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
23.1	INTRODUCTION ............................................................ 23- 5
Consistency With Other General Plan Elements.......................... 23- 5
State Law Requirements................................................ 23- 6
How the Requirements Relate to the City of Folsom .................... 23- 7
Data Sources.......................................................... 23- 7
Regional Nature....................................................... 23- 8
Contents.............................................................. 23- 8
Summary .............................................................. 23- 9
Historical Context .................................................... 23-10
Public Participation .................................................. 23-11
Quantified Objectives.................................................. 23-12
23.2	HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT............................................... 23-14
Population Characteristics............................................. 23-14
Projected Needs........................................................ 23-19
Existing Needs......................................................... 23-23
Median Income..................................................... 23-23
Incidence of Overpayment ......................................... 23-23
Housing Response to Market Demand................................. 23-26
Housing Age and Condition......................................... 23-32
Special Housing Needs ............................................ 23-32
23.3	RESOURCES INVENTORY.................................................... 23-38
Housing Stock Characteristics......................................... 23- 38
Housing Type and Tenure .......................................... 23-38
Vacancy Status.................................................... 23-38
Condition of Housing Stock ............................................ 23-40
Residential Lands Inventory ........................................... 23-40
Land Use Inventory................................................ 23-41
Analysis of Zoning ............................................... 23-44
Analysis , of Public Facilities and Services ..................... 23-46
Additional Uses .................................................. 23-47
23-1
Areas With Residential Potential ...................................   23-47
Potential Loss of Units............................................... 23-47
Assisted (At Risk) Units . . . ................................. 23-47
Demolitions ...................................................  23-50
23.4	HOUSING CONSTRAINTS .................................................. 23-50
Environmental Considerations.......................................... 23-50
Municipal Facilities Constraints...................................... 23-51
Infrastructure........................................................ 23-51
Water/Sewer..................................................... 23-51
Economic Factors...................................................... 23-54
Land Costs ........................................................... 23-54
Building Costs........................................................ 23-54
Financing ............................................................ 23-54
Governmental Constraints.............................................. 23-55
Residential Development Fees ................................... 23-55
Development Standards .......................................... 23-56
Building Codes.................................................. 23-57
Open Space and Park Requirements ............................. 23- 57
The Planning and Permit Process ................................ 23-57
Permit Processing Times ........................................ 23-58
23.5	ENERGY CONSERVATION	23-59
State Regulations....................................................  23-59
Local Guidelines ..................................................... 23-59
Opportunities for Energy Conservation................................. 23-59
23.6	EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY	23- 60
23.7	REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT	23- 61
New Housing Production ............................................... 23-61
Provision of Public Services ....................................... 23- 64
Revise General Plan..................................................  23-65
Housing Rehabilitation ............................................... 23-66
Economic Feasibility of Afford. Housing .............................. 23-67
Preserve Mobilehoihe Parks............................................ 23-68
Mortgage Revenue Bonds................................................ 23-69
Condominium Conversion Ordinance............ . . ................... 23-70
Housing Assistance Program Referrals ................................. 23-70
Fair Housing Program.................................................. 23-70
Urban Development Policies ......................................... 23- 70
Monitor Employment Growth ............................................ 23-70
Annual Review of Housing Element . . ■................................ 23-71
Second Units........................................................   23-71
23-2
Permit Review Process . . ............................................ 23- 71
Locations for Emergency Shelters ..................................... 23-71
23.8	DEFINITIONS............................................................   23-72
23.9	GOALS POLICIES AND PROGRAMS ............................................. 23-73
Goals and Policies ................................................... 23-74
Housing Programs ..................................................... 23-76
Program 1 - Provide Adequate Sites for Housing ............... 23- 76
Program 2 - Site for Multifamily Rental Housing.................. 23-77
Program 4 - Sites for Special Group Housing...................... 23-79
Program 5 - Housing for Older Adults............................. 23-80
Program 6 - Housing for Single Parents with Children ............ 23-80
Program 7 - Density Bonus and Other Incentives ............... 23- 81
Program 8 - Density Bonuses for Moderate-Income Housing....... 23-81
Program 9 - Pursue Funding Under State and Federal Programs .... 23-82
Program 10 - Tax Exempt Bond Financing .......................... 23-83
Program 11 - Community Reinvestment Act.......................... 23-84
Program 12 - Permit and Development Fee Reductions............... 23-85
Program 13 - Second Units in Single Family Neighborhoods...... 23-85
Program 14 - Voter Authorization for Specified Rental Housing .... 23-86
Program 15 - Inspection Program ................................. 23-86
Program 16 - Code Enforcement and Abatement...................... 23-86
Program 17 - Rehabilitation of Substandard Dwelling Units........ 23-87
Program 18 - Relocation Assistance .............................. 23-87
Program 19 - Housing Demolition Mitigation....................... 23-88
Program 20 - Maintenance of Housing Condition Data Base ......... 23-88
Program 21 - Zoning Flexibility for Housing Rehabilitation....... 23-88
Program 22 - Preservation of Subsidized Housing Units ........... 23-88
Program 23 - Manufactured Housing on Single-Family Lots ......... 23-88
Program 24 - Preservation of Mobilehome Parks ................... 23-89
Program 25 - Homeless Services................................... 23-89
Program 26 - Fair Housing Program ............................... 23-90
Program 27 - Implement State Energy Conservation Standards.... 23-90
Program 28 - Site Development Standards.......................... 23-90
Program 29 - Energy Conservation Assistance for Low-Income HH . 23-91
Program 30 - Preservation of Historic Residences................. 23-91
Program 31 - Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Plan................ 23-92
PROGRAM SUMMARY AND PRIORITY LIST......................................... 23-93
APPENDIX ................................................................. 23-94
23-3
LIST OF TABLES
Table 23- 1	POPULATION AND HOUSEHOLD FIGURES	(1990)...... 23-
Table 23- 2	POPULATION GROWTH RATES...................... 23-
Table 23- 3	AGE CHARACTERISTICS.......................... 23-
Table 23-4 SCHOOL ENROLLMENT CHARACTERISTICS .....'....... 23-
Table 23- 5 ETHNICITY.............................. . . .. 23-
Table 23-6 SACOG RHNAP FAIR SHARE ALLOCATIONS ........... 23-
Table 23- 7 BASIC CONSTRUCTION NEED...................... 23-
Table 23 8 BASIC CONSTRUCTION NEED BY INCOME CATEGORY .... 23-Table 23- 9 INCOME LEVELS AND MAXIMUM HOUSING PAYMENTS ... 23-
FOR SACRAMENTO COUNTY AREA
Table 23-10	MONTHLY PAYMENTS - PURCHASE HOUSING ......... 23-
Table 23-11	MAXIMUM HOUSING PAYMENTS FOR AVERAGE HHOLD .. 23-
Table 23-12	MAXIMUM HOME PURCHASE PRICE BY INCOME ....... 23-
Table 23-13	NEW HOME CHARACTERISTICS..................... 23-
Table 23-14	SINGLE FAMILY OWNER-OCCUPIED HOME VALUES .... 23-
Table 23-15	CONTRACT RENTS FOR THE CITY OF FOLSOM.......  23-
Table 23-16	AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS BY INCOME CATEGORY ... 23-
Table 23-17	HOUSING AFFORDABILITY........................ 23-
Table 23-18	GENERAL HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS ........... 23-
Table 23-19	NUMBER OF PERSONS BY TENURE ................. 23-
Table 23-20	NUMBER OF ROOMS BY HOUSING UNITS ............ 23-
Table 23-21	TENURE BY PERSONS PER ROOM................... 23-
Table 23-22	HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS................ 23-
Table 23-23	DENSITIES OF PROJECTS APPROVED .............. 23-
AND UNDER CONSTRUCTION
Table 23-24	RESIDENTIAL LAND INVENTORY................... 23-
Table 23-25	ASSISTED UNITS IN THE FOLSOM AREA............ 23-
Table 23-26	MONTHLY SUBSIDIES REQUIRED TO MAINTAIN ...... 23-
AFFORDABILITY OF AT RISK UNITS
Table 23-27	WATER USAGE DATA............................. 23-
Table 23-28	WATER CONSUMPTION FACTORS ................... 23-
Table 23-29	RESIDENTIAL FEE COMPARISONS ................. 23-
Table 23-30	HOUSING UNITS CONSTRUCTED FROM 1985 TO 1990 ...... 23-
Table 23-31	MULTIFAMILY UNITS BUILT SINCE 1986- ......... 23-
RENTAL RATE SURVEY
14
15
16
17
18
21
22
22
24
25
25
26
27
28
29
31
32
33
34
35
37
39
41
42
48
49
52
53
56
62
63
23-4
HOUSING
23.1	INTRODUCTION
23.1.1	Relation and Consistency with General Plan and other Elements
The Folsom General Plan is the City’s comprehensive statement describing how lands should be developed and serviced, how citizens and workers will be able to travel throughout the City, how open spaces and natural resources will be conserved, how citizens and workers will be protected from excessive noise and natural hazards, and how adequate housing will be provided to meet the City’s current and future needs.
This chapter is the housing portion, or Housing Element, of the Folsom General Plan. The Housing Element is a vital part of the General Plan because it addresses housing as one of the three basic human needs. As such, the City’s Housing Element defines the current and future housing needs of Folsom residents, identifies areas for future housing development, contains policies to preserve the existing housing stock, seeks to ensure that no one is denied access to housing based on arbitrary factors, and contains programs to address the housing needs of Folsom’s very' low-, low-, and moderate-income residents.
For the General Plan to be a workable document, the elements of the plan must be consistent with one another. The internal consistency of the General Plan elements means that policies support and do not contradict one another, that no one element takes precedence over any other element, and that any subsequent amendment to a General Plan element must also be consistent with the other elements.
The City of Folsom has determined that the Housing Element is consistent with the other General Plan elements in the following way:
Land Use Element. The Land Use Element identifies the existing and proposed uses of land for housing, business-, industry, and open space. This includes land used for agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public and private uses of land. The amount of land zoned for residential use, and the densities at which housing can be constructed under the various General Plan categories, should be sufficient to accommodate the range of housing types necessary to meet the City’s regional share of housing need under the housing allocation plan prepared by the Sacramento Area Council of Governments. (See Tables 23-29.)
Circulation. This Element identifies the proposed thoroughfares and the circulation network that wdll be implemented along with uses outlined in the Land Use Element. The City has adopted policies to ensure that adequate circulation can be provided at the densities and land uses proposed in the Land Use Element. The City will also pursue policies to mitigate the financial impact of required transportation improvements on affordable housing developments that contribute to the City’s low- and moderate-income housing supply.
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation Element. This Element contains policies for the preservation of important open spaces, the conservation of environmentally sensitive plants and animals, the conservation of important natural resources, and the designation of present and future park lands, but these policies would not create a barrier to production of housing. In consideration of the amount of land designated for open space, the City has determined that the amount of land and the land use densities allocated to residential use will be sufficient to meet the
23-5
City’s regional housing needs. (See Tables 28 and 29.)
Safety Element. The Safety Element contains policies for the protection of the community from natural and human hazards, including fire, flood, toxic or hazardous materials, earthquake, and landslides. City policy is to direct intense development, particularly residential development, away from those areas with the highest hazards. No natural hazards were identified that would represent barriers to the supply of housing.
Noise Element This Element contains policies to protect noise sensitive land uses, such as residences, from excessive exterior and interior noise. Existing and future noise is and will be primarily from surface traffic. There should be little impact of noise attenuation policies on the City’s ability to accommodate its regional share of housing as the City has few sources of noise that impact residentially-designated areas of the City.
Public Facilities and Services Element. This Element addresses the facilities and services needs of new development The City has prepared community facilities plans and established community facilities districts to finance needed infrastructure and services for new residential development. .Although the financing of required services and facilities will have a substantial overall impact on the cost of housing in Folsom, the City has adopted policies to mitigate the effect of these costs on housing developments for lower-income households.
23.1.2	State Law Requirements
The California Legislature adopted requirements in 1980 for the contents of Housing Elements. Among these legislative requirements is the mandate that:
"The Housing Element shall consist of an identification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives, and scheduled
programs for the preservation, improvement, and development of housing...The Housing Element shall make adequate provision for the existing and projected needs of all economic segments of the community."
This Housing Element serves two main purposes which are based on the legislative requirements mentioned above. First it contains information describing the City’s residents and their homes in sufficient detail to evaluate current and future housing needs. Second, the Element contains recommended policies and programs aimed at meeting the identified housing needs.
Specifically, the element must contain:
(a)	An assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant to the meeting of these needs, including:
1)	Analysis of population and employment trends;
2)	Analysis and documentation of household/housing characteristics;
3)	Inventory of land suitable for residential development;
■ 4) Analysis of potential and actual government constraints;
5)	Analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental constraints;
6)	Analysis of special housing needs
(including HomelessAIneeds);
7)	Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation; and
8)	The preservation or replacement of dwelling units in subsidized housing projects which are affordable to low-income households and which may convert to market-rate rents.
23-6
(b)	A statement of the- community’s goals, quantified objectives, and policies relative to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing. The total housing needs identified in (a) may exceed the available resources and the community’s ability to satisfy those needs.
(c)	A program which sets forth a five-year schedule of actions the local government is undertaking or intends to undertake to implement the policies and achieve the goals and objectives of the housing element, including:
1)	Identification of adequate sites that will be made available;
2)	Assisting in the development of housing affordable to low-income (80% or less of median) and moderate-income (80-120% of median) households;
3)	Addressing, and where possible, removing governmental constraints;
4)	Conservation of and improvement in the condition of existing affordable housing stock; and
5)	Promotion of housing opportunities for all persons (fair housing program).
23.1.3	How the Requirements of State Law Relate to Folsom’s Most Critical Housing Issues
Among the provisions of California Housing Element Law are requirements that:
♦ the City adopt, as a minimum goal, a share of the projected regional growth in low- and moderate-income households as determined by the Council of Governments operating within the region (Sacramento Area Council of Governments [SACOG] for Sacramento County);
♦	financial resources be identified that can make the construction of low- and moderate-income feasible; and
♦	existing housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households be conserved, especially federally or state subsidized housing that may convert to market-rate housing within the timeframe of the housing element
These requirements of state law will likely be the most challenging ones for Folsom to meet. They address the most critical effects of the public actions that the City is pursuing.
To date, Folsom has pursued a market-based strategy to meeting its residents’ housing needs. The City has designated lands for various types of housing at several density levels, including land for multifamily housing which could meet a portion of the low- and moderate-income housing need. The City does not require developers to construct housing at the maximum allowed density, however. Nor does the City dictate whether multifamily-zoned land will used exclusively for housing affordable to low- or moderate-income households or whether single family-zoned land should include affordable housing.
Market decisions made by individual developers determine timing and types of housing constructed. Folsom would cooperate with developers, private and/or non-profit, interested in building affordable housing projects, and help them identify economic incentives and government subsidies which could be used. However, the City does not dictate that any particular development contain specified percentage of low- and moderate-income households.
23.1.4	Regional Nature
The provision of adequate housing is a regional problem, and Folsom cannot implement a housing program without recognizing how land use and transportation decisions made by other
23-7
jurisdictions wilt affect Folsom’s regional share of the area-wide housing needs. Conversely, land use actions taken by the City of Folsom may also have extra-territorial effects which should be recognized. Because of the regional nature of housing needs in the greater Sacramento area, the City’s housing program will require coordination with Sacramento, El Dorado, and Placer counties; with the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency; and with the Sacramento Area Council of Governments.
23.1.5	Data Sources
As required by state law (Government Code Section 65584), the principal source of information used to determine future housing need is the Regional Housing Needs Allocation Plan (RHNAP) adopted by the Sacramento Area -Council of Governments (SACOG). The most recent version of this report was adopted by SACOG in November, 1990.
A majority of the information used in the analysis of Folsom’s population and existing housing stock was taken from Summary Tape File 1 of the 1990 Federal Census, which was released in June, 1991. 1990 Census data on household income had not been released at the time this Housing Element was prepared. The only current available information on income levels in the Folsom area are the California Department of Housing and Community Development estimates of Sacramento County median income levels. These estimates are based on Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development figures.
Additional sources of information include the City of Folsom Building and Community Development Departments, the City of Folsom Housing and Population Capacity Analysis report, the Folsom Chamber of Commerce. Folsom Prison. State Department of Rehabilitation, local special needs sendee agencies, developers, consultants, and property owners. Every attempt was made to collect the most current and accurate information available.
23.1.6	Contents
This Housing Element is divided into the following parts:
I	Introduction.- An introduction into the Housing Element’s relation to the General Plan, state housing- law requirements. General Plan consistency, regional nature of housing, and pertinent data sources used for the report. This section also includes a summary of element, a historical background of the City of Folsom, definitions used throughout the element, and guidelines for public participation in adoption of the element. This section also summarizes the City’s goals, policies, and quantified objectives.
II	Housing Needs Assessment. A detailed discussion of population characteristics, projected future housing needs, and existing housing needs.
III	Resource Inventory. A discussion of existing housing stock characteristics, an analysis of the condition of the housing stock, an inventory of lands suited for residential uses, a description of additional areas with residential potential, and a discussion of the potential loss of residential units.
IV	Housing Constraints. Areas of potential housing constraints include environmental concerns, municipal facilities, governmental constraints, and financial constraints.
V	Conservation. This section analyzes the potential for residential energy and water conservation in the City.
VI	Equal Housing Opportunity. Attempts made by the City to ensure that all
23-8
segments of the population have equal opportunity to find adequate housing.
VII	Review of Previous Housing Element. This section summarizes the programs, policies, and goals established in the previous Element and discusses the extent to which the City was successful in meeting these standards. Reasons for not obtaining goals are discussed as well as ways to ensure that those goals which still apply are obtained over the next five years.
VIII	Definitions. These are words with meanings specific to the Housing Element.
IX	Programs. Programs, policies, and goals for the five year period covered by the Housing Element.
23.1.7	Summary
This section will summarize the major findings of the Housing Element, including the Quantified Objectives.
1.	Folsom has met and exceeded its apportioned regional share of housing for the 1985 to 1990 period. The amount of housing construction during the past several years indicates that there is a strong regional housing demand evident in Folsom distinct from local employment growth.
2.	The number of multifamily dwelling units represents an increasingly smaller percentage of the total housing stock in Folsom. So long as the private market prefers single family over multifamily dwelling units, and proposes lower density developments on lands zoned for multifamily housing, it wall be difficult for the City to maintain an adequate supply of multifamily land. The City recognizes this dilemma and has developed a program to address the problem (see Program 2)."
3.	The total number of needed units affordable to lower- and moderate-income residents have not been constructed due to economic factors beyond Folsom’s control. As a result of this, the current median average home price in the City was reported by the Census Bureau in 1990 as $210,600.'
4.	Substantial employment growth is anticipated from commercial and industrial projects approved during the past five years. The City’s General Plan would allow for a sufficient number of housing units to meet the demand from this employment growth over the next five years, although it is unlikely that enough units can be constructed that are affordable to workers of lower- or moderate-income persons without some form of government subsidy.
5.	Additional employment growth can be expected on commercial and industrial-zoned properties for which development proposals are pending. Depending on the amount and type of development, it is possible that within the next 10 to 15 years there would be insufficient land, at current densities, to provide enough housing units for workers in these projects.
6.	Certain constraints make it infeasible for builders to provide a sufficient number of units affordable to all income levels. These constraints include:
♦	A limit of Folsom’s current water allocation.
♦	Land and development costs. The policies and programs contained in this Housing Element, and the higher residential densities allowed under the 1988 General Plan, address land and development cost factors which have historically increased the difficulty of producing affordable housing in Folsom"
23-9
7.	Folsom can implement certain measures to preserve the existing stock of affordable housing and allow for some new housing affordable to lower- and moderate-income residents. These measures include:
23.1. 8 Historical Context
As late as 1960, Folsom was a small, isolated, semi-rural community, whose character was defined primarily by Folsom Prison, Folsom Dam, and the historic district centered on Sutter Street. At that time, the City was home to just under 4,000 residents. Up until 1960, the City’s population varied between 1,000 and 2,000 permanent residents (excluding Folsom Prison). While the City was constantly growing and changing during this period, the changes were relatively small and incremental, and did not substantially alter the City’s character.
Up until the 1970s, housing costs were relatively low in Folsom, and the majority of the City’s residents earned modest incomes. Most employment was provided by the Prison, local retail and service establishments, and tourist-oriented businesses in the historic business district.
Beginning in the 1970s, the City’s character began to change as growth and development accelerated. Between 1970 and 1980, the City’s population nearly doubled. Most of the housing that was constructed at this time consisted of single family homes of modest cost affordable to first-time homebuyers, duplexes, and rental apartments affordable to low- and moderate-income households. The growth that Folsom experienced at this time was typical of the other communities experiencing the outward expansion of the Sacramento region into the eastern county and southwest Placer County.
During the 1980s, growth in the City accelerated further, more than doubling the City’s population between 1980 and 1990. (Part of the City’s growth was due to the doubling of Folsom Prison’s capacity, but even after subtracting the
prison population from the total population, the City more than doubled in size.) The development that Folsom experienced at this time, however, was significantly different than during the previous decade.
During the 1980s, the City attempted to create a more balanced community in Folsom by attracting more middle- and upper-income residents and commercial development to serve an expanding local and regional population. As a consequence, over 4,300 single family homes were constructed, while just 800 new multifamily housing units were constructed (mostly rental apartments).
During the early part of the decade (1980-84) most of the single family homes constructed were priced for moderate- and middle-income households, particularly first-time home buyers. During the latter part of the 1980s, and to the present time, most of the single family homes were priced for middle- and upper-income households. Typical housing prices ranged from $125,000 to $160,000 between 1985 and 1988. Since 1988, typical housing prices were $150,000 to $250,000, with a substantial number of new homes in the $250,000 and above price range. As the market for homes priced at $200,000 and above weakened beginning in 1990, home builders throughout the Sacramento area sought to alter their plans to construct more homes for first-time homebuyers and middle-income households looking for homes priced in the low- to mid-$100,000 range.
This shift in Folsom’s housing market during the 1980s resulted from a combination of City policies to attract more higher-cost housing to the City and from market forces which responded to the intense demand for such housing in suburban locations. Folsom’s location at the transition between the valley and foothills, its abundant open spaces and interesting natural habitats, its convenient location adjacent to a major freeway, and City policies to facilitate development created
23-10
the favorable condifions necessary to attract such residential development.
Another substantial change during the 1980s was the City’s effort, through redevelopment and other policies, to attract new commercial and industrial growth to Folsom. At the same time that the City experienced tremendous housing growth, Folsom also experienced a substantial increase in employment, primarily in service, retail, medical, and assembly related jobs. Folsom Prison more than doubled its capacity during the 1980s, increasing employment in prison-related positions, as well.
As a result of the City’s growth during the 1980s, land values rose dramatically, and public facilities had to be expanded to accommodate the new growth. These and other factors greatly increased single family lot costs in the City. Because of higher development costs, City policies favoring single family development, and the housing market’s natural propensity in Folsom to concentrate on single family housing, very little housing was constructed that could be afforded by low- and moderate-income households (who represent a substantial percentage of the newly employed workers in the City).
The high rate of growth also caused increasing concerns among the citizenry about the ability of the City to sustain this growth, the quality of development occurring in Folsom, traffic congestion and school overcrowding, and other side-effects that typically accompany rapid expansion. Over the past year, the City has received some reprieve from the rapid pace of development, owing to an economic recession which has substantially decreased building activity. This period has provided the City with an opportunity to ponder its future with respect to the amount and type of development it wishes to
attract, the ultimate character of the City that Folsom residents desire to achieve, and the balance between commercial and residential development.
This Housing Element has been prepared in the context of Folsom’s growth and development over the past decade. The' most important issues that the City will face over the period covered by this Element (1991 to 1996) are:
♦	The ability of the City to sustain a reasonable rate of growth, yet maintain the high level of environmental quality that has attracted so many to the City.
♦	The relative balance between non-residential and residential development. The pace of commercial and industrial development has fallen below City expectations, and some landowners holding commercially-zoned properties have requested City approval for residential development.
♦	The ability of the City to provide for a reasonable share of housing affordable to low-and moderate-income households attracted to the newly created jobs in Folsom.
23.1.9	Public Participation
The public participation program adopted by
City included a Public Workshop on June 3 and 17. 1992. a Planning Commission Hearing on July 22, 1992, and a City Council Hearing on August 25, 1992. The hearings and workshops were advertised through the newspaper, notices posted in public places, and notices mailed to community groups with an interest in the housing element. The notices and advertisements were be intended to encourage public participation and involvement in the adoption process, and specifically attempted reach organizations serving low-income and special housing needs groups.
23-11
SUMMARY OF CITY HOUSING OBJECTIVES
New Construction	SACOG Share 1989 - 1996	Units Produced 1989 - 1991*	Remaining Share 1991 - 1996	Objectives 1991 - 1996	Total Need Met	Percent
Very Low	1.905	0	1.905	265	265	( 14%)
Low	1.257	335	•' 922	840	1.175	( 93%)
Moderate	1.544	409	1.135	1.050	1.459	( 94%)
Above Moderate	2.853	2,143	710	2,517	4.660	(163%)
TOTAL	7,559	2,887	4,672	4,672	7559	
Rehabilitation				
Very Low	N/A	N/A	N/A	35
Low	N/A	N/A	N/A	15
Conservation - At Risk Units
Very Low	N/A	N/A	N/A	110
Conservation -	Mobilehomes			
Very Low	N/A	N/A	N/A	230
Low	N/A	N/A	N/A	285
Moderate/	N/A	N/A	N/A	285
Above Moderate
* Based on the following: 2,143 single family dwelling units produced. 100% affordable to above moderate-income households: 744 multifamily dwelling units produced. 45% affordable to low-income households and 55% to moderate-income households (see page 78 for documentation).
23-12
The City believes that the programs and objectives described in this section represent the maximum effort the City can make to accommodate housing for all income groups. In developing these quantified objectives, the City has considered:
1)	development costs for market-rate housing and how the City can reduce these costs, still provide necessary public services and facilities, and maintain a minimum acceptable standard of development quality,
2)	the zoning densities which are appropriate to accommodate lower-income housing yet which are still sensitive to the City’s environmental character and existing residential neighborhoods;
3)	available local financial and staff resources to implement the City’s housing program (the City does not anticipate having sufficient funding to provide more than one-half staff position to support the City’s housing program);
4)	available state and federal sources of funding for affordable housing developments; and
5)	the ability of the private sector to assist the City in implementing proposed housing programs. Folsom does not anticipate that it will be financially feasible, given the incentives it can provide, to include affordable housing in every housing development. The housing program makes a conservative estimate, therefore, of the number of market rate and government-assisted housing units affordable to very low-, low- and moderate-income households that could be provided from the programs described above.
The quantified objectives shown above assume that the needs of very low-, low-, and many moderate-income households in Folsom can only be met through various types of multifamily housing (rental apartments, condominiums, townhouses, and duplex units). Land, land development, and construction costs documented in this Housing Element have lead the City to conclude that governmental subsidies and
regulatory incentives will be necessary to stimulate the production of housing affordable to very low-income households and most low-income households.
Home builders may be able to produce attached single family dwelling units or detached units on small lots that are affordable to some moderate-income households, if such units are priced at less than $150,000. There are several types of regulatory and financial incentives, discussed in this document, the City could use to allow home builders to provide single family housing within this price range. All multifamily rental housing produced in Folsom, to-date, has been affordable to moderate-income households and is assumed to remain so in the future.
Folsom does not anticipate that home builders will be able to provide very low-income housing without deep public subsidies and/or the participation of a non-profit housing corporation. The new construction objectives established for very low-, low-, and moderate-income housing represent the maximum number of dwelling units the City believes could be produced under programs 7 and 8 (density bonuses), 9 (use of state and federal subsidies), 10 (mortgage bonds), and 13 (second units). Specific numerical objectives have been assigned to each of these programs, as explained in the "Expected Results" section for each program.
In addition to the low- and moderate-income new construction objectives shown in these programs, the City estimates that 150 market-rate (unsubsidized) rental units can be produced by the private sector which are affordable to low-income households, and 400 market-rate rental and/or ownership units can be produced that are affordable to moderate-income households. It is possible that 100% of the remaining low- and moderate-income need could be met if the programs proposed in this Element are successful in stimulating homebuilders to produce more multifamily housing.
23-13
23.2	. HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
23.2.1 Population Characteristics
The City of Folsom presents an appealing residential environment, due, in part, to its historic background, location on the American River, varied topography, semirural characteristics, and sense of community. The high level of growth experienced in the City since 1980 has caused substantial changes in the characteristic makeup of the population. This section of the Housing Element identifies some of the demographic
changes which have taken place in Folsom over the past ten years.
In 1990, the total population in the City of Folsom was 29,802 persons. Of this total, 23,082 persons, or 77.45% of the population, were members of households. In the County, the percent of population that are also members of households was 97.87%, or 1,019,079 persons. The table below shows population and household statistics for the City of Folsom.
Table 23-1
POPULATION AND HOUSEHOLD FIGURES (1990)
Folsom	Sacramento County
	1990	1992	1990	1992
Population	29,802	36,507	1,041,219	1,099,058
Households	8,757	10,731	394,530	411.848
Household Population	23,082	28,990	1,019,079	1,075,904
Persons per HH	2.64	2.70	2.58	2.61
Persons in Group Quarters*				
Folsom Prison	6,609	6.619		
Nursing Homes	105	*****		
Other	6	*****		
Total	6,720	7.517		
* These figures are included in the Total Population figure.
Sources: U.S. Census, 1990; Cal. Dept. of Finance. 1992; Folsom Prison.
23-14
As the table shows, a small percentage of the population within the City is due to the prison inmates at the City of Folsom State Prison facility. The. prison was recently expanded (1986), increasing the maximum number of inmates from approximately 3,000 to well over 6,000 persons. In 1985, the total persons in the prison (including both inmates and prison personnel) exceeded 3,800 persons; by June of 1991 the total persons in the prison had increased to 7,131, and then declined to 6,619 by May 1992.
The prison does not expect an increase in prison capacity in the near future and the current facility is presently filled to maximum capacity. The percent of the population therefore represented by the prison will become increasingly smaller over the next five years as the City continues to grow.
Because the majority of prison inmates are males between the age of 18 and 35. the total number of inmates could potentially represent a large share of the City population between the ages of 21 and 35 which has increased dramatically since 1980. The statewide average of prison inmates is 29, and officials at the Folsom State Prison feel that this age is very representative of the average Folsom inmate.
The annual average growth rate in the City of Folsom has increased significantly in the 30-year time period since 1960. In 1970, the total population of the City increased by 48.02% since 1960 with an average annual growth rate of 4.00%.
Table 23-2
POPULATION GROWTH RATES
Year	Ave Annual Population	Ave Annual Increase	Growth Rate	Time Period
1960	3,925			
1970	5.810	189	4.00%	1960-1970
1980	11.003	519	6.59%	1970-1980
1990	29.802	1.879	10.48%	1980-1990
1992	36.507	3.352	22.49%	1900-1992
Sources:	U.S. Census Bureau 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990;
California Department of Finance. 1992.
23-15
In the ten year period 1970-1980.the total population increased by 89.38% with an average annual growth.rate of 6.59%. The greatest total and annual change, however, occurred during the ten year period 1980-1990, with a total population increase of 170.85% and average annual growth rate of 10.48%. During this last decade the population in the City more than doubled for the first time in the City’s history. These statistics are shown in the table above.
The California Department of Finance reported 36,507 persons in the City of Folsom in 1992 (January 1). This is an increase of 6,705 persons from the 1990 Census and represents a population percentage increase of 22.5%. The large increase in population reported by DOF is based in its assumption regarding the occupancy of dwelling units completed during 1990. With the substantial reduction in construction during 1991, the Department’s 1992 population will likely show a much smaller increase.
DOF also reported a total of 1.099.058 persons in Sacramento County in 1992. DOF reported a City-wide vacancy rate of 4.59% and 2.70 persons per household. The DOF reported a vacancy rate of 5.30% and 2.61 persons per household in Sacramento County.
The following table indicates an almost across the board increase in the percentage of persons younger than forty-four years of age and a decrease in the percentage of persons above the age of forty-five. The only exception is a decrease in the percentage of persons in the fifteen to nineteen year age group. The greatest change was in the persons in the 25-34 age group (7.79% increase since 1980) and the 35-44 age group (6.32% increase since 1980). These two age groups together combined for almost half of the population (46.23) in 1990, a significant increase from 1980 when these two groups combined for approximately only one third (32.11%) of the population.
Table 23-3
AGE CHARACTERISTICS
Age	1980 Number	Percent	1990 Number	Percent	Percent Change
0 to 4	610	5.54	1.961	6.58	+ 1.04
5 to 14	1,195	10.86	3,527	11.83	+ 0.97
15 to 19	740	6.73	1,346	4.52	- 2.21
20 to 24	707	6.43	2,079	6.98	+ 0.55
25 to 34	2,018	18.34	7,787	26.13	+ 7.79
35 to 44	1.515	13.77	5,991	20.10	+ 6.32
45 to 54	1,247	11.33	2,779	9.32	- 2.01
55 to 64	1,305	11.86	1,742	5.85	- 6.01
65 to 74	1.078	9.79	1.555	5.22	- 4.57
75 + Total	588 11,003	5.34 100.00	1,035 29,802	3.47 100.00	- 1.87
* These figures include Folsom Prison population figures. Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 1980, 1990.
23-16
This statistic, combined with the dramatic increase in total persons in the City and the decreasing older persons in the City could signify a substantial increase in working age adults, with and without families. However, as mentioned above, this change could also represent an increase in the number of inmates at Folsom prison during that same period in the 25-34 age group. The table above shows age characteristics in the City during the last ten years.
An increase in working families would also be reflected in a changing City school enrollment profile. In the 1991-92 school year, the Folsom-Cordova Unified School District reported a total of 4,584 students enrolled in the City of Folsom.
This number is more than twice as many children as enrolled in the 1985-86 school year, when there were 2,180 students. A certain percentage of this increase in the first six grades is due in part to the addition of three elementary schools in the City after the 1985-86 school year. The number of students in each grade are shown in the table below.
Table 23-4
SCHOOL DISTRICT ENROLLMENT CHARACTERISTICS
1985-86	1991-92
Kindergarten	158	7.3%	358	7.8%
First Grade	174	8.0%	418	9.1%
Second Grade	171	7.8%	375	8.2%
Third Grade	188	8.6%	399	8.8%
Fourth Grade	141	6.5%	352	7.7%
Fifth Grade	135	6.3%	384	8.4%
Sixth Grade	141	6.6%	392	8.5%
Seventh Grade	131	6.0%	356	7.7%
Eighth Grade	145	6.6%	368	8.0%
Ninth Grade	181	8.3%	342	7.5%
Tenth Grade	225	10.3%	303	6.6%
Eleventh Grade	192	8.8%	298	6.5%
Twelfth Grade	195	8.9%	239	5.2%
TOTAL	2,180	100.0%	4,584	100.0%
Source:	Folsom-Cordova Unified School District, 1991; enrollment characteristics based on
October 9 of the 1985-86 and 1991-92 school years.
Ethnic Characteristics
In 1980 persons of white ethnic background represented almost 96% of the population (95.9%). In 1990 this number had decreased to 84.0%,
indicating a slight diversification of persons within the city. Significant changes also occurred among the percentage of hispanic and Black persons. The table below shows the ethnicity statistics for the City in both 1980 and 1990.
23-17
Table 23-5 ETHNICITY						
			R	A C E (%)		
Year	White	Black	Am.Ind.	'Asian	JOther	Hispanic3
1980	95.9	0.2	1.2	1.1	1.6	5.9
1990	84.0	9.9	0.7	3.4	2.0	10.9
	(89.4)	0.6)	—	—(6.2)4			(4.0)
% Change	-11.9	+9.7	-0.5	+2.3	+0.4	+5.0
1	Includes American Indian, Eskimo, and Aleut
2	Includes Japanese, Chinese, Filipino, Korean. Asian-Indian. Vietnamese, Hawaiian, Guamanian, Cambodian. Hmong, Laotian, Thai, and Samoan
3	These figures also included in racial categories.
4	Includes American Indian, Asian, and Other categories.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 1980, 1990.
It should be noted that the age and ethnic characteristics of the Folsom Prison population skews the Census Bureau report on the City as a whole. The numbers in parentheses in Table 5 represent the percent of the City’s population in each ethnic category after subtracting the Folsom Prison population. The adjusted figures in parentheses more accurately reflect the composition of the City’s year-round household population.
Employment Characteristics
The City of Folsom has traditionally been a net exporter of workers to other parts of Sacramento County and the region. The City has served as a residential suburb and historic commercial center. The chief "industry" in Folsom for many years was the state prison.
As late as 1980. only one of every four Folsom residents worked within the City limits, of a total labor force of 3.662 workers. Another 41X1-600
workers had jobs in the surrounding communities, based on their reported travel time. Most workers commuted to Sacramento or other distant locations to work, however. Fifty-eight per cent of those workers reported a 20-minute or longer commute time.
As Folsom has developed new commercial and industrial land uses, the ratio of jobs to housing has increased, although population growth has still far outpaced employment growth in the City.
' Employment in 1980. The employment distribution in Folsom has been integrally linked to regional trends. In 1980, 27% of City was employed in the government and education sector. 23% were employed in the services/finance sector, and approximately 22% were employed in the wholesale/retail sector. Overall, wholesale and retail trade, services and finance, and government/education accounted for about 3/4 of the Folsom work force in 1980. about the same
23-18
county-wide. Only 9% of the workforce was involved in manufacturing industries.
Employment Trends 1980-1985. The California Employment Development Department (EDD), in its 1986 Annual Planning Information report, estimated Sacramento County’s total employment in 1985 at 378,600, an increase of 12% since 1980. According to EDD, employment growth since 1980 has occurred primarily in government, private services, and wholesale and retail trade. These employment sectors accounted for 83% of Sacramento area jobs in 1985. Manufacturing jobs actually declined by about 1,000, while construction employment declined by about 1,500 jobs. The county-wide trend, then, is for office and service sector employment to continue to expand.
The employment trends in Folsom, however, will be somewhat different. In the early 1980s, Folsom began an effort to plan for services and municipal facilities for large commercial and industrial parks that were anticipated to develop in Folsom. A number of Bay Area firms and other large, national corporations, especially those involved in the research, development, and manufacturing of electronics components, expressed an interest in locating regional offices and manufacturing facilities in Folsom.
23.2.2	Projected Needs
Economic Development and Employment Characteristics
The commercial and industrial development expected to occur in the Folsom area over the next five years will have a significant impact on the extent to which people working in Folsom are able to find affordable housing in Folsom. If future jobs in the Folsom area are relatively low-paying positions, an increasing number of workers will be forced to commute to their jobs from surrounding communities. Possible results include higher traffic and commuting levels, increased pollution, and a diminished overall quality of life.
It appears that the majority of jobs to be created by the commercial and industrial development proposed for Folsom will be retail and assembly-type positions. Preparation for the development of a regional mall, for example, is in progress. If this project is completed, a substantial number of low- and moderate-paying retail jobs will be created. In addition, several new retail/commercial centers have been completed or are under construction since 1986.
The Intel Corporation, which employs 2,500 persons, plans to expand to 10,000 employees by the year 2010. If this expansion takes place linearly over the next twenty years, an estimated 1,975 jobs will be created over the life of the Housing Element. Although it is likely that these new employees will have a wide range of salary levels, many of them will be assembly-type workers in relatively low-paying positions.
One of the unknowns, since only part of the 1990 Census results has been released, is the proportion of households with two workers or more. This information is important in evaluating the balance of jobs to housing for two reasons:
1)	To the extent that a higher percentage of households have two or more workers, the number of dwelling units needed to meet the housing demand from new workers would be lower; and
2)	The higher the percentage of two-income households, the greater the number of households that can afford housing in Folsom, even among lower-paid employees. Low-paying jobs do not necessarily translate, one-for-one, into low-income households if a substantial number of households have two or more workers.
Because the general trend over the past twenty years has been for an increasing number of households to have two workers, it would be a gross miscalculation to assume that each new job created causes a demand for a new dwelling unit, and that each new low- and moderate-income job created will automatically create a demand for a
23-19
dwelling unit affordable to a low- or moderate-income household.
In addition, there is a substantial capacity for the existing population within Folsom and in the nearby unincorporated area to fill new job positions. There will always be a substantial percentage of the existing population that is unemployed and looking for work or that would fill new job positions if they became available. Taking into account these factors, the number of dwelling units needed to accommodate job growth will be substantially less than the number of jobs created.
Jobs/Housing. Information regarding the jobs/housing balance in the City is not available. However, if the 6,073 housing units which are currently under construction or approved for construction are completed over the next five years, it is unlikely that there will be an imbalance of housing in relation to employment growth. The major shortcoming of the jobs/housing analysis is that it does not take into account housing affordability. As stated in the previous section, until more of the 1990 Census results are available, it will not be possible to analyze the relationship between housing cost, housing availability, job creation, and income from new jobs.
Of the units currently under construction, ready to begin construction in 1992, or planned for construction between 1991 and 1996, it is unlikely that more than a small percentage of these units (probably less than 10%) would be affordable to low-income households. About 15% to 20% of these units would be rental apartments, and less than half of these units are projected to be affordable, at market rates, to low-income households.
A model which measures commute distances, such as the Commute Shed Model established by Sacramento County, could supplement the 1990 Census in providing information on commuting patterns of Folsom residents.
Folsom’s Housing Needs Allocations. The following tables were adopted by the Sacramento Area Council Of Governments (SACOG) in 1990 as part of its Regional Housing Needs Allocation Plan (RHNAP). Table 6 provides estimates of existing and projected households by income group. Each jurisdiction is required by state law (Government Code Section 65584) to use the Regional Housing Needs Allocations as a basis for determining future housing need. The following steps were taken to determine the number of units which need to be constructed for each income group between 1991 and 1996.
1)	The SACOG RHNAP identifies the increase in households by income category in Folsom between 1989 and 1996 and the corresponding percentage of increase in households for each income category (see Table 5).
2)	The Basic Construction Need is calculated using the methodology provided by SACOG and 1990 Census data figures for total housing units (Table 6).
3)	Total Basic Construction Need by Income Group is calculated by applying the percentage of increase in households by income category (Table 5) to the basic construction need figure calculated in Table 6.
The amount of housing which must be constructed over the period covered by the Housing Element in order to provide for household growth, required vacancy rates, and expected housing unit removals is defined by the Total Basic Construction Need, a figure which is provided in SACOG’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation Plan.
Table 8 summarizes the remaining housing need for each income group for the period 1991 to 1996. The remaining need was calculated by subtracting from the total need for the 1989-1996 period the number of dwelling units constructed or approved for construction between 1989 and 1991.
23-20
In distributing these dwelling units by income groups, the City has determined that approximately 50 percent of rental apartments constructed during this period are affordable to low-income households, and approximately 50 percent are affordable to moderate-income households. In
addition, it is assumed that approximately 25 percent of dwelling units constructed in medium-density multifamily zones during this period are affordable to moderate-income households (based on cost information collected for these units).
Table 23-6
SACOG RHNAP FAIR SHARE ALLOCATIONS
Income Categories	Est. 1989 % of Households Total	Proj. 1996 % of Households Total	Increase 1989-1996	Basic New Constr Need
Very Low	1,985	26.7	3,735	26.0	1.905	1.905
Low	1,189	16.0	2.344	16.3	1,155	1,257
Moderate	1,420	19.1	2,838	19.7	1,418	1,544
Above Mod.	2,854	38.3	5,475	38.0	2,621	2,853
Total	7,448 100.0	14,392 100.0	6,944	7,559
Source: SACOG Regional Housing Needs Allocation Plan.
23-21
Table 23-7
BASIC CONSTRUCTION NEED
Projected Households - 1991	14,392
Vacant for Sale - 1996	199
Vacant for Rent - 1996	+294
Subtotal	14,885
Vacant Not for Sale or Rent (1.8%)	+266
Total Units Needed - 1996	15,151
Plus replacement units needed	172
Less total 1989 Housing Units	-7.764
Total Basic Construction Need (1989-1996)	7,559
Housing unit count--1991	10.236
Less 1989 housing unit count	-7.764
Equals housing units added 1989-1991	2,472
1989-1996 Basic Construction Need	7,559
Less housing units added 1989-1991	-2,887
Equals remaining need-1991-1996	4,672
Sources: SACOG RHNAP, 1990, Department of Finance, 1991.
Table 23-8
BASIC CONSTRUCTION NEED BY INCOME CATEGORY (1991 - 1996)
Income	1989-1996	Est Units	Remaining	
Category	Constr Need	Built (89-91)	Need (91-96)	
Very Low	1,905	0	1,905	
Low	1,257	335	922	
Moderate	1,544	409	1,135	
Above Moderate	2.853	2.143	710	
TOTAL	7,559	2,887	4,672	
23-22
23.2.3 Existing Needs
Median Income. Household income levels are generally expressed in terms of percentage of median income for the County in which a		
community is located. The definitions used by HCD are as follows:		-
	Income Catesorv	Definition
	Very Low-Income Low-Income Moderate-Income Above Moderate-Income	Less than 50% of median area income 50% to 80% of median area income 80% to 120% of median area income over 120% of median area income
The most current income information available for Folsom is the 1991 HCD median income figures for the Sacramento County area. It is unlikely that these figures are as accurate as 1990 Census data, but since the Census Bureau is not expected to release income data until late 1992, the HCD figures will be used to calculate maximum housing payment affordability levels.
Incidence of Overpayment. The California State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) has determined that, in general, housing costs in excess of 30 percent of household income cause an undue financial burden on a household. Households spending in excess of 30 percent of the household income are considered to be overpaying.
Since it is impossible to determine who is living in which housing unit, the extent of overpayment cannot be determined. However, the results of this comparison provide an idea of the parity between housing costs and ability to pay. The following methodology provides a comparison between housing costs and income levels.
1) Maximum affordable housing payments are calculated by multiplying the income level for each household size and income group by 30 percent.
2)	Maximum housing payments for the average size household at each income level are calculated at 30% of income.
3)	Maximum housing payments are compared with 1990 Census data on housing costs to determine the percentage of the City’s housing units which are affordable to each income category.
4)	The percentage of units affordable to each income category is multiplied by the 1990 Census estimate of the total number of housing units to determine the number of units affordable to each income group.
5)	The number of households in each income group is calculated by multiplying the 1989 SACOG estimates of percentage of households at each income level by 1990 Census household count.
6)	The number of affordable units in each income group is compared to the number of households in each income group.
Using 1990 Census data and 1990 SACOG information in the manner prescribed above, it can be calculated that 2.564 households in Folsom spend more than 30 percent of their incomes on
23-23
housing costs. This represents 29.2 percent of Folsom’s households. The following tables contain the information used to make these calculations.
Table 9 provides income levels and maximum housing payments for households of different sizes based on the above definitions and median income figures provided by HCD for the Sacramento County area. Table 10 identifies the payments required for loans of varying amounts at varying interest rates.
Because the Census information is not yet available on housing price by size of the house, and the housing payment affordability levels in Table 10 are based on the size of the household, the average size household and its maximum affordable rent must be compared to housing costs. Table 11 provides the maximum housing payments for the average size household (2.64 persons per household, as determined by the 1990 Census).
Table 23-9
INCOME LEVELS AND MAXIMUM HOUSING PAYMENTS FOR SACRAMENTO COUNTY AREA
HH Size	VERY LOW		LOW		MEDIAN		MODERATE Income Payment	
	Income	Payment	Income	Payment	Income	Payment		
One	$13,900	$350	$22,250	$555	$27,800	$695	$33,350	$835
Two	15.900	400	25,400	635	31,750	795	38,100	950
Three	17,850	445	28,600	715	35,750	895	42,900	1,070
Four	19,850	495	31,750	795	39,700	990	47,650	1,190
Five	21,450	535	34,300	855	42,850	1,070	51,400	1,285
Six	23,050	575	36,850	920	46,100	1,150	55,300	1,380
Seven	24,600	615	39,400	985	49,250	1.230	59,100	1,480
Eight	26,200	655	41.900	1,045	52,400	1.310	62.850	1,570
Source:	Median income figures provided by the California State Department of Finance (1991).
Maximum affordable housing payments calculated as 30% of monthly household income, rounded to the nearest $10.
23-24
Table 23-10
MONTHLY PAYMENTS - PURCHASE HOUSING
Loan Amount	8%	9%	10%	11%	12%
$20,000	$148	$162	$177	$192	'	$207
40,000	296	324	354	383	414
60,000	440	483	527	571	617
80,000	587	644	702	762	803
100.000	734	804	878	952	1,028
120.000	880	961	1,053	1,143	1,234
150,000	1,100	1,207	1,316	1,428	1,543
200,000	1,467	1,609	1,755	1,905	2,057
Source: Connerly & Associates, Inc., 1991.
Table 23-11 MAXIMUM HOUSING PAYMENTS FOR THE AVERAGE SIZE HOUSEHOLD				
HH Size	VERY LOW Income Payment	LOW Income Payment	MEDIAN Income Payment	MODERATE Income Payment
2.64*	$16,184 $404	$25,920 $ 648	$32,400$ 811	$38,880 $ 972
* 1990 Census determined that the average household size in Folsom is 2.64.
Based on the maximum average housing payments for the average size household and certain assumptions (10% down, 9% APR), a very low-income household can only afford a housing unit with a value $55,625. Under these same guidelines, a low-income household can afford a maximum value of $88,889,and a moderate-income household can afford a maximum value of $121,341.
These estimates indicate that many of the housing units in the City are not affordable to certain income groups. The table below shows the maximum purchase price for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
23-25
Table 23-12 MAXIMUM HOME PURCHASE PRICE BY INCOME CATEGORY	
VERY LOW	LOW	MODERATE
$55,625	$88,889	$121,341
Assumptions: 10 percent down payment. 9.0 percent a.p.r. financing. 2.64 persons per household.	
Market Response to Housing Demand. There are currently many new homes being completed and under construction in the City of Folsom. Much of this new construction is in the area of Folsom referred to as Natoma Station. Although the size of the subdivisions vary, most range between 80 to 100 lots with most home prices well into the $200,000 range. A number of the new subdivisions are also located in the Lexington Hills area, south of Folsom Lake in the City.
The average home size in these new subdivisions has a minimum of four bedrooms and many times the homes have as many as five bedrooms. Of the listed home sellers below, none offer a three bedroom unit and very few have any models that are available under $200,000. This average price creates affordability constraints on the homebuyer. The table below shows some of the new developments in the City and the range of prices and home sizes each project offers.
X
23-26
Table 23-13
NEW HOME CHARACTERISTICS
PROJECT NAME	SIZE	PRICE	DESCRIPTION
Ashby Parke				$257,000-	3 bdrm/2 bath
[Citation Homes]	2,812-	$283,000	5 bdrm/3 bath
	3,000	$307,000	5 bdrm/4 bath
Briggs Ranch	1,733-	$206,900-	3 bdrm/2 bath
[Winncrest Homes]	2,278	$248,900	4 bdrm/3 bath
Bryncliff		$225,200	
[Morrison Homes]		$297,709	
Carson Hill	1.667-	$185,450-	3 bdrm/2 bath
[Carson Homes]	2,729	$285,950	5 bdrm/3 bath
California Hills	2,260-	$241,950	3 bdrm/2 bath
	2,680 •	$286,950	5 bdrm/3 bath
Cascades	1.910-	$214,400-	3 bdrm/3 bath
[Elliot Homes]	2,435	$252,950	4 bdrm/3 bath
Goldridge	1,845-	$209,950-	4 bdrm/2 bath
[Lexington Homes]	2,690	$264,950	5 bdrm/3 bath
Lakeridge	1,675-	$169,950-	3 bdrm/2 bath
[Lexington Homes]	2,690	$255,950	5 bdrm/3 bath
Orofino	1.987-	$234,950-	4 bdrm/2 bath
[Patrick Developt.]	2,952	$297,950	5 bdrm/2 bath
Prospect Pointe	1,675-	$182,950-	3 bdrm/2 bath
[Lexington Homes]	2.561	$239,950	5 bdrm/3 bath
Silvertrace	2,008-	$206,490-	4 bdrm/2 bath
[Richmond American]	3.268	$271,990	5 bdrm/4 bath
Twin Rocks		$174,950- $209-950	
Source: Marketing brochures from Folsom area developments. 1991, 1992.			
			
23-27
The information presented in Table 13 includes only those prices for homes actually available for sale at the time of the survey and is not, therefore, a complete listing of homes sold in Folsom during 1991 and 1992. Many of the home builders listed in Table 13 have produced smaller single family homes selling between $130,000 and $160,000. These homes tend to be sold very quickly, however, and none were available for sale at the time of the 1991 or 1992 surveys. As a consequence, the information shown in Table 13 tends to overstate the average selling prices of new single family homes for sale in Folsom.
The Census reported a median home value of $210,600 in the City of Folsom in 1990. The
Census report, which categorizes single family owner-occupied homes, indicates that over half of the homes surveyed are valued at more than $200,000 (55.4%). Only 6.2% of the homes are valued at less than $100,000. and the remaining housing units are valued between $100,000 and $200,000. The Census figures are consistent with the asking home prices in new subdivisions in both Natoma Station and Lexington Hills, which both offer homes well into the $200,000 range. The table below shows the distribution of owner-occupied homes in the City by home value.
The Census reported a median contract rent of $555 in the City in 1990. Table 15 shows the rents received by rental bracket group.
Table 23-14
SINGLE FAMILY OWNER-OCCUPIED HOME VALUES
Value	# of Homes	Percent
Less than $15,000	1	__
$15,000 to $19,999	3	—
$20,000 to $29,999	6	0.1%
$30,000 to $39,999	5	0.1%
$40,000 to $49,999	9	0.2%
$50,000 to $59,999	12	0.3%
$60,000 to $74,999	68	1.2%
$75,000 to $99,999	234	4.3%
$100,000 to $124,999	401	7.4%
$125,000 to $149,999	385	7.1%
$150,000 to $174,999	584	10.8%
$175,000 to $199,999	705	13.1%
$200,000 to $249,999	1,361	25.2%
$250,000 to $299,999	855	15.8%
$300,000 to $399,999	514	9.6%
$400,000 to $499,999	157	2.9%
$500,000 or more	104	1.9%
Total	5,404	100.0%
Median Home Value:	$210,600	
NOTE: Excludes condominiums	Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990.		
23-28
Table 23-15
CONTRACT RENTS FOR THE CITY OF FOLSOM
Rents	# of Units	% of Units
Less than $100	8	0.4%
$100 to $149	12	0.5%
$150 to $199	75	3.3%
$200 to $249	64	2.9%
$250 to $299	63	2.8%
$300 to $349	126	5.6%
$350 to $399	214	9.5%
$400 to $449	191	8.5%
$450 to $499	144	6.4%
$500 to $549	173	7.7%
$550 to $599	289	12.9%
$600 to $649	218	9.7%
$650 to $699	131	5.8%
$700 to $749	113	5.0%
$750 to $999	269	12.0%
$1,000 or more	111	4.9%
No cash rent	42	1.9%
TOTAL	2,243	
Median rent:	$ 555	
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990.
An important consideration in analyzing housing prices and rental payments is to determine the degree of overpayment by low- and very low-income households. Unfortunately this information will not be available from the 1990 Census until after the adoption of this element. Therefore, the only accurate analysis of household overpayment in the City is from the 1980 Census report.
At the time of the 1980 Census, there were about 400 rental units available at $170 or less, equal to 25% of a very low-income household’s monthly earnings. In 1980, there were 638 very low-income households in the City of Folsom.
Many of these households, approximately 200. were homeowners. There were about 450 owners whose monthly housing expenses (excluding utilities) were $170 per month or less.
There were approximately 530 rental units affordable to lower-income Folsom residents, units renting for between $170-$274. There were 300 homeowners who paid $170-$274 in housing expenses (excluding utilities) in 1980. In 1980, there were 518 lower-income households and 160 of these were owner-occupants.
It appears that Folsom’s housing market, then, was roughly in balance in 1980. with sufficient rental or ownership units at housing costs affordable to very low- and lower-income
23-29
households. It is obvious, though, from the Census data on housing costs as a percentage of income that most very low- and lower-income households did not actually reside in these lower-cost units. Two reasons are likely:
1)	Very low- and lower-income households often compete for the same lower-cost units as moderate- and some above-moderate households.
2)	Lower-cost housing units are most likely to be studio, one- or two- bedroom homes, which may not be suitable to lower-income families, especially large families.
Since 1980, Folsom has evolved into a "dual" housing market, with a sizeable stock of older, lower-cost housing and newer units affordable mainly to moderate- and above moderate-income residents. Some evidence of this duality existed in 1980. The Census showed the median cost of housing varied significantly with the age of a home.
Homes constructed the year prior to the Census had a median price of $130,000, whereas homes constructed prior to 1960 had estimated median values of $50,000 to $60,000. In between were homes constructed during 1970-1978. These homes had estimated median values of $80,000-$100,000 in 1980.
Changes in housing costs in Folsom since 1980 reflect four underlying factors:
3)	Regional housing demand pressures which have caused property values and rents to rise,
4)	The price mix of new housing units built,
5)	The growing desirability of Folsom as a residential environment, and
6)	Increased costs of construction, including land prices and development costs, and facilities that serve new residences.
The following table uses information on the maximum housing payments for the average size household and the housing cost information presented in the above tables to estimate the number of housing units affordable to each income group.
Table 17 shows SACOG’s estimate of housing affordability by household income level throughout the City in 1990. Based on these estimates, only 34.3% of the units are affordable to very low-income households. Each of the remaining income levels have a higher percentage of affordability with moderate-income households being the next most in demand of affordable housing at 60.3%.
23-30
Table 23-16					
	AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS BY INCOME CATEGORY*				
Type	Very Low	Low	Moderate	Abv. Mod.	Total
Rental	619	991	371	262	2.243
Owner-Occupied	31	73	446	4,854	5,404
Totals	650	1,064	817	5,116	7,647
Percentage By Category	8.5%	13.9%	10.7%	66.9%	100%
Cumulative	8.5%	22.4%	33.1%	100.0%	
* Based on 2.64 persons per household, does not include 100% of the City’s housing stock. Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990.
Table 23-17
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
Income Group	1989 SACOG Projection	1990* HHEst	% of Units Affordable***	Total Units 1990*	Aff Units Total HHs***
Very Low	26.7%	2,338	8.5%	801	34.3 %
Low	16.0	1,401	13.9	1,309	93.4
Moderate	19.0	1,671	10.7	1,008	60.3
Above Mod.	38.3	3,354	66.9	6,301	188.0
Total	100.0%	8,754	100.0%	9,418	
* U.S. Census Bureau.
** From Table 14.
*** Ratio of affordable units to households for each income level.
23-31
Housing Age and Condition. In 1987, over half (58%) of Folsom’s housing was constructed since 1975 and over 80% since 1960. Less than 6% of the City’s housing predates 1940, and these numbers have only become greater in the five years since.
Given the relative newness of Folsom’s housing, one should not expect to find a significant problem of substandard housing. In fact, an exterior housing conditions survey conducted in 1991 identified only 88 housing units in need of rehabilitation.
The exterior conditions survey did not include several homes which were in the process of being repaired by their owners.
It should be noted that the survey was not an extensive "walk through" inspection of each unit; therefore, it is possible that many of these units may be in need of internal repairs.
Also, it is highly likely that other homes are substandard internally, although the outward appearance might not show a need for substantial home repairs. Details of the housing conditions survey are discussed later in this document
Special Housing Needs. This section will identify the housing needs of special population groups such as the elderly and mobility impaired. The table below summarizes 1990 Census data for householders over the age of 65, female householders, large families, and overcrowded households.
23-32
Table 23-18		
GENERAL HOUSEHOL	D CHARACTERISTICS	
# of Households		% of Total
Householders 65+ yrs.	1.619	-
Renters	334	20.6%
Owners	1.285	79.4%
Female Householders	1,8542	1.2%
single, no children	1,0611	2.1%
single, with children	429	5.0%
non-single, no children	227	3.0%
non-family	137	1.6%
Household size		
1 person	1.740	19.9%
2 persons	3.0843	5.2%
3 persons	1,617	18.5%
4 persons	1.5611	7.8%
5 persons	551	6.3%
6 persons	143	1.6%
7 or more persons	61	0.7%
Large Families ( 5 or more in HH)	755	8.6%
Overcrowded Households (more than one person/room)		
Owner Occupied	84	1.0%
Renter Occupied	124	1.4%
Total	208	2.4%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990.		
Residents 65 Years of Age or Older. The	Nearly four in five (79.4%) of Folsom’s older	
1990 Census determined that there were 2.590	households	own their homes. Most of these
persons over the age of 65, and 1,619 households	households do not have trouble meeting their basic	
with a head of household 65 or older, in the City	housing costs because the mortgage has been paid	
of Folsom. Although the actual number of	in full. However, other housing costs, particularly	
persons within this age group has increased, the	utilities and	maintenance, continue to increase.
proportion of the total population 65 years and	making it	increasingly difficult for those
older has decreased by more than six percentage	households	who depend primarily on Social
points.	Security and income from pensions to meet these	
23-33
costs. As these older homeowners find they do not have the necessary funds to maintain their homes, they defer maintenance. When this occurs over a period of years, many homes become dilapidated and no longer provide a safe or healthy living environment
Only one of five (20.6%) households 65 years or older rents its unit These households face a much more difficult housing situation, however, regarding unit availability and affordability. There is no readily available data which can identify the number of older renters in need of housing assistance. However, these older households are included in the total number of low-income renter households identified as needing housing assistance.
Large Families. There were 755 large families (five or more members) living in Folsom in 1990. Information is not yet available from the 1990 Census regarding the income levels of these families. To keep from being overcrowded, these families need housing units with five or more rooms.
There are 7,094 housing units in the City with five or more rooms (1990 Census), but the Census does not identify the housing costs associated with these housing units.
Based on the available information, it is assumed that the housing needs of above moderate-income and most moderate-income large families are being met. Given the small supply of rental units, particularly rental apartments, with three or four bedrooms that are affordable to very low- and low-income households, the City would need to expand the supply of such units to meet the needs of lower-income large families.
The extent of this supply imbalance cannot be quantified until 1990 Census data is available to allow a comparison of rental rates by number of bedrooms with household income for large families. The tables below show the total rooms per housing unit and the total household size by household status and tenure.
23-34
Table 23-19
NUMBER OF PERSONS BY TENURE
Household Size	Total	Percent
FAMILY HOUSEHOLDS		-
2 Persons	2.721	41.3%
3 Persons	1,552	23.7%
4 Persons	1.540	23.4%
5 Persons	545	8.4%
6 Persons	143	2.3%
7 or more	61	0.9%
Total	6,562	100.0%
NON-FAMILY HOUSEHOLDS		
1 Person	1,740	79.3%
2 Persons	363	16.5%
3 Persons	65	2.9%
4 Persons	21	1.0%
5 Persons	6	0.3%
6 Persons	0	—
7 or more	0	—
Total	2,195	100.0%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 1990.		
Table 23-20
NUMBER OF ROOMS BY HOUSING UNIT
Number of Rooms	Total Housing Units	Percent
1 Room	106	1.1%
2 Rooms	205	2.2%
3 Rooms	622	6.6%
4 Rooms	1,391	14.7%
5 Rooms	1,556	16.5%
6 Rooms	1.750	18.6%
7 Rooms	1,538	16.3%
8 Rooms	1.295	13.7%
9 or more Rooms	955	10.1%
TOTAL	9,418	100.0%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990.		
		
23-35
Mobility Impaired. Persons with physical handicaps that limit their mobility need a housing plan that addresses the problems of accessibility within the handicapped person’s private residence. Accessories such as handrails, ramps, wider doorways, and non-skid flooring are necessary for many mobility-impaired persons in order to have maximum use of their home.
The Sacramento Easter Seals Foundation, Sacramento County Social Services, the Association for Retarded Citizens, the State Department of. Rehabilitation, and the Alta Regional Center were contacted in order to determine the needs of individuals in Folsom with physical conditions which require special housing design.
The Alta Regional Center, a state-funded nonprofit agency which provides services for the developmentally disabled, indicated that they are providing services for 45 persons in the Folsom area. According to the Center, the housing needs of this group are mainly financial assistance needs. The City could provide housing for this group through the implementation of policies and programs aimed at assisting in the development of affordable housing.
Both the Easter Seals Foundation and Placer County Social Services agree that it is very difficult to quantify the physically handicapped population because members of this population do not congregate towards specific programs. However, the 1980 Census data identifies 324 individuals within Folsom as having a disability involving work or public transportation. It is assumed that a large percentage of these individuals are members of low-income households, since their disabilities preclude them from working. It is also assumed that these households require housing assistance, particularly rental assistance.
Financing for disabled accessibility improvements is also available through the City’s
Community Development Block Grant Program for those homeowners whose family income falls below 80% of the median income. Encouraging investors to add accessibility features to singlefamily rental units is a difficult proposition, however, as any permanent alteration could affect the units’ marketability to non-disabled persons.
Homeless. There are no homeless facilities in Folsom. Furthermore, there is no information which is readily available regarding the nature of the homeless population in Folsom. None of the primary social service agencies that provide homeless services in Sacramento County (Volunteers of America, Catholic Social Services, Traveler’s Aid, and the Salvation Army) are aware of any significant number of residents from Folsom, or individuals passing through Folsom, who require emergency shelter. City officials are aware that homeless transients passing through Folsom will occasionally camp at Negro Bar State Park campgrounds temporarily, but they have also concluded that the City’s relative distance from central Sacramento, from an operating railroad line, and from Highway 50 would make it unlikely that a significant number of homeless individuals would seek shelter in Folsom.
Female Householders. The 1990 Census determined that 21.2 percent of the households in Folsom (1,854 households) are headed by women. Four hundred twenty-nine of these householders are single and have children. Information regarding the income levels of these households is not available, but it can be assumed that they have income levels below the median area income.
Interviews with the Placer Women’s Center indicate that housing affordability is the number one problem concerning female householders. The second major concern is the availability of apartment owners who will rent to single mothers. The Placer Women’s Center suggests that increased affordable housing and educational programs for single mothers would help substantially.
23-36
Housing programs aimed at increasing the stock of lower-income housing would benefit this group. In addition, multifamily housing with child day-care facilities would benefit female householders with children. A multifamily housing survey could identify complexes with this type of facility.
Incidence of Overcrowding. The Census Bureau defines an overcrowded household as one which has more than one person per room, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, and hallways.
The 1990 Census counted 208 overcrowded households (2.4%) in Folsom, 124 of which (1.4%) were rental households. The table below shows the number of persons per room in the City as reported by the Census. The income levels of these households cannot be determined at this time. Furthermore, if is not clear whether these households are overcrowded because they cannot afford to rent housing with sufficient numbers of rooms, or if there are simply not enough multiple-room rental units in the City. A multifamily housing survey would answer part of this question.
Table 23-21 TENURE BY PERSONS PER ROOM		
OWNER OCCUPIED		
0.50 or less	5,003	57.2%
0.51 to 1.00	1,401	16.0%
1.01 to 1.50	65	0.7%
2.01 or more	4	0.1%
RENTER OCCUPIED		
0.50 or less	1,340	15.3%
0.51 to 1.00	805	9.2%
1.01 to 1.50	86	1.0%
1.51 to 2.00	28	0.3%
2.01 or more	10	0.1%
TOTAL8,742100.0%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990.
Farmworkers. The City of Folsom is not an agricultural community. Since there is no known community of farmworkers in Folsom, there is no identifiable need for farmworker housing or other facilities. However, the 1980 Census reported that 30 individuals were employed in agricultural pursuits.
The Census did not report specifically on whether these 30 individuals were seasonal laborers, ranch-
hands, farm or ranch owner-operators, or "hobby" farmers. It is possible that some or all of these individuals may be employed in agricultural or ranching pursuits in the El Dorado Hills area, in the apple orchards in El Dorado County, in El
23-37
Dorado County vineyards, or in agriculture or ranching southeast of Folsom.
Because there are no large agricultural operations nearby that would attract a substantial seasonal farmworkers population, there does not appear to be a need for special farmworker housing in Folsom. If any individuals employed in agriculture in Folsom require housing assistance due to their economic status, their need can be met through other housing assistance programs targeted for lower-income households in general.
23.3	RESOURCE INVENTORY
23.3.1	Housing Stock Characteristics
Housing Type and Tenure
The table below provides 1990 Census data on housing types and vacancy in the City of Folsom. Since 1990. the California Department of Finance reported (January 1992) that the City’s housing stock has increased to 11,247 dwelling units, of which 7,973 are single family homes, 492 are dwelling units in buildings of 2 to 4 units, 1,895 are dwelling units in buildings of 5 or more units, and 886 are mobilehomes.
Vacancy Status-
There were 645 vacant housing units in 1990, a vacancy rate of 6.8 percent in the City. Of those, 175 units were vacant for rent, and 297 units were vacant and for sale. An additional 86 units were sold or rented and awaiting occupancy, and 87 other units were vacant for other reasons but not available for occupancy.
The effective vacancy rate in the City, therefore, was 5.1 percent in 1990 (4.4% for owner-occupied housing and 7.2% for rental housing). The overall percent of units unoccupied declined from 6.8% in 1990 to 4.6% in 1992.
For a typical community with moderate growth and turnover in housing units, a vacancy of 2% for owner-occupied housing and 5% for rental housing is considered adequate to ensure sufficient choice and movement by households looking for housing.
These vacancy rates indicate that, at the time of the Census, the City of Folsom had adequate vacancy rates, and that, overall, there is no housing shortage in the City. These general statistics do not reveal, however, the relative availability of housing that meets the needs of low- and moderate-income households.
23-38
Table 23-22
HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
Total	Occupied Units
Units Percent Owner Percent RenterPercent
Housing Types
SF Detached	6,533	69.4	5,433	62.0	686	38.0
SF Attached	373	4.0	212	56.8	138	43.2
Subtotal	6,906	73.4	5,645	81.7	824	18.3
Duplex	218	2.3	18	8.3	191	91.7
MF (3 - 49 units)	1,133	12.0	6	0.1	1,008	99.9
MF (50 + units)	238	2.5	0	0.0	166	100.0
Subtotal	1,589	16.8	24	1.5	1,365	98.5
Mobilehomes	886	9.4	809	91.3	55	8.7
Other	37	0.4	10	27.0	25	73.0
Subtotal	923	9.8	819	90.5	77	9.5
Total Units	9,418	100.0				
Total Occupied Units	6,488	74.1	2,269	25.9		
Vacancy Status For Rent For Sale Rented or Sold,
not occupied Other
175	1.9
297	3.2
86	0.9
87	0.9
Total
645	6.8
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 1990.
23-39
23.3.2	Condition of Housing Stock-
A 1986 survey of housing conditions found approximately 100 dwelling units in need of rehabilitation. All of these units were located in the City’s redevelopment area, in the central portion of the community developed prior to 1970. A follow-up survey of housing conditions conducted in 1991 found that eighty-eight (88) dwelling units are need of repair. The level of repair needed is summarized below:
♦	58 minor repairs
♦	30 moderate repairs
♦	0 substantial repairs
♦	0 are dilapidated (not feasible to repair)
The decrease in the level of units in need of rehabilitation was primarily due to the City’s housing rehabilitation program, in operation since 1988.
23.3.3	Residential Lands Inventory
The purpose of the Residential Lands Inventory is to summarize the City’s total residential holding potential. The resulting number of potential units can then be compared with expected growth patterns to determine if it is possible to construct housing in sufficient quantities for households of all income levels.
To compute the total number of residential dwelling units which could realistically be built,
the report first totaled the units which are either under construction, have been approved, or for which proposals have been submitted. This number was added to the total number of units which could potentially be built in the remaining undeveloped residential areas under a medium-density development assumption (this density level is the most likely considering current City policies).
The total residential potential under this assumption is then adjusted to reflect the extent to which recent residential development (projects which are either under construction or have been approved) has taken advantage of densities allowable under the medium density scenario. Table 18 calculates a construction ratio by dividing the projected number of units allowed at the "midpoint" density level into the actual units approved and under construction. For example, single family housing developments are currently being constructed at approximately 108 percent of allowable densities under the Medium Density scenario.
The majority of the information used in this analysis was taken from the City’s Housing and Population Capacity Analysis report. This report defines three scenarios for potential growth according to different density levels; low. medium, and high. These density levels represent ranges established in the City’s General Plan. The density ranges were applied to housing types as follows:
Housing Tvpe	Low	Medium	High
Single Family Low	2.0	3.0	3.9
Single Family High	4.0	5.5	6.9
Multi Family Low	7.0	9.5	11.9
Multi Family Medium	12.0	15.5	17.9
Multi Family High	18.0	21.5	25.0*
* Could only be achieved with a density bonus.
23-40
Land Inventory
A land use inventory was updated for the City in October 1991. The survey shows that about half the City’s land has already been developed or is under development
The results of the survey are shown below. The first table shows the developed land in the City and the second table shows the undeveloped land in the City.
Table 23-23 LAND INVENTORY Developed By Use Land Designation
General Plan Designation	Acres	Percent
Single Family Residential	3.999.26	26.36%
Single Family High Density	795.90	25.25%
Multifamily Low Density	495.90	53.27%
Multifamily Medium Density	23.46	0.15%
Multifamily High Density	0.00	
Neighborhood Commercial	14.35	0.09%
General Commercial	15.59	0.10%
Community Commercial	108.40	0.72%
Central Commercial	150.83	0.99%
Regional Commercial	20.27	0.13%
Specialty Commercial	265.08	1.75%
Industrial	201.33	1.33%
Public Lands	1,203.80	97.94%
Open Space Lands	—	—
Schools	100.77	0.66%
Water	—	—
TOTAL	7,392.10	48.76%
Source: City of Folsom Community Development Department. 1991.
23-41
Table 23-24 LAND INVENTORY Not Yet Developed Land Designation				
General Plan Designation	Acres	Percent	Dwelling Units-	Income Group
Single Family	922.17	6.08% •'	1,844- 3,596	Above Mod
Single Family High	165.97	1.09%	663- 1,145	Mod*/Above
Multifamily Low	182.05	1.20%	1,277- 2.171	Low*/Moder
Multifamily Medium	139.80	0.92%	1,677- 2,502	Very L*/Low
Multifamily High	59.64	0.39%	1,073- 1,491	Very L*/Low
Neighborhood Commer	36.67	0.24%	N/A	
General Commer	7.19	0.05%	N/A	
Community Commercial	62.06	0.41%	N/A	
Central Commercial	85.53	0.56%	N/A	
Regional Commercial	60.57	0.40%	N/A	
Specialty Commercial	266.67	1.76%	N/A	
Industrial	1,313.54	8.66%	N/A	
Public Land	15.57	0.10%	N/A	
Open Space	2,680.27	17.67%	N/A	
Schools	175.60	1.16%	N/A	
Water	1,601.24	10.56%	N/A	
TOTAL	7,774.59	51.19%	6,534- 10,905	
* Potentially affordable to this income group at the allowed density range only with local regulatory incentives and/or financial subsidies.
NOTE: This Table shows land use designations as included in the General Plan at the time of adoption of the Housing Element. A proposal is pending to redesignate industrial land in the East Area to residential use.
Source: City of Folsom Community Development Department, 1991.
Table 29 indicates that the City could accommodate its remaining regional share of housing for all income groups based on existing General Plan densities if it adopts programs to stimulate the production of affordable housing (see Goals, Policies, and Programs). Folsom’s remaining SACOG regional housing share between 1991 and 1996 is 1.905 dwelling units affordable to very-low income households, 922 dwelling units
affordable to low-income households, 1,135 dwelling units affordable to moderate-income households, and 710 dwelling units affordable to above moderate-income households. There is more than sufficient land designated for single family development to meet the remaining above moderate-income housing need (710 dwelling units), even if all such development occurred at the bottom of the density range. To meet low-
23-42
and moderate-income housing needs, many multifamily developments would have to occur at the mid-point or higher density range. To meet very low-income housing needs, multifamily developments would, need to occur at the upper end of the density range in the medium and high density multifamily categories.
It is not necessary that every development on multifamily-zoned land will occur at the highest density allowed and include only low- and moderate-income housing to meet the City’s lower- and moderate-income housing needs. There is sufficient capacity within the three multifamily categories to ensure that enough developments could be accommodated to meet these needs in projects containing a mixture of dwelling units for all income groups.
The City is presently revising its zoning code to reflect the 1988 General Plan categories. The zoning code revision is a high priority and should be completed by July, 1993. Pending the zoning code revision, the City is allowing developments that reflect the current General Plan density ranges, and does not anticipate that the lack of an updated zoning code will represent a constraint to development during the updating period.
The types of dwelling units that could potentially be constructed in each land use category are based on the density ranges shown on page 44. These densities are established by the Land Use Element (see Table 21-4). For the purpose of projecting the total number of dwelling units and population, public facilities, and community services needs, the City has assumed that development, on the average, will occur at the mid-range of the allowed densities, although the highest density is allowed for projects which incorporate low- and moderate-income housing.
Section 21.2.4 of the Land Use Element contains policies used by the City for judging whether densities above the minimum should be allowed. The low end of the density range for each residential land use category is allowed by
right. The higher end of the range is allowed if a development incorporates "special benefits", such as additional park or open space, on-site recreational facilities, additional trees or landscaping, or transit facilities or services. The City can also permit higher densities for other "special benefits" which are not specifically named in the General Plan. One of these other benefits for which the City allows developments at the higher density is the provision of senior, low- or moderate-income housing.
The City does not use the special benefits policy to discourage higher density projects, but to assure that developments with higher densities contain offsetting benefits that address the impacts of those higher densities. In fact, it is not difficult for developers to qualify for the higher densities, and several developments have been approved at densities higher than the mid-range density since the General Plan was adopted in 1988.
Because the City will allow developments which include low- and/or moderate-income housing to qualify for the highest density within the applicable residential category, the General Plan has a built-in density bonus program. The "bonus", in this case, is the ability to develop at the high end of the density range in exchange for providing at least 10% very low-income housing, 20% low-income housing, 25% moderate-income housing, or senior housing (see Programs 7 and 8 for details). The effect is to provide a density "bonus" of between 39% to 70% over the minimum density allowed, depending on the residential category'. This is more generous than the 25% density bonus required by state law. Program 8 contains conditions on the moderate-income density bonus to ensure that it does not discourage very low- and low-income housing proposals.
A review of the average development densities of projects approved since 1988 indicates that most were proposed at the mid-point density range or less. The lower densities reflect market conditions, the desire of home builders to
23-43
construct mostly single family dwelling units (although townhouses have been proposed and two apartment developments have been completed recently). The City has not discouraged higher density housing, but the local housing market, as perceived by homebuilders active in Folsom, does not seem to support substantial multifamily development at the present time.
Several home builders have produced smaller, single family dwelling units priced at less than $150,000 for first-time home buyers and moderate-income households. More such homes are proposed as these units sell quickly. An evaluation of proposed building plans indicates that most include three- or more-bedroom single family homes priced at more than $150,000, however. This trend could change as builders try to address the large, unmet demand for low- and moderate-income housing, which represents a potentially larger market at the present time than the "move-up" single family home market.
City land use policies favoring a variety of housing types is a necessary condition for the production of affordable housing. Favorable City land use policies can not guarantee, however, that builders can and will respond to low- and moderate-income housing needs if there is a strong local market for other types of housing. The City cannot control, and has no desire to dictate, how home builders respond to the needs of the housing market.
The City can use General Plan policies, regulatory incentives, and financial incentives to encourage home builders to propose a wider variety of housing types. The City can also cooperate with other governmental entities and non-profit housing corporations to produce housing for low- and moderate-income households. Folsom does not believe, however, that the City’s role should include the adoption of mandatory "inclusionary" housing policies which require home builders to produce a specified percentage of low- and moderate-income housing.
Because the City cannot "control” the decisions of homebuilders, and does not consider a mandatory inclusionary housing program appropriate, the Housing Element includes a program (see Program 2) to monitor development proposals on multifamily-designated land and to determine, annually, if any changes in land use policy are necessary to encourage more proposals for housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
Analysis of Zoning
It is generally agreed upon that densities in excess of 20 units per acre are required for new multifamily units to be affordable to lower-income households, particularly in high-cost areas. The "realistic potential" number of units in land use category MF High (Multifamily High Density) in the above table is based on the midpoint density level of 21.5 units per acre. This is the most likely scenario for average density levels (as calculated in Housing and Population Capacity Analysis for the City of Folsom. California study conducted by the City of Folsom), not a maximum allowable density. The maximum allowable density for this land use category is 25 units per acre. However, builders seeking approval of projects in excess of midpoint density levels must prove that the project offers substantial benefit to the City. The provision of affordable housing would be one benefit that would induce the City to offer a density bonus so that the 25-units-per-acre density could be achieved.
The City provides additional housing opportunities by allowing elderly housing in medical commercial zones. Two elderly housing proposals are pending before the City include a combination of congregate care facilities and individual apartments.
If it is assumed that densities of 21.5 units per acre are sufficient, in conjunction with other City incentives and government subsidies, to accommodate affordable housing for lower-income households, then it can be concluded that the
23-44
1.793 potential multifamily high density units are sufficient to meet the needs of the 1,445 very low-income households expected to reside in Folsom by 1996. This leaves a surplus of 348 multifamily high-density units which can be used by low-income households.
. According to this analysis, zoning should not be a constraint to the production of affordable housing for very low- and low-income residents over the next five years, provided that other factors which affect the financial feasibility of constructing affordable housing are addressed (such as infrastructure requirement and development fees, construction costs, financing costs, etc.).
The City recognizes, however, that zoning density is just one, albeit an important factor that determines the cost of housing. Higher residential densities, by themselves, will not guarantee the financial feasibility of affordable housing, although they are the primary determinant of whether the City could accommodate such housing. The City believes that its present zoning will not hinder the construction of such housing if other cost factors that affect the financial feasibility of providing housing for very low-income households can be addressed.
SACOG projects that 952 additional low-income households would need to be accommodated in Folsom by 1996. If 348 of these households are able to find housing in the MHD land use category, and the balance of 604 households are able to find housing in the MMD land use category, then it can be concluded that there is a sufficient amount of appropriately zoned land available to accommodate the 2,397 very low-and low-income households expected to reside in Folsom by 1996. The mid-range density for the MMD category, 15.5
dwelling units per acre, is typical for garden apartments and condominiums.
An informal survey conducted of the apartments constructed since 1986 concluded that
45 percent of the units, most of which are medium-density projects, are affordable to low-income households. This suggests that incentives and governmental subsidies would be necessary in addition to higher densities to provide affordable housing.
Should the City find that the present multifamily densities, governmental incentives and subsidies are insufficient to reduce the cost of providing rental housing affordable to low-income households, the City will re-evaluate its maximum densities to determine if higher densities would increase the financial feasibility of providing such housing.
Zoning, however, could present development constraints to mobilehome park proposals within the City. The City of Folsom defines mobilehome parks in its Title 17 chapter, Zoning, as follows:
Mobilehome parks as used in this part, means any tract of land where space is rented or held out for rent to one or more owners of mobilehomes. Mobilehome parks shall be located in residential mobilehome zones known as RMH Zones and shall be subject to issuance of a Use Permit. (Ord. 262 Sec. 1, 1970: Ord. 258 Sec. 2 (pan), 1970).
There are only a few mobilehome parks in the City of Folsom, due in part to zoning regulations and identified sites. Among the regulations are:
1)	A minimum of two 10 feet by 20 feet parking spaces for each mobilehome.
2)	A minimum entrance of at least 36 feet.
3)	All roadways within the mobilehome park will be paved with asphalt or concrete and have adequate curbs and/or gutters.
4)	Each mobilehome park will provide a minimum recreation area or areas within the park of not less than two hundred square feet per mobilehome site.
23-45
5)	Where mobilehome units are situated adjacent to public roadways, they shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet.
6)	Mobilehome sites shall be so situated that no mobilehome shall be closer than 10 feet from another mobilehome or permanent structure.
Analysis of Public Facilities and Services
Most vacant areas of Folsom do not currently have roads and municipal facilities in place. This is a primary concern in evaluating the development potential of these vacant lands during the five-year time period of this Housing Element. The city of Folsom relies on area facilities fees and development funding mechanisms to provide municipal facilities that benefit new residential development. The lack of most facilities is not a growth constraint, so long as the City and developers can agree on the timetable for installing required improvements. Since very little of the City’s vacant land contains "development-ready" facilities, these must be installed as development proceeds.
There are several long-term concerns regarding the ability of the City to accommodate new development. These include sources of drinking water, the capacity of the regional sewer plant, and the capacity of the City’s traffic circulation sysiem. especially the bridges. None of these concerns should be serious enough to limit development over the next five years, but solutions to these concerns must be identified during this period so that they can be implemented over the next 10 to 20 years.
These factors, as well as other constraints such as the fixed size of the City limits and the City’s Sphere of Influence, are important in projecting the amount of development the City will allow during the next five years. One of the primary effects of the City’s fixed Sphere of Influence is that it is very difficult for the City to annex land.
and, therefore, the City must maximize its use of existing land.
The major constraint to future development in Folsom is the availability of water. The 1988 Folsom General Plan EIR estimated that existing water supplies should‘support 11,600 households and a total population of approximately 32,000. Since SACOG projects a total of 14,392 households in Folsom by 1996 (nearly 38,000 residents at the present average household size), it is obvious that water is a constraint to housing development The City is trying to procure additional water supplies through the federal bureau of Reclamation and other sources.
All of the South Area Assessment District is already served by, and the East Area Specific Plan can be connected to (by the end of 1995), major off-site public facilities needed prior to development, including sewer, water, and roads. Internal roads and facilities would have to be provided by the developer.
A financial constraint to housing development exists due to the relative lack of existing infrastructure in the undeveloped portions of the City. The majority of undeveloped residential land in Folsom does not have the infrastructure needed for development.
The streets, sewer lines, power, and drainage facilities are generally developed as needed in the newer areas of the City. The financing of internal as well as regional facilities required for new development is generally accomplished through assessment districts and developer fees. The costs associated with these improvements are then passed along to the homeowner or renter, thereby causing higher housing costs than would be experienced in areas with existing infrastructure.
Given the reality of municipal financing under the present property tax system, there is no practical method for the City to issue general obligation bonds or use current tax revenues to pay for the expansion of needed infrastructure in
23-46
developing areas of the City. Infrastructure costs must be paid, therefore, either by the developer (who would pass these costs along up-front to the consumer) or through an assessment district (in which case new homeowners would pay additional taxes to cover the assessments and renters would pay higher rents to cover the rental owner’s added tax cost).
Since water lines, sewer lines, drainage, roads, and other municipal services must be provided regardless of the type of housing developed, the City cannot waive these requirements for affordable housing projects. Ihe City could reduce the financial impact of these necessary facilities and services, however, by adopting alternative standards for affordable housing, reducing or waiving certain impact fees, and providing partial subsidies.
Additional Uses
Aside from single-family and multifamily owner-occupied and rental housing, the residential lands mentioned in the vacant lands table above can be used for factory-built housing, mobilehomes, emergency shelters, and transitional housing, as needed, to meet the City’s housing goals and needs.
23.3.4	Areas with Residential Potential -
The City of Folsom has very little flexibility in its use of land due to the fact that the city limits and the Sphere of Influence are essentially one and the same. Because these limits are synonymous, the City cannot annex' land from outside its city limit. Therefore, land with residential potential must be located on the undeveloped land within the city. The Willow Springs subdivision converted land designated as industrial in the City of Folsom General Plan to residential, but there are very few additional opportunities for the City to convert land uses previously designated non-residential.
23.3.5	Potential Loss of Units
Assisted (At-Risk) Units
"Assisted" dwelling units are subsidized multifamily rental dwelling units which are under contract with either local, state or federal agencies to provide housing at below market rates. State law requires local jurisdictions to identify and determine the status of federally subsidized units; at-risk units are those assisted units which will be eligible to terminate their use restrictions over the next ten years. The following table identifies the assisted units in Folsom.
23-47
Table 23-25 ASSISTED UNITS IN FOLSOM				
Complex Name And Address	Total Units	Elderly Units	Earliest Termination	Government Program
Bidwell Gardens 1201-1212 Bidwell	14	-0-	6/16/90	Section 8
Folsom Gardens I 613 Stafford Street	48	8	1/14/91	FHA Section 236 (J)(l)
Folsom Gardens 613 Stafford Street	48	16	9/19/93	FHA Section 236 (J)(l)
Source:	1990 Updated Conversion.	Inventory	of Federally	Subsidized Low-Income Units at-Risk of	
Table 30 indicates that there are 110 low-income housing units in Folsom which are in danger of being converted to market-rate housing over the next five years. The 14 at-risk units in the Bidwell Gardens complex are currently being assisted by the Section 8 program. The complex owner intends to keep the units at the below-market rate indefinitely by renewing the Section 8 contract in 1995. The contract would be renewed automatically in 1995 unless the owner chooses to opt out of the contract at least one year in advance of the expiration date. This development could be at-risk in the future, however, if the owner decides to voluntarily terminate the contract or if the federal government does not provide sufficient appropriations to renew all expiring Section contracts.
Folsom Gardens Apartments I and II are owned and managed by FPI Real Estate Group in Sacramento. In December 1990, FPI filed a Notice of Intent to Prepay Mortgage. FPI states that it would like the units to remain affordable to lower-income households and has contacted the
City of Folsom about purchasing the units. The City’s current position on the matter is that property management and ownership is better accomplished in the private sector. The City has not made any plans to purchase the properties. Rural California Housing Corporation, a nonprofit organization, has shown interest in purchasing the properties and will pursue the matter further when the Department of Housing and Urban Development establishes guidelines for prepayment.
The proposed sale of Folsom Gardens I is proceeding under the requirements of the Low-Income Housing Preservation and Resident Homeownership Act of 1990, which contains a number of procedural requirements relating to public notice, right of first refusal by a qualified public agency or non-profit, and other requirements that must be met before a sale can occur on the open market. CDBG funds may be used a source of funds to preserve the affordability of the dwelling units.
23-48
Replacement cost for these units can be approximated by the cost to build a similar multifamily complex. Interviews with the developer of a recently completed multifamily apartment complex in Folsom indicated that the total development cost was approximately $80,000 per unit If these units were replaced with other rental units developed with governmental financial incentives, the cost per unit would potentially be decreased to as little as $68,000, for a total replacement cost of between $7,480,000 and $8,800,000.
The cost of maintaining the affordability of these units can also be determined by comparing the subsidized rental rates with market rental rates. The difference between these two figures represents the subsidy needed to maintain affordability.
The proposed sale of Folsom Gardens I.is proceeding under the requirements of the Low-Income Housing Preservation and Resident Homeownership Act of 1990, which contains a number of procedural requirements relating to public notice, right of first refusal by a qualified public agency or - non-profit, and other requirements that must be met before a sale can occur on the open market. CDBG funds may be used a source to preserve the affordability of the dwelling units."
Rancho Cordova-based Affordable Homes for Americans has applied for a "bridge" loan from the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency to purchase these at-risk developments. Folsom has submitted letters of support to SHRA.
Table 31 summarizes the total subsidies required to maintain the affordability of the units.
Table 23-26
MONTHLY SUBSIDIES REQUIRED TO MAINTAIN AFFORDABILITY OF AT-RISK RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
Complex Name	Market Rate	Subsidized Rate	Difference (Subsidy)	#of Units	Total
Bidwell	$450	$ 424	$ 26	14	$	364
Gardens					
Folsom	$ 290 (1BR)	$ 200 *	$ 90	16	$ 1.440
Gardens I	$ 330 (2BR)	S 200 *	$ 130	32	$ 4.160
Folsom	$ 296 (1BR)	$ 200 *	$ 96	16	$ 1.536
Gardens II	$ 347 (2BR)	$ 200 *	$ 147	32	$ 4,704
Total Monthly Subsidy	$ 12,204
Total Yearly Subsidy	$ 146,448
* Subsidized rate varies according to tenant’s income. These figures were provided by the complex manager as estimated averages.
23-49
Demolitions
The loss of housing units due to demolition has not been a problem in Folsom. Over the last five years, the City estimates that no more than three units have been demolished.
23.4 HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
Previous chapters have identified development trends and housing needs in the City of Folsom. This chapter describes potential impediments to the production of affordable housing in Folsom. There are several factors which can affect the level and cost of housing production. These factors can be grouped into four categories.
1)	Environmental characteristics of land which affect the cost and suitability of the land for residential development.
2)	The capacity of municipal facilities and services to accommodate new residential development.
3)	Economic factors affecting the level and cost of housing production.
4)	Government policies, plans, programs, and regulations affecting housing.
While these factors may not always have substantial negative impacts on the level of housing production in Folsom, they can influence housing cost and availability to certain population groups.
23.4.1	Environmental Considerations
A number of environmental considerations must be addressed in the development process in Folsom. Some of the environmentally-related development standards imposed by the City are in
direct response to state and federal requirements to protect wetlands, endangered species, and other environmental assets located with the City. Other standards reflect purely local environmental concerns. While these environmental considerations do not always represent as constraint on the number of housing units which can be built, they can affect the configuration and placement of dwelling units on a site.
More importantly, these requirements may add incidental costs to the total cost of development. These incidental costs, while not significant by themselves, could become a significant factor in conjunction with other development costs in the financial feasibility of affordable housing.
To mitigate the possible negative effects of these costs, the City would need to evaluate how its development standards affect affordable housing development costs on a case-by-case basis and make a policy decision in each case of whether to allow alternative standards that are less costly.
Environmental considerations addressed by the City’s development standards include the protection of creeks and other waterways, the preservation of significant trees, the protection of hillsides and hillside views, and the use of landscaping for shading and to screen residential developments. With careful site planning, a developer can meet these environmental design guidelines without reducing the number of housing units allowed under the General Plan, except perhaps in steep, hilly terrain.
Sensitivity to these factors has been an essential component of the attempt to retain a quality living environment and to avoid the negative effects of development. Of particular concern is the water runoff from development. The majority of the General Plan area’s runoff flows into Lake Natoma, which has been identified by the State Department of Fish and Game as a unique wildlife and fisheries habitat.
23-50
23.4.2	Municipal Facilities Constraints
Infrastructure
Most vacant areas of Folsom do not currently have roads and municipal facilities in place. The City of Folsom relies on facilities fees and other developer funding mechanisms to provide municipal facilities for new residential development.
The City of Folsom adopted an Urban Development Policy in 1983 to implement its General Plan. According to Section VI (Municipal Services and Facilities), the City will require developers to provide facilities (streets, storm drains, sewer lines, water lines, etc.) and equipment that serve their developments. Folsom has also adopted a municipal facilities fees schedule to cover the costs of many off-site improvements and has established the Folsom South Area Assessment District to finance the installation of municipal facilities in most of South Folsom between Folsom Boulevard and East Bidwell Street.
Folsom has set forth a procedure in its Urban Development Policy for preparing area facilities plans in other parts of the City. Such plans must identify municipal service and facility needs of the area covered by the plan, provide a cost estimate of the improvements, propose a procedure for apportioning costs among the benefitted properties, and set up the administrative funding mechanism.
As long as the City and developers can agree on the timetable for installing required improvements, the lack of facilities is not a growth constraint Since very little of the City’s vacant land contains "development-ready" facilities, these facilities must be installed as development proceeds. Due to the cost of infrastructure development, new residential development in areas without infrastructure will be more expensive than areas with infrastructure. A majority of these costs are likely to be passed on KMfte homebuyer.
Water/Sewer
Water Facilities. The water supply for most of the City of Folsom comes exclusively from Folsom Lake via the Bureau of Reclamation pipeline to City-owned facilities. Water is treated at the City’s filtration-plant and is then fed into the distribution system. The City is currently divided into three separate pressure zones.
The design capacity of the water treatment plant has been expanded from 10 to 20 million gallons per day (mgd). The actual capacity of the expanded plan may prove to be up to 50% greater than the design capacity due to the reasonable conservative surface loading rate that has been used for design. The plan must be fully tested in operations before the actual maximum capacity can be established. The plan has been planned for another 10 mgd (design capacity) expansion increment, when ultimately required.
The City of Folsom’s water entitlement from Folsom Lake limits the City to 22,000 acre-feet per year. The city is currently attempting to increase this water entitlement, but competition for additional water entitlements is great from throughout Central California, and there is no guarantee that the City will be able to contract for additional water.
The city has contracted to supply up to 5 million gallons per day of raw water to Aerojet in addition to supplying up to 3 million gallons per day of treated water to Aerojet through facilities constructed as part of the Folsom South Assessment District and the Nimbus Water Assessment District The contract with Aerojet will remain in effect until December 31. 2036.
Recent water usage data for the City through the year 1985 is presented in Table 32.
Water usage projections for ultimate buildout within the study area (undeveloped portions of the City, excluding 1.000 acres annexed in 1984) have been developed using "per-acre" usage factors
23-51
based on the type of usage and density of development. These factors were generally abstracted from a report prepared by City staff dated November 1983 and were updated for consistency with anticipated use types in this area. These water consumption factors, shown in the table below, are thought to be realistic for the Sacramento and Folsom areas.
Note that the following restrictions currently exist on water supply:
1)	Maximum annual usage = 22,000 acre-feet.
2)	Maximum treatment = 20 mgd. with current expansion complete.
3)	Ultimate treatment = 30 mgd (to 45 mgd), with planned "ultimate" expansion. This expansion of treatment capacity may not be possible at the existing site.
Table 23-27
WATER USAGE DATA
Year	Yearly* Consumption Treated**		Raw Water (Acre- Feet) (Including Aerojet)	Yearly Usage Total (Acre- Feet)
	Treated Water (Acre- Feet)	Water Maximum Day (mgd)		
1981	3,500	7.8	5,000+	8,500
1982	3,500	7.8	6,500***	10,000
1983	2,600	5.8	6,500***	9,100
1984	2,750	6.1	6,500***	9,250
1985	3,165	—		
* Based on metered water production at water treatment plant. ** Estimate based on assumed peaking factors.
*** Rough estimate of current usage.
Source:	Yearly consumption of treated water based on City of Folsom records.
Note: The treated water consumption declined in 1983 because a portion of the system (Ashland) was served by other sources (San Juan Suburban Water District) as of late 1992.
23-52
Table 23-28 WATER CONSUMPTION FACTORS		
Land Use	Density	Water Duty (Acre-Feet/Y ear)
Residential
Low Density	2 units/acre	2.8
Medium-Low Density	3 units/acre	3.0
Medium Density	4-6 units/acre	3.8
Medium Density	7-10 units/acre	4.1
Multi	10-15 units/acre	4.5
Multi	16-25 units/acre	6.0
Commercial		
Industrial		
Light		2.5
Heavy		2.5
Office Park		
(Heavy Landscape)		4.5
Parks		3.0
Source:	City of Folsom Staff Report, Water Supply and Disposal, November 1983 (as revised).
Folsom’s present water allocation is sufficient to serve the area within the former City limits (prior to the annexation in 1984 of 3,689 acres) at the current General Plan land use densities. The City has sought an increased allocation from the Bureau of Reclamation of 22.000 to 25.000 acre feet as well as opened negotiations with San Juan suburban water district for additional participation in their system.
Sewerage Facilities. The City of Folsom and Folsom Prison are served by a series of City and regional interceptor sewers which transport wastewater to Sacramento County’s Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant. Collection, lateral, and certain interceptor sewers which feed from various areas of the City into the regional facilities are owned by the City of Folsom.
The collector sewer capacity is, in itself, a relatively minor concern to the overall issue of Folsom’s development capacity because sufficient sewer capacity can be financed through the regional sewer district to meet the City’s future housing needs.
The capacity of individual segments of the City’s various interceptor lines is an important consideration in planning for new development, however. These capacities range from 3 million gallons per day to 12.5 million gallons per day. The peak dry weather flow for the entire community in 1984 was 3.6 million gallons per day as measured by the City’s metering station, and the peak wet weather flow was 6.5 million gallons per day.
23-53
The City has recently upgraded its pump station capacity to 12.5 million gallons per day (average daily flow). This capacity would be sufficient to handle Folsom’s sewerage needs under the current General Plan land use designations.
In sum, if the City works closely with Sacramento County to plan for sewerage flow increases, any acute capacity shortage and delays of development approval can be avoided. Developers will be required to provide adequate sewer lines to serve their developments and contribute to the improvement of interceptor lines.
23.4.3	Economic Factors
Land Costs
Precise information regarding land and improvement cost differences between Folsom and surrounding cities is not readily available. However, interviews with local developers have yielded the following estimated costs for a 6,000 square foot "finished" lot.
City	Estimated Cost
Folsom	$ 60	- 65,000
Roseville	$ 45	- 50,000
Sacramento	$ 37	- 42,000
(Laguna Area)
In 1991, a custom home, "construction ready" lot (12 thousand square feet) in the City may sell for approximately $78,000.
Sacramento Title Company reported on the characteristics of sixty four vacant residential lots located throughout the City were reported. The majority of these lots were zoned single-family residential and have been transferred or sold during 1991. The lots, originally assessed from $6,100 to $171,965, sold from $50,000 to upwards of two and a half million. The majority of the
subdivision lots, originally assessed at $40,219. were selling from $77,000 to $103,500.
The above information suggests that single family lot costs are higher in Folsom than in other developing parts of Sacramento and south Placer County and that the cost of land in Folsom could be an impediment to the production of ownership housing affordable to moderate- or middle-income households. The effects of land costs on the ability of homebuilders to provide rental housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households will depend primarily on the density allowed by the City and whether substantial amounts of non-residentially zoned land is rezoned for residential use.
Building Costs
Interviews with local developers suggest that there is no noticeable difference between building costs in Folsom, and the building costs in surrounding communities. The construction cost of housing in Folsom, therefore, would depend on the square footage of, and types of amenities included in, new housing units.
Financing
Interviews with several developers in the Folsom area have indicated that financing is a constraint to development regardless of the community in which the project is located. There do not appear to be any particular areas in Folsom, or types of projects, for which financing is less readily available than in other pans of the region. The availability of financing for housing development tends to be cyclical and follow the general economic cycle. While many developers are facing difficulties in finding financing for their projects, as the economy improves, financing should become more readily available.
Structural changes in federal laws governing financial institutions (as a result of the recent crisis in the savings and loan industry) will likely create some long-term problems with the availability of
23-54
development financing, but many homebuilders are seeking to overcome this problem by searching for alternative sources of capital, particularly from lenders in foreign countries.
The cost of money to finance housing developments is as important to the feasibility of housing construction as is the supply of financing. Affordable housing projects are particularly hard hit by the high financing rates that have characterized real estate lending throughout much of the 1980s.
Interest rates have declined dramatically since the early 1980s; typical interest rates for real estate loans to homeowners have varied between 8.25% and 8.75% between Fall of 1991 and Spring of 1992 for fixed, thirty year loans, and even lower for fifteen-year and variable-rate loans. These are the lowest rates since the mid-1970s. It does not appear that interest rates will decline to the lower levels that characterized the 1960s and early 1970s, but if they remain relatively stable at just under 9%, a substantial number of additional households will be able to afford home purchases. Even though interest rates have declined, they remain at a level which can present an impediment to the construction of affordable housing for lower-income households. Interest rate subsidies of two to four percentage points are often necessary to make a low-income housing project "pencil out".
Although the City of Folsom cannot control interest rates, it can help to reduce the financial impact of interest rates on affordable housing projects by using its powers to issue tax-exempt bonds or providing interest-rate subsidies from Redevelopment Agency housing set-aside funds.
23.4.4	Governmental Constraints
It is difficult if not impossible, to disassociate the market "cost" of housing production from the effects of government policies, exactions, and fees. A substantial portion of the development cost of
housing cited in the previous sections relates directly to fees for, or the required installation of, such facilities as roads, sewers, drainage systems, schools, and parks. These are essential requirements for the health, safety, and welfare of Folsom residents. Additional City requirements relate to landscaping and the design of housing. Residential Development Fees
The information provided in Table 34 below indicates that fees imposed on new residential development in Folsom are moderate in comparison to other communities, but nonetheless substantial as a percentage of the cost of new single family home or rental apartment. The effect of these fees on the financial feasibility of affordable housing will depend on the type of project.
For a typical multifamily rental housing project, these fees can represent between 10 percent and 20 percent of the final cost of rental housing. It would undoubtedly be in the interest of a developer of low-income housing to avoid this additional cost, but the City faces the dilemma of having to provide for the financing of necessary facilities and services while not precluding the construction of affordable housing. Some of the fees cited below are charged by other public agencies not under the control of the City. Three ways in which the City can address this dilemma are to:
1)	evaluate changes in development requirements that might reduce the costs of providing needed infrastructure,
2)	find sources of financing to partially subsidize these development costs, and
3)	find sources of revenue or provide other incentives that can reduce other aspects of the development cost to offset the increased cost from infrastructure requirements.
23-55
Table 23-29
RESIDENTIAL FEE COMPARISONS
	West Sac	Davis	Rocklin	Roseville	Sac Co	Folsom
Value	$103,608	$116,460	$128,637	$128,637	$128,637	$128,637
Type of Fee						
Bldg Permit	652	474	1.544	389	741	741
Plan Check	424	308	0	318	• 722	722
Water Fees	1,357	719	3,543	1,918	1,831	1,730
Sewer Fees	3.318	1,257	3.540	1,158	2,600	1,033
Drainage	0	566	0	647	0	540
Park Fees	1,607	2,942	1.304	500	1,968	1.600
Construe/						
Cap Impr	0	2,844	1,351	0	932	400
Traffic	0	3,069	1,635	559	2,122	1,800
School	2.700	0	0	2,844	3,745	2,844
Other	3,989	2,022	903	0	2,061	535
Credits	(1,708 )					
Total	$13,975	$12,493	$13,820	$8,333	$16,772	$11,945
Source: Economic & Planning Systems, Inc., "Fee, Assessment, and Special Tax Comparisons Within the Sacramento Region, prepared for the Southport Planning Group, October 12, 1990.
NOTE: The fee comparisons shown above do not account for all costs imposed on new developments to pay for public services and facilities. This table does not show, for example, dedication requirements, subdivision improvement requirements, or special assessments paid by homeowners bi-annually with their other property taxes.
Development Standards
Construction activity in Folsom is subject to development standards adopted by the City in 1985. These standards address residential development requirements for landscaping, street lighting, fences and walls, solar energy use, and parking. The City adopted these standards to
ensure that minimum levels of design and construction quality are maintained and adequate levels of street and facility improvements are provided.
The City does not believe that its development standards exceed the level necessary to ensure adequate circulation and
23-56
parking, drainage, environmental protection, and protection from potential visual nuisances. The City’s standards are summarized below. The standards included in this summary are those with the greatest potential to affect housing costs.
Fences and Walls. Materials should be textured solid surface compatible with architecture of building. Property owner(s) should be responsible for maintenance of perimeter fences and walls.
Landscaping. Street trees (minimum ten-gallon size) are required. One or two trees per lot frontage should be used in residential areas. Existing significant trees should be preserved. Folsom’s climate should be considered in the selection of landscaping materials.
Parking Lots. Parking lots serving residential uses should have one major exit/entrance point Parking areas should be screened by an earth mound landscape, a low decorative wall, or by lowering the grade of the parking area.
Residential Streets. Street patterns should be indirect and should minimize through traffic. Greenbelts or landscaped setbacks maintained by homeowner associations are encouraged. Street width reductions will be considered on private streets where adequate access for emergency vehicles and off-street parking can be shown.
Building Codes
The City of Folsom follows the requirements of the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and the additions to that Code adopted by the State of California. Folsom has not amended UBC requirements nor added its own requirements.
One could argue that the minimum requirements of the UBC and other model codes have, over the past thirty years, added substantially to the cost of housing. Governmental agencies at all levels, as well as organizations representing building officials, have decided, however, that
these changes are necessary to achieve a minimum level of health and safety. Few would disagree that dwelling units built today offer health and safety features that are real improvements over homes built a generation ago. As the accepted standards of "health and safety" have changed over the years, however, the cost of these changes has not been evaluated for its impact on the ability of homebuilders to produce affordable housing. Open Space and Park Requirements
Folsom follows Quimby Act requirements (Government Code Section 664477 et. seq.) for park land dedications in new subdivisions. The City does not believe that the amount of open space set aside in the General Plan nor the City’s park dedication requirements represent excessive constraints on residential development. These requirements would not impede the City’s ability to meet is overall share of the region’s housing needs. In conjunction with other development requirements, however, there is a land or dollar cost involved. This cost can be mitigated for affordable housing developments if the City were to allow additional dwelling units to compensate for units that cannot be built on land dedicated for park use.
The Planning and Permit Process
While local government can have little impact on market-oriented constraints and obstacles, such as the cost of materials, cost of labor and consumer preferences, it can respond to those constraints over which it has direct control, such as codes and ordinances affecting project design and processing procedures.
Over the past several years, the City of Folsom’s planning processes have been streamlined as much as possible under the constraints of CEQA review period requirements. Occasional delays have been experienced in preliminary review phases, particularly when the workloads are heavy in relation to available staffing levels. This situation could be a
23-57
significant problem in the future if the rate of submission of new development proposals increases. Any additional staff would have to be supported by application fees.
The City’s General Plan land use policies are viewed by some to be a constraint in providing more affordable units. The City’s General Plan, revised in 1988, provides residential development densities for a population of about 69,000. It is the City’s decision-makers’ position that approval of increased densities cannot be given without proof that the project will provide "special community benefits". The development of additional water sources would also allow for the development of additional dwelling units, which could either be accomplished by increased residential or an increase in the amount of land developed for residential use, or both.
The 1988 General Plan revision contained several substantial residential land use changes. Most significantly, the total number of acres designated for residential uses decreased from 7,393 acres to 6,132 acres, although the overall density of residential uses increased, such that 23 percent more homes could be built. Multi-family use densities were increased, and the total number of multi-family units that could be built increased by about 20 percent
Despite the increases in densities allowed under the 1988 General Plan, builders still express concerns that City land use policies and allowable residential densities adversely affect the cost of housing. The approach taken by the City is to balance the concern of housing affordability with other concerns, such as environmental quality, energy conservation, and the provision of adequate services.
The amount of land available for residential development would be less of a concern if a substantial amount of land presently zoned for commercial use is rezoned for residential use. The City has approved just such a rezone for the Willow Springs and would be receptive to other
rezone requests if land owners can show that the demand for commercial land is less than the amount of land zoned for such use. There are several such requests pending. The City will decide whether to rezone parcels for residential use based on its evaluation of the demand for commercial development
Permit Processing Times
The City of Folsom makes every effort to meet the permit processing deadlines specified under Government Code Section 65950. Development proposals are approved or denied within the six-month (for Negative Declaration) or one year periods (for EIR preparation) required by State Law.
Once a development is approved, the City expedites building permit applications so that construction is not unreasonably delayed. The City often completes application reviews and approves development projects in less time than required under the California Permit Streamlining Act Because the City meets state-set deadlines in virtually every case, the time required for development approval is not considered a constraint to development. To further reduce total development review time, the City will evaluate, as part of its zoning code update, whether some presently discretionary decisions can be made by the Community Development Director as ministerial decisions.
Folsom contains a number of unique natural habitats, including riparian habitats and vernal pools. These areas often contain plants and animals recognized as "endangered species" by the State of California or the federal government, such as the long-homed elderberry beetle and the tri-colored blackbird. If such species are present within an area proposed for development, environmental review and mitigation may cause a delay in development approval and additional expense to mitigate the habitat loss. The City cannot avoid this problem since it must follow the requirements of state and federal law.
23-58
Folsom can, however, mitigate the potentially negative impact on the production of affordable housing by using specific plans to identify such areas prior to development, by allowing planned development proposals that cluster development at higher densities in more suitable areas, and by using master environmental assessments for the entire City as part of the General Plan to balance environmental and affordable housing concerns. In fact, Folsom has used all of these approaches.
23.5	ENERGY CONSERVATION
Since the time of the petroleum shortages of the early 1970s, Californians have become increasingly aware of the benefits of energy conservation. Despite the recent, short-term tumble of oil prices, the overall trend in energy prices has been one of steady increases and sometimes sharp changes in prices. Energy "awareness" has been ingrained in our collective conscious and institutionalized in government practices. This awareness of the need to conserve energy has important implications for homebuilders as consumers increasingly demand energy conservation features in new homes.
23.5.1	State Requirements
The provision of energy conservation features in new homes has been reinforced by State laws for minimum levels of energy efficiency. In 1975, the Warren-Alquist Act took effect and created the California Energy Commission.
The Commission’s task was to develop and implement cost-effective energy-saving requirements that would reduce Californians’ energy consumption yet minimize the cost of the additional construction requirements. The Energy Commission adopted its first set of energy conservation standards in 1977; these were revised in 1982 and again in 1985.
The standards differ for each of 16 "climate zones" identified in the state. Folsom is located in Climate Zone 12, the requirements of which are influenced by the characteristic Sacramento area climate of cool, wet winters and warm, dry summers with cool evening breezes.
Builders can comply with the energy conservation standards in one of two ways: by complying with a list of prescriptive requirements or by meeting a specified point score (or energy budget) which would achieve the same level of energy conservation as the prescriptive requirements. Local governments are required to enforce the State’s standards.
23.5.2	Local Guidelines
The City of Folsom adopted guidelines in 1985 for developers to follow in meeting City requirements for landscaping, walls and fences, streets, signs, and other aspects of development. These guidelines included solar energy standards. The City encourages the use of solar energy devices and requires that new developments be designed so that access for passive or active solar energy measures can be maintained for individual homes in a development
23.5.3	Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Of the 9,418 housing units in the City of Folsom, approximately 3,500 (37.1%) were constructed prior to the year state requirements for energy conservation took effect. Of these units, about 1,200 are more than 25 years old and could potentially benefit from an energy conservation retrofit program. This is not to suggest that all 1,200 units are in need of repair, but many otherwise sound older units can benefit from minor alterations such as weatherization and insulation of the home and appliances.
In July, 1986, a housing conditions survey determined that approximately 100 units were in need of some sort of rehabilitation. Based on
23-59
some obvious external signs of inadequate weather protection, about two-thirds of the housing units in that survey could benefit from some form of energy conservation retrofitting.
Additional information on the need for energy conservation can be obtained from the 1980 Census, which reported on home energy expenditures as a percentage of income. The majority of Folsom residents had no difficulty managing the energy costs in 1980, according to the Census. The majority of all renters (60%) and homeowners (74%) paid less than 5% of their income for energy costs. Another 24% (268 households) of the rents and 16% (401 households) of the homeowners paid between 5% and 9% of their income for energy.
Of most concern from the 1980 Census data, however, are the 185 renters (16% of all renters) and 243 homeowners (10% of all homeowners) who devoted 10% or more of their income for energy costs in 1980. These households might be special targets of a program to assist lower-income residents in making energy conservation improvements to their homes. Unfortunately, similar income and payment data will not be available from the 1990 Census until after the adoption of this element.
Another indication of the need for energy efficiency improvements is the type of heating system used in Folsom’s homes. According to the 1980 Census, 117 Folsom houses did not have a permanent heating system, and another 370 homes had wall-mounted or room heaters as the primary method of heating.
The City routinely enforces the residential and nonresidential energy standards set forth by the California Energy Commission as part of its efforts to enforce the UBC. In addition, the development standards adopted by the City in 1985 include solar energy standards.
These standards encourage the use of solar energy devices and also require that new developments be designed so that access for passive or active solar energy measures can be maintained for individual homes in a development
Pacific Gas and Electric provides gas services and the Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD) provides electricity services for the City of Folsom. The energy conservation programs offered by PG&E and SMUD are available in the Folsom area.
Weatherization
The availability of low-cost or free weatherization sendees is especially important to low-income and elderly households who would not otherwise obtain these services. Currently, the Community Development Block Grant program and non-profit housing corporation, known as "Project Go", provide basic weatherization services to low-income households as long as state funding is available. PG&E has developed programs to educate homeowners about conserving energy, to perform weatherization services in communities receiving gas or electric services from PG&E and, in some instances, install wall heaters and water heaters in low-income households.
23.6	EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
The City of Folsom acts as a referral agency for persons seeking to file equal housing opportunity complaints. Anyone seeking information about housing discrimination or related housing matters is referred to the appropriate public service agency. Some of the local agencies available to assist in this area are: Legal Sendees of Northern California; Housing and Urban Development’s Sacramento Service Office; California State Department of Fair Employment and Housing; and the U.S. Civil Rights Commission.
23-60
23.7	REVIEW OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
The Housing Element adopted by the City in 1987 established a set of action plans to be used in an attempt to meet the goals set forth by the Element. This section summarizes the extent to which these action plans were completed, discusses possible reasons for failures, and suggests ways in which these plans might be completed in the future. Throughout the following discussion, the goal topics are numbered as they were in the previous Element, and a synopsis of each goal or plan is presented in bold type.
23.7.1	New Housing Production
Plan for the construction of approximately 7,800 homes between 1987 and 1991.
This goal was established based on the number of development proposals approved by and pending before the City in 1987. Based on the SACOG allocation for this period, as pro-rated (the 1983 SACOG allocation for Folsom was for a seven-year period), the City’s housing construction need between 1985 and 1990 was 1,182 units. The Housing and Population Capacity Analysis For the City of Folsom. California
estimated that a total of 3,869 housing units were constructed over this period. The breakdown by type of unit and the estimated units constructed over the life of the previous Housing Element is provided in the following table.
Although the City did plan for the construction of 7,800 dwelling units, the slow-down in housing construction between 1989 and 1991 resulted in substantially fewer dwelling units being constructed during this period.
The number of units constructed, however, was still three times the number allocated to Folsom as its regional share during this period.
The affordability of housing constructed since the previous Housing Element was adopted in 1987 can be approximated using information about housing which was constructed during the period
1985	to 1990.
For-Sale Housing
Because of the typical market prices of new homes in Folsom, very low- and low-income households are not capable of purchasing homes in Folsom. Moderate-income households may be able to afford a small amount of the for-sale housing in Folsom. The 121 single- family high-density homes (in general, these homes will be less expensive than the single-family low density homes) built between 1987 and 1991 were affordable to moderate-income households earning between 100% and 120% of median income. The
1990	Census determined that 81.7 percent of the single family homes in Folsom are owner-occupied. If this percentage were applied to the number of single family units constructed in the high-density category, then ninety-nine single family purchase homes were built from 1987 to
1991	and were affordable to moderate-income households.
Rental Housing
The City collected information on rental rates charged for 941 multifamily units at four apartment complexes which were built between
1986	and 1991. The results of this survey are shown below.
23-61
Table 23-30
HOUSING UNITS CONSTRUCTED FROM 1985 TO 1990
Type of
Unit	1985	1990	1985-1990	Yearly	1987-1991
SF Low	3,434	5,916	2,482	496.6	1,986
SF High	297	248	151	30.2	121
MF Low	443	923	480	96.0	384
MF Med/High	361	1,114	753	150.6	602
Mobilehomes	666	669	3	0.0	0
Total	4,535	9,070	3,869	773.4	3,094
Source:Housing and Population Capacity Analysis For the City of Folsom, California.
23-62
Table 23-31
MULTIFAMILY UNITS BUILT SINCE 1986 - RENTAL RATE SURVEY
Apt. Size	Ave. Rate	# of Units	Affordable to (income group)
1 Bedroom	$528	52	low-income
	634	116	mod-income
	555	34	low-income
	575	33	low-income
	575	60	low-income
	610	60	mod-income
2 Bedroom	$590	61	low-income
	603	77	low-income
	714	120	mod-income
	814	108	mod-income
	655	34	low-income
	675	35	low-income
	710	15	mod-income
	730	16	mod-income
	670	40	low-income
	700	72	mod-income
	710	80	mod-income
Total		941	
Affordable to Low-	and Moderate-Income	426 (45%)	
Affordable to Moderate-Income Only		515 (55%)	
Notes: Affordability is based on two persons per 1-bedroom apartment and three persons per 2-bedroom apartment.
Maximum affordable rents are taken from Table 9.
Using the results outlined above, the following conclusions can be drawn regarding the affordability of multifamily units built in Folsom from 1987 to 1991.
1)	No multifamily units were built which are affordable to very low-income households.
2)	Forty-five percent of the units surveyed are affordable to low-income households. Table 23 indicates that 986 multifamily units were built between 1987 and 1991. Thus. 444 multifamily units built between 1987 and 1991 are affordable to low-income households (.45 x 986 = 444).
3)	Fifty-five percent of the units surveyed are affordable to moderate-income households. Gf the multifamily units built between 1987 and 1991.
23-63
542 are affordable to moderate income households (.55 x 986 = 542).
23.7.2	Provision of Public Services
Plan for the provision of public services and facilities to serve 5,870 housing units between 1986 and 1990. [NOTE: The difference in the number of dwelling units referred to in this objective and objective number 1 is due to the difference in time frames for these two objectives.]
a.	Pursuit of additional water allocation from the Bureau of Reclamation.
The City recently requested an additional 50.000 acre feet of water from the Federal Bureau of Reclamation to be used in two 25,000 acre feet increments over the next twenty years. The Bureau of Reclamation has not yet responded to the request for 50,000 acre-feet, but is in the process of approving an additional 7,000 acre feet for the City. According to City staff involved in acquiring the additional water, it appears likely that the City will receive this additional 7,000 acre feet. The City is also negotiating for additional water from other water purveyors. Although Folsom is pursuing options to guarantee long-term sources of water, the City does not anticipate any shortage of water supply through 1996.
b.	Establishment of facilities plans funded through collection of fees.
The East Area Facilities Plan is the only facilities plan which has not been completed, and it is scheduled for completion by the end of 1992. The City has, therefore, successfully responded to the need to create funding mechanisms for infrastructure to allow for development to proceed.
c.	Collection of development fees to pay for essential off-site improvements benefitting new development, including temporary school facilities.
The City continues to charge fees on all new development. The Folsom-Cordova School District collects school fees which can be used for temporary school facilities, and the County regional sewer agency assesses fees for regional sewer facilities. The City has been successful in ensuring that the fees it collects are adequate to meet the public facilities needs of new development, but the added cost to new housing does pose an affordability barrier to low-income households. The City would need to find ways of partially subsidizing these costs and looking at alternative requirements to mitigate the cost impact of necessary infrastructure on affordable housing. A blue-ribbon committee headed by Folsom Councilman Holdemess has been established to investigate alternatives to developer fees.
Continued enforcement of development standards addressing internal improvements in new development
The City continues to enforce its development standards, which have substantially improved the quality of development in Folsom. Although these standards are necessary to carry out important environmental and aesthetic goals, the standards can be implemented in a way that allows for some flexibility for affordable housing developments.
Coordination with Sacramento County to ensure that additional wastewater collector capacity is constructed in an adequate fashion to serve Folsom.
The facilities plans outline the manner in which the City will coordinate with the County in an effort to ensure that there is sufficient collector capacity for new development. To date, the City does not anticipate any difficulties in meeting the sewer system demands imposed by new development in the City.
Establishment of a finance program for needed bridge expansion.
23-64
The Environmental Impact Report for this program is in the draft stage. Once the City Council adopts the EIR, staff will prepare the actual finance plan. The impact of such a finance plan on new development has yet to be determined.
23.7.3	Revise General Plan
In October, 1988, the City adopted a revised General Plan, which made substantial changes in land use designations in order to reflect changes in anticipated housing, commercial, and industrial land use demands. Specifically, residential densities were increased across the board to allow for increased affordable housing opportunities. The previous Housing Element suggested the following changes.
Designate areas that are appropriate for higher density residential development.
Maximum residential densities in all areas of the City were increased as a result of the General Plan Update.
Listed below are the densities allowed under the previous General Plan and under the current General Plan.
Designate enough sites between 1986 and 1990 at sufficient densities to allow private builders to provide' 636 additional units of housing affordable to lower-income households.
As previously identified, 444 multifamily housing units affordable to lower-income households were constructed between 1987 and 1991. It was also assumed that there were not any single-family homes built during the same period that were affordable to lower-income households.
If the current General Plan Residential densities were in place over the entire period, it is possible that 636 affordable units would have been constructed. In fact, it is likely that projects built up to two years after the General Plan was adopted reflect densities prescribed by the previous Plan. However, it is more likely that other reasons for the shortfall of affordable units exists. The primary reason was the difficulty of financing multifamily rental developments after changes in federal tax policies took effect in 1987.
Land Use	Previous G.P.	Current G.P.
SF Very Low	1 unit/20 acres	N/A
SF Low	2 units/acre	2.0-3.9 units/acre
SF Low	3-5 units/acre	N/A
SF Medium	5 units/acre	N/A
SF High	N/A	4.0-6.9 units/acre
MF	12 units/acre	N/A
MF Low		7.0-11.9 units/acre
MF Medium	N/A	12.0-17.9 units/acre
MF High	N/A	18.0-25.0 units/acre
23-65
■ As another example, although the maximum number of units per acre in multifamily high density areas is twenty-five, , although the number of units which will be constructed is only eighteen typical maximum density has, historically, been twelve dwelling units per acre. Considering this fact, the City may need to encourage higher density development in the multifamily high density zone to accommodate very low-income households.
Several programs have been proposed by the City (see Goals, Policies, and Programs) to encourage multifamily developments at 18-25 dwelling units per acre.The City’s inability to produce a sufficient amount of affordable housing is largely a result of factors discussed throughout this section. To be able to meet it lower-income housing goals through 1996, the City would need to consider how it can improve the financial feasibility of affordable housing through higher densities and other development incentives. A range of 18 to 25 dwelling units per acre would give developers of affordable housing greater options for proposing financial feasible projects.
Specific areas of the City that would be studied for higher residential densities are: the City’s redevelopment area; the residential areas between Blue Ravine Road, the Southern Pacific Railroad line, Sibley Street, and Bidwell Street; three parcels of land north and east of the proposed community college site; and residential lands between the SPRR lines on the north and Highway 50 on the south.
As mentioned above, maximum residential densities have been increased throughout the City as a result of the General Plan Update process.
23.7.4	Housing Rehabilitation
Establish a housing repair and rehabilitation program in cooperation with the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency to conserve Folsom’s stock of affordable housing. Repair the fifty single-family homes, forty
apartment units, and six duplex units identified in the housing conditions survey by 1990, and retrofit up to thirty to fifty homes per year to increase their accessibility to disabled individuals. To accomplish this, the City will undertake the following six specific programs.
Although the lack of proper record-keeping procedures precludes the possibility of determining if the above goals have been met. it is likely that the City has fallen substantially short. The objective set for this program was unrealistic in light of the amount of city and Sacramento Redevelopment Agency funding available between 1986 and 1991.
However, the City’s Redevelopment Agency is beginning to accumulate a substantial amount of 20 percent set aside funds which can be used for housing rehabilitation. This source of funding will allow the City to sustain its present rate of residential rehabilitation in the future, which appears to be sufficient to meet the demand. The City should continue to set goals for rehabilitation and will devote more effort to its rehabilitation program.
a.	Housing repair and rehabilitation program for low-income homeowners City-wide.
Folsom has been receiving CDBG entitlement funds from the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency for residential rehabilitation purposes since at least 1987. This program requires recipients to be lower-income households. In 1990, the City spent about $70,000 of CDBG entitlement funds on residential rehabilitation, the total amount available from SHRA.
b.	Housing maintenance and minor repair program for low-income homeowners.
There is no specific program aimed at housing maintenance and minor repair for low-income households because CDBG funds are available for this purpose. This activity should be covered
23-66
under the city’s overall housing rehabilitation program, so that it is not necessary to designate minor repair as a separate program.
c.	Emergency home repair program.
No specific program has been adopted for this purpose because emergency health and safety repairs are covered under the City’s housing rehabilitation program. There is no need for a separate program for emergency repairs.
d.	Housing retrofit program.
No specific energy conservation retrofit program has been adopted because this type of home improvement is covered under the City’s housing rehabilitation program. There is no need for a separate program for emergency repairs.
e.	Low interest loan housing repair program.
(See above CDBG program description.)
f.	Rental housing rehabilitation program.
Since 1987, the City’s Redevelopment Agency has provided financial assistance for the rehabilitation of fourteen multifamily housing units. These units are affordable to low-income households. Because this program provides a vital source of financing for rental housing in need of rehabilitation, this activity should be continued (see discussion of CDBG rehabilitation).
23.7.5	Economic Feasibility of Affordable Housing
Between 1987 and 1991, increase the supply of units affordable to very low-income households by 200 units, lower-income households by 575 units, and moderate-income households by 1,400 units.
There were no housing units constructed between 1987 and 1991 which were affordable to very low-income households. Between 1987 and 1991, as previously mentioned, 444 rental units affordable to low-income households were constructed and 542 multifamily rental units were constructed which were affordable to moderate-income households. One hundred twenty-one (121) single family homes were built between
1987	and 1991 which were affordable to moderate-income households. There are three primary reasons that no housing affordable to very low-income households was constructed:
1)	Even with density bonuses and regulatory incentives, new rental housing requires governmental subsidies to be affordable to very-low income households, either in the form of lower interest rates, partial subsidy of development cost, or direct subsidy to the very low-income renter.
2)	Because of staff limitations, the City could not devote sufficient staff time to identifying governmental subsidies that could be used in Folsom, applying for those subsidies, and seeking an interested developer to construct rental units affordable to very-low income households. Part of this work has been accomplished, however, with the preparation of a report by the Community Development Department on multifamily housing, submitted to the City Council in 1989. This report investigated options for increasing the supply of affordable housing and whether or not those options could work in Folsom to implement the
1988	General Plan.
3)	Because of the intense demand for single-family housing and because of land development costs in Folsom, it was unlikely that home builders would propose rental housing projects affordable to very low-income households without strong encouragement and active participation by the City.
To overcome these obstacles in the future, Folsom would need to assign staff time to
23-67
researching appropriate subsidies for very low-income housing, seeking a committed developer (for-profit or non-profit), and making available local incentives to improve the financial feasibility of developing such housing.
The most practical method for the City to increase the supply of very low- and low-income housing is to work with developers to use government financing and regulatory incentives to include a percentage of such units in new multifamily rental projects. Such an approach would stop short of a mandatory requirement ("inclusionary zoning") but would use a negotiated process to strongly seek commitments from home builders. By mixing low-, moderate-, and middle-income housing in new rental projects, the financial feasibility of supplying affordable housing increases and the over-concentration of low-income housing is avoided.
Substantial governmental subsidies would still be required, however, to make housing affordable to the poorest residents of Folsom.
In setting future objectives for affordable rental housing, the City should account for the financial "gap" that makes affordable housing infeasible in Folsom without substantial financial incentives.
a.	Institute a density bonus program.
The City has not formally adopted a density-bonus ordinance but follows the requirements of state law. The City has, historically, considered density bonus requests on a case-by-case basis. Developer interest in a density bonus program was not high between 1986 and 1991, however, and there have not been any requests for density bonuses. The housing market has undergone some important changes since the late 1980s. however, and developer interest in density bonuses may warrant the adoption of an ordinance within the next year. The lack of interest by the development community can be attributed to homebuilders’
focus on the upper end. "move-up" segment of the single-family market between 1987 and 1991. For the predominant type of housing constructed during this period, density bonuses were not of concern.
The interest in affordable housing for which density bonuses would be requested may be on the increase, however, as the upper end of the market becomes saturated and home builders look for other opportunities. The housing recession, which began in 1990, has forced many builders to reorient their product to the first-time homebuyer. To sell such units, builders must emphasize affordability, and density bonuses may become an important consideration in reducing housing development costs.
The City could also become more aggressive in searching out interested home builders to construct affordable rental housing. The City should not, therefore, abandon the concept of adopting a density bonus program tailored to its own needs.
b.	Coordinate the issuance of tax-exempt bonds.
The City has not issued tax-exempt bonds due to the lack of available City staff time to coordinate the necessary tasks preceding the issuance of bonds and the absence of specific development projects for which the bonds could be used. Tax-exempt financing represents an attractive alternative for home builders interested in affordable housing, and so the City should not abandon this option. To increase the likelihood of success in the future, the City should first identify one or more builders interested in using tax-exempt financing for affordable housing projects, apply for an allocation to issue bonds, and then determine the most feasible approach to the use of that allocation (i.e.. issuing bonds through a City-sponsored program only, forming a joint powers agreement with another jurisdiction to share costs and expertise, or issuing mortgage credit certificates in place of bonds).
23-68
c.	Actively seek builder participation in California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) programs.
The City has not aggressively pursued the use of CHFA loans because the purchase cost of housing in Folsom is substantially higher than the maximum home purchase price currently allowed for CHFA loans in Sacramento County ($126,200). If the purchase price of homes in Folsom begins to approach the CHFA limits, the City will reevaluate the CHFA possibilities. One method of improving the possibility of using CHFA programs is to seek home builder commitments for less costly forms of ownership housing, such as townhouses, condominiums, and small lot single family homes.
d.	Actively seek builder or nonprofit agency participation in stateZfederal programs for elderly and family affordable rental housing.
The City has not done this because of the lack of available City staff time and the absence of interested developers to construct such housing. The probability of constructing affordable rental housing for elderly persons and families could increase if the City were to take a more aggressive posture in its development negotiations and offer regulatory and financial incentives to increase the financial feasibility of producing such housing. However, the success of such an approach will depend on the interest of home builders and whether there are other home building opportunities that can avoid the complications of developing affordable housing.
One such developer, FPI Real Estate, has expressed an interest in developing an elderly housing project in Folsom, but will require City support in making use available local, state, and/or federal resources to help finance such a project.
e.	Seek the participation of one or more large corporate employers to provide low-cost financing and/or a land-buy-down subsidy for
the development of housing affordable to Iower-and moderate-income residents.
City staff recently contacted the Intel Corporation to investigate the possibility of enlisting the company’s assistance in providing affordable housing for their employees. Intel responded positively, but no specific plans have been developed. A substantial amount of City staff time would need to be allocated to this project to achieve an agreement with Intel. This program should be continued, as there is a strong possibility that the City could successfully negotiate some form of participation by Intel and other large corporate employers in Folsom in the production of housing affordable to its workers.
23.7	6. Preserve Mobilehome Parks
Maintain the existing zoning/General Plan mobilehome park designations and provide technical assistance to interested mobilehome park owners who wish to convert to cooperative ownership.
The General Plan adopted in 1988 maintained the land use designation allowing for mobilehomes (designated as Single Family High Density/Mobilehomes). Since the City staff does not have to expertise to assist mobilehome park residents who wish to convert to cooperative ownership, these residents are referred to special interest groups that are actively involved in this area.
23.7.7	Mortgage Revenue Bonds
Participate in future County issues of single-family mortgage revenue bonds.
The City passes a resolution each year declaring that the City will participate in this program. However, staff has been unable to ascertain whether or not the County has made any Mortgage Revenue Bond funds available in the
23-69
Folsom area; To increase the probability that such funds would be used in Folsom, the City could enter into a joint-powers agreement with Sacramento County to apply for an allocation and to issue bonds or mortgage credit certificates. The City is not in a position, at present, to issue bonds on its own for affordable housing, but may be able to jointly issue bonds with one or more other agencies. The implement this program, the City would need to recruit interested builders before the bonds are issued.
23.7.8	Condominium Conversion Ordinance
Prepare an ordinance governing the conversion of apartment buildings to condominium units.
The City’s General Plan contains a policy regarding condominium conversions, and the City has not adopted an ordinance to implement this policy. There have not been any requests to convert apartments to condominiums, however.
23.7.9	Housing Assistance Program Referrals
Continue to provide interested individuals with information and referrals on housing assistance programs.
The City has, historically, relied on the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency and other community organizations in Folsom to make information available on Section 8 assistance, federally assisted below-market-rate rental units, weatherization programs, and housing rehabilitation programs. For the housing rehabilitation program managed by the City, the Folsom has made information available directly to the public. Because of Folsom’s distance from the Housing Authority offices, the City could better serve its residents if made information from the Housing Authority available at City Hall.
23.7.10	Fair Housing Law Compliance
Maintain information on fair housing laws, refer housing discrimination complaints to the Sacramento County Human Rights and Fair Housing Commission or the California Fair Employment and Housing Department, and organize a fair housing workshop.
The City refers housing discrimination complaints to the appropriate agencies, but the City has not organized a fair housing workshop. Interviews with several City employees indicate that there have not been any housing discrimination complaints made to the City since 1986. For this reason, the City has not made the availability of housing discrimination information at City Hall a high priority. If housing discrimination becomes a problem in the future, City staff will take action to organize a workshop. The need for such a workshop is questionable at this time, however. The City could provide information to interested individuals on fair housing laws. To do so, it could rely on information available from the Sacramento County Housing and Redevelopment Agency, or from community-based housing organizations that specialize handling discrimination complaints.
23.7.11	Urban Development Policies
Continue to implement Folsom’s urban development policies and standards.
The City continuously enforces these standards as part of the development review process. The City has been successful in increasing the quality of project designs and the environmental sensitivity of development proposals through its policies and standards.
23.7.12	Monitor Employment Growth
Report to the Planning Commission and City Council at least every two years.
23-70
A report was made to the Planning Commission and City Council 1988 in the form of the General Plan Update, in 1990 in the form of a report entitled Housing and Population Capacity Analysis For the City of Folsom, and in July 1991. Each of these reports addressed the subject of employment growth and the population growth and housing demand that could be expected as a result of job creation. The City should continued to periodically evaluate the relationship between jobs and housing as part of the Housing Element review.
23.7.13	Annual Review of Housing Element
Review the Housing Element annually to monitor the City’s progress in implementing its housing programs and report to the Planning Commission and City Council.
The City did not implement this action in the past, mainly due to the lack Of available City staff time, but is now monitoring its progress annually as required by state law. To carry out this review, the City will need to allocate staff time to this activity and make the Housing Element evaluation a higher priority.
23.7.14	Second Unit Ordinance
Adopt an ordinance allowing second units in single-family zones subject to specific criteria.
The City’s General Plan contains a policy regarding second units, but the City has not adopted an ordinance for second units, per se. The City’s Zoning Code allows accessory structures without kitchens designed for human occupancy. There have not been any requests to build second units. The City will adopt an ordinance if there is a request, but the lack of City staff time needed to prepare an ordinance precludes this from being completed until it actually becomes an issue. At the present time, therefore, the standards set forth in state law would regulate the construction of second units in the City.
23.7.15	Permit Review Process
Study the City’s planning and building permit process to determine if there are process changes that could be made to improve the handling of development applications.
This is an ongoing process. Over the past several years, the following improvements have been made in the Community Development and Building departments:
1)	development of informational materials for public use to help speed up the process;
2)	concurrent processing (Building and Community Development departments can process applications concurrently) has been implemented;
3)	the building permit process has been computerized;
4)	a "fee committee" was established to ensure compliance (facilitates project completion for larger projects); and
5)	development fees are reviewed regularly to ensure that they reflect actual costs incurred by the City.
With these improvements in the development review process, the City is able to handle a higher volume of development proposals more efficiently. The City will continue to monitor its development review processes to evaluate if further changes are warranted.
23.7.16	Identification of Possible Locations for Emergency Housing Shelters
The section of this Element which addresses the homeless population discusses the reasons why Folsom does not currently need emergency housing shelters for the homeless. Local sendee agencies who deal with homeless issues do not believe that there is a significant homeless population in Folsom. For this reason, the City
23-71
has not made the identification of sites for homeless facilities are high priority. Until such a need is evident, the City will not attempt to designate any particular locations for homeless facilities. The City will, however, review its zoning requirements to ensure that a homeless facility could be sited within the City should the need arise.
23.8	DEFINITIONS
23.8.1	Affordability
Homeowner Households
For households purchasing their units, maximum housing costs should not exceed the maximum percentage of gross income allowed by mortgage lenders in qualifying home buyers. This is estimated to be in the 30 percent to 35 percent range. For the purposes of this Element, 30 percent is used as the maximum amount.
Renter Household
Very low- and low-income households should not spend more than 30% of their gross income on housing costs. This figure has been adopted by the federal and state governments and is being implemented in their housing programs.
It has been determined that moderate- and above moderate-income households do not require rental housing assistance and should pay whatever they decide is appropriate for rent.
23.8.2	Housing Costs and Responsibilities
Home Ownership
Housing costs include principal, interest, taxes, and insurance payments paid by the homeowner. In evaluating the affordability of ownership housing, however, one should also consider the income tax savings that homeowners realize from
the deduction of mortgage interest and property taxes from the calculation of taxable income.
Renter
Housing costs include payments for rent and utilities.
23.8.3	Housing Types
Single-family Detached
One housing unit per lot, serving the needs of one family.
Single-family Attached
One housing unit per lot. serving the needs of one family, but sharing a common wall with a single-family attached home on an adjacent lot.
Duplex
Two single family-attached homes on one lot.
Multi-family
Housing complexes consisting of more than three units per lot.
23.8.4	Income Categories
Very Low
Household income is 50% or less of the median income for households of similar size.
Low
Household income is between 50% and 80% of median income for households of similar size.
Moderate
Household income is between 80% and 120% of median income for households of similar size.
23-72
Above Moderate
Household income is greater than 120% of median income for households of similar size.
23.83 Median Income
Median income, the most commonly used measure for federal and state housing programs, is that level of income at which 50% of the households earn more and 50% earn below the annual dollar amount determined to be the median. The Housing Element uses federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) income figures (as published by the state Department of Housing and Community Development) for the Sacramento Metropolitan Area to determine median income levels for Folsom. The HUD figures are updated approximately every 18 months.
23.9	HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
This section of the Housing Element contains the City’s goals, policies, and proposed programs implement the City’s housing program. The goals and policies reflect the needs identified previously in the Element. Each proposed implementation program contains a description of the intended action, an explanation of the agency responsible for administering the program, possible sources of funding (if applicable), the timeframe during which the program would take effect, and anticipated results. Whenever possible, the anticipated results have been expressed in quantified terms.
The programs contained in this Element are based on the philosophy that the City’s proper role is one of facilitator of the private sector and nonprofit housing corporations. When necessary to meet low- and moderate-income housing needs, Folsom will use its redevelopment tax increment housing set-aside funds, provide regulatory
incentives, and use available state and federal programs. In the past, the City’s role has been severely limited by a lack of local staffing and financial resources to accomplish its housing agenda.
During the period covered by the prior Housing Element the City had available only a small amount of redevelopment tax increment funds for housing program. The small amount of money available was directed to housing rehabilitation in the blighted area identified in Redevelopment Plan (the Montrose-Talisman area). A number of duplexes and small apartment buildings have been rehabilitated in this area.
Beginning with the 1992-93 fiscal year, the City will be able to institute a formal housing program by dedicating staff time on an on-going basis to housing programs and by expanding the use of local redevelopment funds. The availability of staff time for housing program implementation will allow the City to take advantage of state and federal programs and other housing strategies which were formerly beyond the City’s capabilities.
23.9.1	Assumptions
1)	The proposed policies and programs are based upon the assumption that Folsom’s proper role in the development of housing is one of facilitator in the development of housing.
2)	The City will pursue a planning role for housing construction which provides a favorable regulatory environment for housing.
3)	Financial assistance from state and federal agencies will be pursued.
4)	The City will use redevelopment housing set aside funds to support affordable housing programs.
23-73
5)	The City will encourage interested builders. to work with the City on alternative housing developments that will promote affordability for low- and moderate-income households.
6)	Whether or not appropriate amounts and types of housing are constructed, however, will depend primarily on the decisions of home builders and non-profit housing corporations. The City, itself, is not in the business of building housing.
7)	In developing its proposed housing strategy, the City has decided not to pursue a mandatory inclusionary housing program, required land dedications for affordable housing, or required contributions to a housing trust fund in lieu of building affordable housing. The City’s reasons are as follows:
a.	Folsom does not believe it is in a position to dictate builders’ responses to the housing demand.
b.	Given the reduced level of state and federal subsidies to support affordable housing development, the City does not want affordable housing units in an inclusionary program to be subsidized by higher prices/costs on market-rate units. This internal development subsidy could substantially affect the availability of housing affordable to moderate- and middle-income households.
c.	The City does not want builders to offset the costs associated with land dedications or contributions to a housing trust fund by raising their prices on market-rate housing.
d.	Given the. great variation in financial, environmental, and locational considerations among residential development proposals, the City does not believe it is appropriate or desirable to require a fixed percentage of affordable housing in all new residential developments.
e.	The City believes that, in the long run, it can achieve a reasonable balance between the needs of its low- and moderate-income residents and the ability and willingness of the private market to- respond to those needs through voluntary approaches.
For a full discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of voluntary versus mandatory approaches to providing affordable housing, see the Appendix. "SUMMARY OF APPROACHES TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT'. As Folsom monitors its progress annually in meeting its quantified objectives, it may re-examine the costs and benefits of mandatory affordable housing programs.
23.9.2	HOUSING ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 18
To provide for the City’s regional share of new housing for all income groups.
POLICY 18.1
Maintain sufficient land zoned at a range of residential densities to accommodate the City’s regional share of housing.
POLICY 18.2
Identify sites that are suitable for multifamily housing and residential redevelopment.
POLICY 183
To encourage home builders to use multifamily-designated land for the highest allowed density housing consistent with the City’s low- and moderate-income housing needs.
23-74
GOAL 19
To encourage the provision of affordable housing.
POLICY 19.1
The City will make use of state and federal programs for which it would be the applicant, and work with non-profit and for-profit developers to make use of those programs for which the developer must be the applicant. As one of its first implementation actions, the City will identify available, funded programs, determine which of those programs could be used in Folsom (based on the purpose and eligibility requirements for each program), and determine the most appropriate public agency or private entity to take primary7 responsibility for applying for funding.
POLICY 192
The City will also investigate the feasibility of issuing tax-exempt bonds or mortgage credit certificates to provide low-interest financing for affordable housing.
POLICY 192
The City will provide density bonuses to home builders proposing to include at least 10% very low-income housing or 20% low-income housing in their residential developments.
POLICY 19.4
The City will work with non-profit organizations, to identify potential projects and sources of funding to develop low- and moderate-income housing.
POLICY 192
The City will identify surplus government property that could be used for construction of housing affordable to low- and moderate-income
households and encourage interested developers to make use of such land.
POLICY 19.6
The City will develop a plan for the use of redevelopment tax increment funds set-aside for the construction and rehabilitation of housing for low- and moderate-income households.
GOAL 20
To improve the existing supply of housing
POLICY 20.1
Provide property owners with assistance to inspect and identify code violations in residential buildings.
POLICY 20.2
Continue to apply for state and federal assistance for housing rehabilitation for low-income households. Rental housing that is repaired with government assistance shall remain affordable to low-income households for a specified period of time.
POLICY 202
Require the abatement or demolition of substandard housing that is not economically feasible to repair and which represents a health and safety threat.
POLICY 20.4
Seek, through code enforcement, the private rehabilitation of substandard dwelling units and provide financial assistance, when available, to owners of dwelling units occupied by low-income households. In applying this policy, the City shall seek to avoid the displacement of low-income households.
23-75
POLICY 20.5
Periodically survey housing conditions in the to maintain a current data base on housing repair needs.
POLICY 20.6
Allocate a portion of the City’s redevelopment tax increment set-aside funds for preserving substandard housing occupied by lower-income households.
GOAL 21
To ensure equal housing opportunity
POLICY 21.1
The City will provide information and referral to individuals with fair housing complaints.
GOAL 22
To promote energy conservation
POLICY 22.1
Continue to implement state energy-efficient standards.
POLICY 22.2
Include energy conservation guidelines as part of the development standards for the specific plan area.
POLICY 22J
Provide weatherization assistance to low-income households.
GOAL 22-A
To promote the preservation of historic residences
POLICY 22-A.l
The City will encourage the preservation of residential buildings with historic or architectural value.
GOAL 22-B
To develop a plan for the use of redevelopment housing set aside funds.
POLICY 22-B.l
The City will prepare a plan to guide the use of redevelopment tax-increment funds set-aside to support low- and moderate-income housing programs.
23.9.3	PROGRAMS
PROGRAM 1 Provide Adequate Sites for Housing
Description. The City will continue its planning programs to accommodate new housing development as expeditiously as possible. Given the financial constraints discussed above over which the City has no control, and little ability to mitigate, it is unlikely that 100% of the needs of lower-income households can be met even with a concerted effort by the City to work with for-profit and non-profit housing developers to use a number of techniques to supply affordable housing. The City’s quantified objectives for low- and moderate-income housing are discussed in the following section.
The City will accomplish this program through an annual review of the composition of the housing stock, the types of dwelling units under
23-76
construction or expected to be under construction during the following year, and the anticipated mix, based .on development proposals approved, or under review, by the City of housing ■ to be developed during the remainder of the period covered by the Housing Element This analysis will be compared to the City’s remaining "fair share" housing need to determine if any changes in land use policy are warranted.
The City contains approximately 1,088 acres of undeveloped land designated for single-family residential use and 322 acres of for multifamily see (excluding approved development projects and projects presently under construction).
Folsom’s allocation between 1989 and 1996 is 7,559 dwelling units, of which 2,572 units were constructed between 1989 and 1991 (see Table 8). The remaining need through 1996 is 1,905 very low-income dwelling units, 1,038 low-income dwelling units, 924 moderate-income dwelling units, and 1,220 above moderate-income dwelling units. Folsom has adequate vacant land (including land in developments presently under construction) to accommodate 100% of its SACOG regional housing needs (see Tables 23-26).
The City believes that its General Plan and zoning densities are sufficient, in combination with density bonuses, to provide adequate densities for housing for all income groups. Adequate zoning densities will not, by themselves, guarantee the economic feasibility of producing affordable housing, however.
There may be financial constraints that would prohibit home builders from being able to address the needs of low- and moderate-income households, even with the residential densities permitted by the City. For example, the ability of the private sector to provide housing affordable to these groups could be substantially affected by interest rates, federal tax-policies and incentives for lower-income housing, the availability of state and federal housing development and operation subsidies, and housing development costs. With
the exception of housing development costs, the City has no control over these other factors that affect the ability of home builders to deliver housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
The City can affect housing development costs, in part, through its zoning policies, its development permit procedures, its subdivision and development standards, its requirements for public services and facilities for new development, and the methods it adopts to finance those services and facilities. These aspects of the City’s influence on development costs were discussed in Chapter IV, Housing Constraints.
Administration/Funding. Community Development Department and City Council.
Timeframe. Current and ongoing.
Expected Results. Periodic updating of the City’s vacant land use inventory with an annual comparison of needed units by income/density category and remaining vacant land by General Plan/zoning category. This regular updating and comparison may lead to a periodic refinement of City’s land use regulations to reflect changes in housing need.
PROGRAM 2. Sites for Multifamily Rental Housing
Description. Although the City cannot control the market conditions conducive to the production of multifamily housing, the City can, through its General Plan policies and development permit procedures, ensure that land designated for multifamily use is not prematurely committed to single-family development and that the total development potential for affordable housing is maintained. Should a developer propose singlefamily housing on multifamily-designated land, the City will undertake one or more of the following actions to mitigate the loss of that land for
23-77
potential use for housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households:
1)	Determine whether there is sufficient remaining multifamily-zoned land to meet the City’s low- and moderate-income housing needs and, if so, allow the project for single family use (the burden would be on the applicant to document the sufficiency of remaining multifamily-zoned land);
2)	Find that the project will have negative implications for the supply of land for affordable housing, and request the project proponent to include affordable housing in the development plan;
3)	Find that the project will have negative implications for the supply of land for affordable housing, and request the project proponent to work with the City in developing affordable housing on another site;
4)	Instigate a rezone to multifamily use of undeveloped single family-zoned or other land elsewhere in the City to offset the loss of multifamily land; or
5)	Seek to ensure that developers of other multifamily-zoned sites submit proposals with densities that are closer to the maximum allowed under the General Plan to assure that the total number of potentially affordable multifamily units to be developed can be maintained.
One of the most critical needs in the City, as identified in a staff report to the City Council (see Multifamily Housing Report prepared for the City of Folsom in 1990 by Loretta McMaster), is for affordable multifamily rental housing and large family housing. This includes both rental apartments for lower-income households and ownership housing for moderate-income households. Nearly 60% of the City’s remaining housing needs between 1991 and 1996, according to the SACOG housing allocation plan, is for housing affordable to low-income households.
Most of these. low-income households cannot afford, are not expected to be able to purchase, single family homes or condominiums, even with the programs included in this Element which seek to reduce housing costs.
The provision of adequate sites for multifamily rental housing is included in this Element as a separate program from sites in general because state housing law imposes an affirmative obligation on local governments to designate sufficient land to meet their housing needs, including sites for multifamily rental housing.
The City should make the most effective use of these sites it has designated for multifamily use to promote the construction of housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
The documentation of the sufficiency of remaining land to meet the City’s housing needs would be based on the City’s annual review of its Housing Element objectives, as updated by information provided by an applicant for a rezone.
Multifamily rental housing does not typically provide dwelling units for large families, and so the City will encourage that a percentage of new multifamily dwelling units contain three and four bedrooms. The City will require the provision of three- and four-bedroom units in family housing projects that it participates in through state and federal funding.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will carry out this program as part of its on-going planning activities.
Timeframe. July 1991 to June 1996.
Expected Results. Designation of sufficient land to accommodate 3,962 units of multifamily housing, including rental apartments, townhouses, condominiums, and single family attached dwelling units. The City will monitor the remaining vacant land annually to determine
Folsom’s ongoing ability to meet is housing needs and whether any changes in land use are
23-78
warranted. It is expected that at market rates, 150 units could be developed at costs that are affordable to low-income households and 400 units would be affordable to moderate-income households. Whether or not the full 3,962 dwelling units can be developed will depend on market factors beyond the City’s control. The City monitor the availability of multifamily-designated land through its annual Housing Element review.
PROGRAM 3. Provision of Public Services
Description. The City will continue to plan for and develop financing plans to finance the provision of public services and facilities that are needed to serve new residential development. These include streets, intersection and interchange improvements, a new bridge across the American River, water and sewer facilities, additional water allocations, drainage facilities, emergency services, educational services and facilities, recreational services and facilities, and general municipal governmental services.
The City has employed, and will continue to employ, a number of methods for identifying needed services and facilities. These include the preparation of specific plans to govern the development of large areas of land designated for a mixture of uses, the preparation of financing plans to accompany the public facilities and service components of specific plans, the preparation and periodic updating of a city-wide Capital Improvements Plan. In establishing minimum standards for public services and facilities, the City will seek to balance the need for assuring that residents of new development enjoy a high quality of public sendees and facilities with the need to mitigate the cost-effects of public service and facility requirements on the ability of home builders to provide affordable housing.
To finance needed services and facilities, the City will seek to reduce the up-front housing costs impacts as much as possible by charging
development fees only for the cost of those services and facilities which must be in place prior to, or shortly after, the completion of a development and for which long-term financing options are unavailable. Whenever possible, the City will seek financing solutions that allow costs to be stretched over a period of ten or more years. Among the long-term financing options are the creation of special assessment districts with the power to issue bonds that would be repaid by annual assessments levied on properties in the district based on the level of benefit received from the services and facilities. Mechanisms that allow the costs of needed infrastructure to be financed at lower municipal borrowing rates, rather than at the home loan interest rate, will ultimately reduce the cost to the consumer.
Administration/Funding, Community Development Department and Public Works Department will be responsible for identifying needed services and facilities. Finance Department and City Manager’s Office would be responsible for coordinating any City participation in the financing (issuing bonds, conducting elections to establish an assessment district, etc.).
Timeframe. July 1991 to June 1996.
Expected Results, Provision of adequate services and facilities to accommodate City’s regional share of housing needs.
PROGRAM 4. Sites for Special Group Housing
Description. There are a number of special population groups which the state has identified as in need of a residential living environment for their proper physical and mental fulfillment. These groups include mobility, developmentally, and mentally impaired individuals; elderly residents in need of 24-hour care; persons with mental illnesses; and individuals recovering from substance abuse. Group homes of six individuals serving these and other special population groups
23-79
will be allowed as a residential use in any residential zone in the City.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will review applications for such homes as part of its development permit processing responsibility. The purpose of the review is to assure that proposed group homes meet state and federal criteria for siting. The City will continue to apply a conditional use permit process for group homes of more than six persons.
Timeframe. July 1991 to June 1996, and on-going.
Expected Results. No quantifiable estimate is available, as the number of individuals benefitted will depend on the interest by public agencies or non-profit groups operating such facilities. In qualitative terms, a more enriched living environment will be provided to these special population groups.
PROGRAM 5. Housing for Older Adults
Description: The City will cooperate with nonprofit and for-profit housing developers who propose to construct housing for older adults by providing assistance in applying for governmental funding and offering density bonuses and other local incentives (see affordable housing programs under Goal Two). There are a number of types of housing which could meet the needs of older adults, including rental housing apartments designed specifically for seniors, group homes, congregate care facilities, and mobilehome park/manufactured housing subdivision with recreational facilities for older adults.
The City currently allows housing development which is specifically designed for the lifestyle, physical, and medical needs of older adults in multifamily zones. There is a need for additional housing to meet the needs of this age group, particularly those who are low-income. The number of City residents most likely to need
special housing accommodations because of age-related physical and economic conditions has nearly doubled since 1980 and is projected to increase further during the 1990s.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will be responsible for project review and consistency with development standards.
Timeframe. July 1991 to June 1996.
Expected Results. Depends on development proposals submitted to City.
PROGRAM 6. Housing for Single Parents With Children
Description. In its participation in housing programs, the City will investigate state and federal programs, and activities by non-profit housing sponsors, that can address the affordable housing requirements of single mothers as well as their child care needs. This program includes two specific actions:
1)	Encouragement of development proposals that integrate affordable housing and child care services.
2)	Review of the City’s Zoning Code to ensure that City requirements do not overly restrict the location of child care services.Single parents with children have difficulty in arranging child care that is conveniently located with respect to work and their place of residence.
Single mothers, in particular, have the greatest difficulty in affording housing and child care because the majority of single mother are low-income (this group also has the highest incidence of impoverishment).
Administration/Funding, The Community Development Department will be responsible for Zoning Code and development review. Although
23-80
the City will not impose a requirement that a developer construct a child care facility, it will request that developers include in their proposals spaces in proposed buildings or sites on which such facilities could be developed or leased by a child care operator.
Timeframe. Cooperate in the development of one or more projects which integrate affordable housing and child care services between 1993 and 1996.
Expected Results. Increase in affordable housing and child care services and options for single mothers.
PROGRAM 7. Density Bonuses and Other Incentives
Description. Density bonuses provide a developer with additional dwelling units in exchange for the provision of housing affordable to lower-income households and specified senior citizen developments. State law provides that if a developer proposes to include at least 20% of the dwelling units in a project at rents/prices that are affordable to low-income households (households earning 50%-80% of median income) or 10% of the dwelling units in a project at rents/prices that are affordable to very low-income households (50% or less of median income), the local jurisdiction must permit a 25% density bonus and offer other development incentives.
In addition, the City must offer at least one economic or regulatory incentive that will help to reduce the development cost of the affordable housing project. Examples of incentives are financial contributions to development costs, development permit or fee waivers or reductions, expedited permit processing, allowance of costsaving alternative development standards, application on a developer’s behalf for state or federal subsidies, and the issuance of tax-exempt bonds to provide low-cost financing.
The City will offer a 25% density bonus for any project in which at least 20% of the units are affordable to low-income households and/or at least- 10% of the units are affordable to very low-income households. In addition, the City will offer one or more of the following incentives to projects meeting the above criteria:
1)	fee reductions, the amount of the reduction depending on the financial need of the project to maintain the affordability of dwelling units,
2)	priority permit processing,
3)	low-interest financing (if available as a result of a successful tax-exempt bond issue),
4)	a contribution from the City’s redevelopment fund consistent with a plan for the use of such funding,
5)	the use of alternative subdivision standards that will result in cost savings to be passed on to the occupants of a new development, provided such alternative standards can achieve a similar level of design and service performance as standard subdivision requirements, or
6)	the enlisting of financing from private lenders under the federal Community Reinvestment Act.
PROGRAM 8. Density Bonuses for Moderate-Income Housing.
Description. If a developer proposes to provide at least 25% of the dwelling units in a project at costs affordable to moderate-income households (80% to 120% of median income), the City would consider a 25% density bonus. This is an option the City would grant on a case-by-case basis based on the need for moderate-income housing, and is not required by state law.
Affordable density bonus units granted under this program must contain affordable guarantees.
23-81
The City will adopt an ordinance setting forth affordability requirements for density bonus units. For Programs 7 and 8:
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will implement the provisions of program 7 and 8 as part of its planning and development permit processing responsibilities. Financial and regulatory incentives will be approved by the City Council and the Redevelopment Agency on a case-by-case basis.
Timeframe. Approve density bonuses on an on-going basis. Adopt density bonus ordinance by January 1993.
Expected Results. Development of 250 moderate-income, 350 low-income, and 105 very low-income density bonus units. Units to be provided in conjunction with other programs that provide financial incentives or subsidies for affordable housing. Although the City did not have a density bonus ordinance in place between 1988 and 1992, the General Plan policies for approving the high end of the density range for senior, low-, and moderate-income housing functions as the equivalent of a density bonus, and is more generous than the 25% density bonus required by state law.
PROGRAM 9. Pursue Funding Under State and Federal Programs
Description. There are a number of state and federal programs which provide low-cost financing or subsidies for the production of low- and moderate-income housing, although funding levels have decreased substantially over the past decade. Certain programs require an application and participation by a local public agency; other programs are for use by non-profit housing corporations and housing authorities, and the remaining programs require application and direct participation by a private developer.
9(a) Folsom will- provide assistance to non-profit and private housing developers to make use of other programs which require their application and participation. The use of the programs listed below is predicated upon reaching agreements with interested non-profit or private developers to construct low- and/or moderate-income housing.
Programs which the City or the Redevelopment Agency may pursue directly are:
a.	State Predevelopment Loan Program
b.	State Rental Housing Construction Program
c.	Development Assistance Program
d.	Community Development Block Grant Program
e.	Federal loan guarantees for senior and handicapped housing developments
f.	Federal loan guarantees for low-income family housing developments
g.	HOME program (a new federal program)
These are the most readily available programs at the present time. Should the City identity other state or federal programs for which it is eligible, these other sources of funds will be considered as well.
9(b) There are a number of other programs which provide direct subsidies, mortgage insurance, or low-interest loans to non-profit housing sponsors. Agencies providing this assistance include the California Department of Housing and Community Development, the California Housing Finance Agency, the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the U. S. Farmers Home Administration. Included in these programs are:
23-82
1)	Technical assistance grants for project feasibility and development
2)	Subsidies for shared housing for seniors, congregate housing, senior housing, self-help housing, transitional housing for homeless individuals, and other targeted groups
3)	Mobilehome park purchase and rehabilitation
4)	Project loans and loan insurance
5)	Federal funds for the acquisition, conversion, rehabilitation, or construction of publicly owned or managed housing (funding is extremely limited)
9(c) The City will encourage interested non-profit and private developers, and other private entities to make use of these other programs. These other private entities could include major employers in Folsom who are interested in working with developers to finance affordable housing development for their workers.
The City will also cooperate with for-profit or non-profit developers by lending City support to, or local assistance in preparing funding applications, grant density bonuses, and apply for complementary programs that can help reduce land or site development costs for such projects, providing that development proposals are consistent with Housing Element.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department and the Redevelopment Agency will coordinate their efforts to make use of available state and federal programs, and to solicit participation by non-profit and private developers. The City will also cooperate with the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency for identifying suitable sites in Folsom for at least one small, scattered-site public housing development should additional funding be available from the federal government.
Timeframe. July 1991 and on-going.
Expected Results. Provision of 125 very low-income dwelling units, 250 low-income dwelling units, and 250 moderate-income dwelling units. These objectives are based on the following assumptions:
1)	That the' City can successfully apply for state or federal funding (HCD or HUD) for two rental housing development projects that will include at least 10% of the dwelling units affordable to very low-income households, at least 25% of the units affordable to low-income households, and at least 25% of the units affordable to moderate-income households.
2)	That the City will be successful in soliciting participation by developers in at least four CHFA-financed development projects (two ownership and two multifamily rental) in which a percentage of the units will be affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
3)	That the City, will be successful in working with a non-profit housing developer to develop at least two small scattered-site rental housing projects for low- and moderate-income households.
4)	That the City will be able to "piggy-back" financial incentives under its density bonus program and to provide financial assistance under its redevelopment tax-increment set-aside plan.
PROGRAM 10. Tax-Exempt Bond Financing
Description. Public agencies can issue revenue bonds, the interest on which is exempt from income taxation. Because the bonds are issued through a public agency, the investors pay no income tax on the interest earned, and the bonds carry a lower interest rate than would otherwise be available to the borrower. Housing financed through tax-exempt bonds can be of two types:
23-83
1)	Ownership housing, typically single-family homes, in which income qualified first-time home buyers receive a discounted mortgage interest rate.
2)	Multifamily rental housing, in which the project owner receives below-market-interest-rate financing in exchange for reserving a specified percentage of dwelling units for low- and/or moderate-income households.
To use this program, a public agency must first locate an interested developer, apply for and receive an allocation from the State Mortgage Revenue Bond Allocation Committee, and locate a bond underwriter to assist in the issuance of the bonds. The process typically takes one year to 18 months from the initial application to the availability of funds for project development/financing.
The City will pursue applications for the authority to issue two tax-exempt bonds. In the event the City determines that it would be infeasible to issue bonds, it will pursue the alternative option of mortgage credit certificates, which may be issued to qualified borrowers. Mortgage credit certificates provide tax credits to borrowers, which have the equivalent effect of low-interest-rate financing. One requirement of the program is that the applicant make a deposit of 1/2 of one percent of the bond allocation being requested.
The City will seek an interested developer to take advantage of the mortgage revenue bond program and explore the cost and feasibility of issuing tax-exempt bonds. Because the size of a likely project would be small, it may not be financially feasible for the City to issue tax exempt bonds individually. In such a case, the City would look for one or more other interested public agencies to form a joint powers authority to issue bonds jointly.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department would work with the Folsom Redevelopment Agency in applying for a
bond allocation. The Community Development Department would take the lead in locating an interested developer. The City Manager and City Attorney would take the lead in setting up necessary legal mechanisms to issue and administer the bonds. Funding for the required deposit would have' to be provided by the developer, and administrative costs of issuing the bonds could be covered through arbitrage (the difference between the interest rate paid to bond holders and the interest rate charged to the developer or home buyers).
Timeframe. Determine feasibility and locate interested developer(s), if any, for potential bond issues in 1993 and 1995. Develop affordable housing projects in 1994 and 1996. (The City would not pursue this program until one or more interested developers can be identified).
Expected Results. Finance at least two projects with tax-exempt bonds, or provide mortgage credit certificates for borrowers in at least one project. The City will specify a minimum percentage of dwelling units to be affordable to low- and/or moderate-income households. Objective is for 25 very low-income, and 75 low-income, and 150 moderate-income housing units.
PROGRAM 11. Community Reinvestment Act
Description. Folsom will identify financial institutions operating in the City that fall under the requirements of this act and request that these institutions develop specific' programs for providing financing for low- and moderate-income housing.
The Community Reinvestment Act directs federal regulatory and deposit insurance agencies to encourage the institutions they regulate or insure to assist in meeting the credit needs of their communities, including low- and moderate-income needs. Federal agencies are supposed to evaluate compliance with the intent of this act when reviewing applications by financial
23-84
institutions for charters, new branches, mergers, relocations, and other regulated transactions. Until recently, the provisions of this act were not widely implemented.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will be responsible for assisting public agencies, non-profit organizations, and private developers seeking commitments from financial institutions willing to assist in the financing of affordable housing projects.
Timeframe. January 1, 1993 and ongoing.
Expected Results. Financing of one or more .affordable housing project(s) at favorable terms. Objectives for this program are included in programs 1-4 above.
PROGRAM 12. Permit and Development Fee Reductions
Description. Development and building permit fees represent a substantial portion of the cost of housing. The City will decide, on a case-by-case basis, to waive or reduce fees for affordable housing projects. This decision will be based, in part, on the availability of alternatives means of financing the services or facilities for which the fees are being charged, and the ability of the City to absorb the revenue loss from fee waivers or reductions. The City will also request waivers or reductions from other agencies which have independent authority to charge fees.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will recommend to the City Council fee waivers or reductions on a case-by-case basis. The Council will be responsible for approving fee waivers or reductions for those fees over which it has jurisdiction.
Timeframe. On going, and reviewed on a case by case basis.
-Expected Results: Cost savings for affordable housing projects.
PROGRAM 13. Second Units in Single-Family Neighborhoods.
Description. The City will permit second units in single-family neighborhoods according to the requirements of state law. The City will implement the second unit standards in state law until it adopts it own second unit ordinance.
This program is designed to allow additional affordable housing opportunities in neighborhoods in which lot and dwelling unit sizes are sufficiently large to permit the creation of small second unit. City standards for the location and design of such units will ensure that homes with second units are not readily distinguishable from other homes in a single-family neighborhood.
The adoption of a second unit ordinance will encourage the creation of second units in two ways: 1) it will provide an established process with standards by which interested residents can construct such units, and 2) it will provide a process by which units created prior to the adoption of an ordinance, without the proper permits, can be brought into compliance with City standards.
Administration/Funding. Community Development Department and Building Department to review applications and ensure compliance with City standards.
Timeframe. Implementation of state standards current and on-going. City will adopt second unit ordinance by July 1, 1993.
Expected Results, Creation of 25 dwelling units, 10 affordable to very low- and 15 affordable to low-income households.
23-85
PROGRAM 14. Voter Authorization for Specified Rental Housing Programs
Description. The City will request Folsom residents to authorize the use of local, state, and federal funds for a sufficient number and types of dwelling units to meet that portion of its very low-and low-income quantified objectives that can only be met by government funded programs that are covered by the state constitutional requirement for voter approval.
The State Constitution requires that local voters authorize the use of public funds for certain publicly-subsidized rental housing developments. Voter approval is not required for specific developments, but a local jurisdiction must have voter authorization to use public funds for a specified number of dwelling units, the general types and locations of which must also be approved.
Administration/Funding. City Council will approve ballot measure to be submitted to local voters. Community Department will prepare recommendation regarding the number, types of units, and general locations within the City for which voter approval should be sought
Timeframe. City Council to approve submission to voters in time for first election after January 1, 1993.
Expected Results. Voter approval of the use of public funds for a sufficient number of dwelling units that will allow the City to pursue those state and federal programs which require voter authorization.
PROGRAM 15. Inspection Program.
Description. The City of Folsom will, on a request basis, arrange for an inspection of residential properties building code violations
which should be corrected. A more comprehensive voluntary building code inspection would be performed by the Building Department for an inspection fee that covers the cost of this service.
Administration/Funding. The Building Department will administer the code inspection program, to be funded from inspection fees.
Timeframe. July 1992 to June 1996.
Anticipated Results. Depends on the number inspection requested.
PROGRAM 16. Code Enforcement and Abatement
Description. Upon request of a property owner or occupant, the City will identify dwelling units that are unsafe to occupy and initiate appropriate action to have those units brought into compliance with building code standards or removed.
This action would be taken only in the most extreme cases in which the owner of the dwelling units is unable or unwilling to make necessary repairs, in which repairs are not feasible, or in which the dwelling unit has been abandoned.
A 1991 housing conditions survey did not locate any dwelling units in a state of disrepair requiring demolition.
Administration/Funding. The Building Department will enforce code requirements and order unsafe units to be vacated (and demolished, if necessary).
Timeframe. July 1991 to June 1996.
Anticipated Results. Repair of dwelling units which are feasible to rehabilitate and removal of dwelling units, if any, which may be infeasible to repair.
23-86
PROGRAM 17. Rehabilitation of Substandard Dwelling Units
Description:	To encourage private
rehabilitation efforts, the City will apply for and/or assist eligible households in applying for various private, state and federal sources of funding for housing rehabilitation and home repairs, which would include the correction of health and safety hazards, weatherization, and the addition of space to alleviate overcrowding. The City will also allocate a portion of its redevelopment tax-increment funds for housing rehabilitation.
The City has identified 88 dwelling units in need of immediate rehabilitation based on the exterior deterioration of these units. Based on the number of dwelling units constructed prior to 1960 (about 900), it is reasonable to assume that in addition to the 88 dwelling units with obvious exterior repair needs, there are a number of other dwelling units with interior deficiencies or which could require rehabilitation within the next two to five years if not property maintained (patching of stucco, repainting, roof patching, etc.). The survey results did not include dilapidated mobilehomes located in mobilehome parks at Folsom Boulevard and Natoma Street and on Sibley Street (the Sibley Street park has been upgraded since the survey was completed).
Most of these substandard dwelling units are occupied by low-income households. Most low-income owner-occupants lack sufficient financial resources to obtain private funding for home repairs. Owners of rental units occupied by low-income households often cannot financially support repairs to dwelling units from the rents they can charge.
Administration/Funding, The City will apply annually, or as frequently is needed, based on housing rehabilitation demand, for funding under the Community Development Block Grant
Program^ - and the California Housing Rehabilitation Program. In addition, the City will provide information to, and assist owners of. rental properties in applying for funding under the California Housing Rehabilitation Program, from the California Housing Finance Agency, and from the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
In some cases, several of the above-mentioned programs will be combined to undertake home repairs. Owners of rental properties who are assisted in financing the rehabilitation of their dwelling units will be required to rent the units to low-income households and to sign a rent limitation agreement.
Timeframe. Current and on-going program.
Expected Results. Rehabilitate 75 dwelling units between 1991 and 1996.
PROGRAM 18. Relocation Assistance
Description. The City of Folsom will require owners of rental property to pay for the relocation expenses of low-income residents displaced as a result of the condemnation or required vacation of dwelling units due to code violations. The City will require that displaced residents be given the right of first refusal to return to the dwelling units upon their repair.
Administration/Funding. The Building Department will administer this program as funds permit. City Council will adopt an ordinance to implement this program.
Timeframe. Adopt ordinance by January 1. 1993; implement thereafter and ongoing.
Expected Results. Provide relocation assistance to the estimated households displaced by the code enforcement and abatement program.
23-87
PROGRAM 19. Housing Demolition Mitigation
Description. State law requires that all dwelling units occupied by lower-income households which are demolished or converted by public actions in a redevelopment area be replaced, and 75% of the replacement units must be available at comparable cost to the units removed. The City will follow the requirements of state law regarding the demolition or conversion of dwelling units occupied by lower-income households in the City’s redevelopment area. At the present time, the City has not identified any specific dwelling units to be demolished or converted.
Administration/Funding. The Redevelopment Agency is responsible for implementing the requirements of state law.
Timeframe. Ongoing program.
Expected Results. Provision of replacement dwelling units within the redevelopment area. At present, no dwelling units have been demolished in the City’s redevelopment area nor are there any plans for the demolition of dwelling units.
PROGRAM 20. Maintenance of Housing Condition Data Base
Description. The City will continue to maintain current information on the condition of dwelling units by periodically updating its housing conditions data base. Approximately every 2-3 years, the City will resurvey housing conditions to ensure the currency of its housing conditions information.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will direct these surveys.
Timeframe. Conduct surveys in 1991 and 1994.
Expected Results. One survey update completed in 1991 and one survey update in 1994.
PROGRAM 21. Zoning Flexibility For Housing Rehabilitation.
Description. -To avoid discouraging rehabilitation efforts, the City will allow non-conforming dwelling units to be rehabilitated so long as the rehabilitated dwelling units meets the Folsom Zoning Code requirements for non-conforming structures.
Many dwelling units in need of rehabilitation were constructed prior to adoption of current zoning standards. As a consequence, some of these dwelling units are non-conforming as to lot size, set-backs, yard requirement, location, and other zoning requirements.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will determine the zoning status of dwelling units to be rehabilitated based on inspection information provided by the Building Department. The staff time required for the determination of zoning status will be included in any permit fees, except that the City may waive any extra charges for low-income households.
Timeframe. Current and on-going.
Expected Results. Zoning status to be determined for properties rehabilitated under Programs One through Four.
PROGRAM 22. Preservation of Subsidized Housing Units.
Description, (a) The City will work with interested private entities a non-profit housing corporation with the capacity to manage and maintain the dwelling units.
b) The City will assist the interested entity in applying for available state or federal assistance to purchase the properties and to continue their
23-88
operation as low-income housing. If state or federal funds are insufficient to offset acquisition costs, the City may consider using redevelopment tax-increment funds to provide a low-interest or deferred loan to cover the financing "gap".
There are two federally subsidized (no state or local) rental housing developments whose owners could prepay their federal loans and convert their units to market-rate housing between 1991 and 1996. There is, in addition, one rental housing development with a Section 8 contract which expires in 1995. The owner of one development containing 48 dwelling units has already issued a notice of intent to prepay. Under such circumstances, the owner must give a public or non-profit entity the right of first refusal to acquire the units for continued operation as low-income housing. The total potential loss of affordable housing is 110 dwelling units.
Administration/Funding. Either Community Development Department to seek interested nonprofit or private entities or Redevelopment Agency to provide partial financing if needed and if funds are available at the anticipated time of sale.
Timeframe. Current and ongoing as needed.
Estimated Results. Preservation of 110 dwelling units as affordable housing.
PROGRAM 23. Manufactured Housing on Single-Family Lots
Description. State law requires local governments to allow manufactured homes on land zoned for residential use, subject to the same development standards as site-built housing. The City will continue to implement the requirements of state law.
Administration/Funding. Community Development Department and Building Department will process applications.
Timeframe. Current and ongoing.
Expected Results. Increase in opportunities for manufactured housing constructed to HUD code as a lower-cost alternative to site-built housing. It is anticipated that not more than five applications will be received for manufactured housing.
PROGRAM 24. Preservation of Mobilehome Parks.
Description. The City will seek to preserve mobilehomes in mobilehome parks which have the potential to provide sound housing. Of the nearly 900 mobilehomes in mobilehomes parks in Folsom approximately 10% were constructed prior to 1974 HUD standards and have been determined by the City to be dilapidated. The City will not. however, seek to preserve those mobilehomes which do not have the potential to provide safe and sound housing. Rather, the City will assist these owners in finding suitable replacement and, if necessary, provide low-interest loans to purchase replacements.
Administration/Funding. Community Development Department to identify dilapidated mobilehomes with the assistance of the Building Department. Redevelopment Agency to provide relocation assistance.
Timeframe. Beginning July 1. 1992, assist approximately 90 low-income residents in finding suitable replacement mobilehomes as current homes become uninhabitable.
Expected Results. Assist 90 residents in finding replacement mobilehomes. Preserve approximately 800 mobilehomes.
PROGRAM 25. Homeless Services
Description. The City of Folsom will continue to cooperate with regional homeless shelter providers and meet the needs of individuals and
23-89
families without permanent housing. At present, there is no identified need for a permanent homeless or transitional housing facility in the City. Should such a need arise in the future, the City would identify appropriate locations for homeless or transitional housing facilities according to the City’s Zoning Code. Homeless/transitional housing facilities are presently allowed in multifamily high density and commercial zones.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will be responsible for reviewing compliance with City zoning requirements.
Timeframe. Timeframe for homeless or transitional housing facility depends on the timing of proposals presented to the City.
Expected Results. Increased capacity to serve homeless persons and creation of housing opportunities to return homeless persons to permanent housing.
PROGRAM 26. Fair Housing Program
Description. The City will seek information from state and county agencies, and community organizations which have produced information on state and federal fair housing requirements. The City will make such information available at a designated office in City Hall. The City will also assist individuals with complaints in contacting the appropriate agency and filing a complaint.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will disseminate information on fair housing laws and assist individuals in filing complaints.
Timeframe. Current and ongoing.
Expected Results. Resolution or referral of fair housing complaints.
PROGRAM 27. Implement State Energy Conservation Standards.
Description. Applicants for building permits must show compliance with the state’s energy conservation requirements at the time building plans are submitted. -
The State of California has adopted a number of energy conservation requirements for residential dwelling units. These conservation standards apply to all newly constructed dwelling units and additions to existing dwelling units. Conservation requirements address insulation; the amount and orientation of glazing; shading by landscaping, mechanical, and architectural devices; heating and cooling system efficiency; the amount and placement of thermal mass (materials that absorb heat during the daytime and release heat at night); and other aspects of building energy efficiency.
Administration/Funding. The City Building Department is responsible for implementing the state’s energy conservation standards. This includes the checking of building plans and other written documentation showing compliance and the inspection of construction to ensure that dwelling units are constructed according to those plans. The cost of enforcement is paid for from fees paid at the time plans are submitted.
Timeframe. Current and on-going.
Expected Results. Checking of all building plans for compliance with state energy conservation requirements. Increase in energy efficiency will save an unspecified amount of energy and natural resources.
PROGRAM 28. Site Development Standards
Description. The City will implement the requirements of the California Subdivision Map Act regarding design solar access, landscaping to reduce energy use. appropriate orientation and
23-90
configuration of buildings on a site, and other site design factors affecting energy use.
The state energy conservation requirements address energy conservation in the construction of dwelling units. Additional energy conservation can be obtained from development patterns which encourage conservation.
Administration/Funding. Community Development Department
Timeframe. To be implemented at the time of review of tentative subdivision maps.
Expected Results. Improved energy conservation in new residential developments. Energy savings cannot be estimated at this time.
PROGRAM 29. Energy Conservation Assistance for Low-Income Households
Description. The City will provide information to homeowners seeking financial assistance in retrofitting their homes for energy conservation.
Substantial energy conservation, and reduced utility payments, can be realized from weatherizing and insulating older dwelling units. Many low-income households and owners of rental units lack the financial resources, however, to undertake such home improvements. There are several programs that can provide financial assistance to low-income homeowners and rental unit owners whose tenants are low income: Community Development Block Grant Program, California Housing Rehabilitation Program, Pacific Gas & Electric, SMUD, Special Circumstances Grants (specified homeowners on Social Security only), and "Project Go".
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will include weatherization and energy conservation as eligible activities under CDBG and CHRP programs which it administers. The Agency will provide
information and refer eligible property owners to other programs.
Timeframe. Current and on-going.
Expected Results, Weatherization and insulation of 100 dwelling units between 1991 and 1996.
PROGRAM 30. Preservation of Historic Residences
Description. To preserve historically and architecturally significant buildings, the City will undertake the following actions:
1)	When considering development or rehabilitation activities, the City will evaluate the potential impact of such activities on historic properties. Higher priority in funding decisions for CDBG, redevelopment, or other state or federal funds will be given to eligible projects whose objectives include the preservation of properties identified as historic by a federal, state, or local agency.
2)	The City will continue to designate certain areas as historic districts and may adopt guidelines for historic structures. The City has established on such historic district (see the Historic District Specific Plan).
3)	Property owners who wish to alter or convert historic structures on local, state, or federal lists will be required to follow state historic preservation guidelines. The demolition of such structures will not be allowed unless the property owner has first offered the property for sale to a public or private organization to preserve the property, and there has been no willing buyer; or unless the property represents an immediate threat to public health and safety.
4)	In public meetings and hearings on proposed activities involving the use of public funds for development or rehabilitation, the City
23-91
will invite the public to comment on the potential impact of such activities on historically significant sites. Notices of such meeting and hearings will include language inviting such public comment.
The City may exempt property owners from specific historic preservation requirements, to the extent it has the authority to do so, if such requirements would conflict with handicapped access, energy conservation, seismic safety retrofitting, or if the strict application of historic preservation requirements would impose an unreasonable economic hardship on the property owner. Any such
decision would be made on case-by-case basis.
The City had approximately S300,000 accumulated in its housing set-aside fund as of July 1992, and anticipates that $1.5 million in additional housing set-aside funds will be generated between 1992 and 1997.
Administration/Funding, Folsom Redevelopment Agency, assisted by the Community Development Department.
Timeframe. Redevelopment Agency to adopt plan by January 1993.
Expected Results. Improvement in City’s ability to prioritize the expenditure of its redevelopment housing set-aside funds.
Administration/Funding. The Community Development Department will review applications.
Timeframe. Adopt historic preservation requirements by July 1993. Implement thereafter as part of the City’s permit process.
Expected Results. Preservation of residential buildings with historic or architectural value.
PROGRAM 31. Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Plan
Description. The City will prepare a plan which shows how the City intends to meet the requirements of redevelopment law concerning the percentage of newly constructed or rehabilitated dwelling units within the redevelopment area that must be affordable to low- and moderate-income households. The plan will also contain a strategy for the use of the City’s tax-increment housing set-aside funds to assist low- and moderate-income households.
23-92
PROGRAM SUMMARY AND PRIORITY LIST
Prgrm
# Description
Recommended Timeframe Timeframe	Priority	QwepRbc
1	Provide Adequate Sites for Housing	ongoing	1
2	Sites for Multifamily Rental Housing	7/91-6/96	1
3	Provision of Public Services	7/91-6/96	1
4	Sites for Special Group Housing	7/91-6/96	2
5	Housing for Older Adults	7/91-6/96	1
6	Housing for Single Parents With Children	1993-1996	2
7	Density Bonuses and Other Incentives (ordinance)	12/93	1
8	Density Bonuses for Moderate-Income Housing (ordinance)	12793	1
9	Pursue Funding Under State and Federal Programs	7/91-ongoing	1
10	Tax-Exempt Bond Financing	1993-1996	2
11	Community Reinvestment Act	1/93-ongoing	2
12	Permit and Development Fee Reductions	ongoing	1
13	Second Units in Single-Family Neighborhoods (ordinance)	7/93	3
14	Voter Authorization for Specified Rental Housing	After 1/93	1
15	Inspection Program	7/92-6/96	3
16	Code Enforcement and Abatement	7/91-6/96	3
17	Rehabilitation of Substandard Dwelling Units	ongoing	1
18	Relocation Assistance (ordinance)	1/93-ongoing	2
19	Housing Demolition Mitigation	ongoing	2
20	Maintenance of Housing Condition Data Base	1991/1994	2
21	Zoning Flexibility For Housing Rehabilitation	ongoing	2
22	Preservation of Subsidized Housing Units	ongoing	1
23	Manufactured Housing on Single-Family Lots	ongoing	3
24	Preservation of Mobilehome Parks	7/92-ongoing	1
25	Homeless Services	none	3
26	Fair Housing Program	ongoing	1
27	Implement State Energy Conservation Standards	ongoing	3
28	Site Development Standards	ongoing	2
29	Energy Conservation Assistance for Low-Income HH	ongoing	1
30	Preservation of Historic Residences	7/93-ongoing	3
31	Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Plan	1/93-ongoing	1
1/93
1/93
7/93
NOTE: The level of priority recommended for the programs above is based on the urgency of program implementation to meet low- and moderate-income housing objectives.
23-93
23.10	APPENDIX
Summary of Approaches to Affordable Housing Requirements For Development
There are three general approaches to affordable housing requirements for new residential developments:
1)	the traditional mandatory approach (often referred to as "inclusionary zoning"),
2)	the negotiated development approach, and
3)	the strictly voluntary approach.
23.10.1	Mandatory Approach
Under a mandatory approach to affordable housing, often called "inclusionary zoning", a city or county requires that a specified percentage of housing be set aside for low- and moderate-income households. The percentage set aside and the income group for whom affordable units must be set aside typically varies depending on the type of housing project (for example, multifamily rental versus single-family ownership). "Affordability" is defined as a percentage of income, usually 30%, and the low-and moderate-income groups are usually defined based on the state definition (very low-income = 50% or less of median, low-income = 50-80% of median, and moderate-income = 80-120% of median).
Cities and counties that have adopted mandatory approaches to affordable housing requirements usually set up administrative procedures for monitoring compliance. These include:
1)	rent restrictions on the affordable rental units to ensure that rents stay within certain limits for a specified period of time (this is typically accomplished through a recorded rent limitation agreement),
2)	occupant screening to ensure that households benefitting from the program are from the targeted income group,
3)	sales price restrictions on the affordable for-sale units to ensure that prices are within the range affordable to the designated income group, and
4)	resale controls, to ensure the continued affordability of the for-sale units (resale controls are not imposed in most programs).
In addition, some programs have recapture requirements on for-sale housing to recover a portion of any governmental subsidy provided to a homeowner. This is not a universal practice, however.
Affordability is determined by calculating the appropriate percentage of income that should be devoted for housing expenses (usually 30%) and subtracting an allowance for utility costs (and property taxes and homeowner’s insurance for ownership housing). The affordable housing price determined on for-sale housing is calculated according to the monthly mortgage which a low- or moderate-income household could afford (after subtracting other housing expenses), and estimating, at the prevailing interest rate, the maximum loan for which such a household could qualify.
Mandatory affordable housing programs often provide exemptions for small projects, allow developers to pay in-lieu fees to an affordable housing fund, or donate land in-lieu of building housing. These exemptions are usually made on the basis of the feasibility or desirability of providing the affordable housing in a specific project.
To assist developers in providing affordable housing, some cities and counties provide financial and regulatory incentives, such as density bonuses, low-cost financing, fee reductions, expedited permit processing, and
23-94
assistance in applying for state or federal subsidies. Most communities, however, still require a developer to meet the affordable housing goals regardless of the availability of such incentives.
23.10.2	Negotiated Development
Under a negotiated development process, cities and counties set affordable housing goals on a case-by-case basis depending on project size, characteristics, location, and other factors. The features of negotiated development programs are very similar to mandatory inclusionary programs, except that there is no absolute percentage of affordable housing specified in advance for which all development must provide.
The implementation techniques for negotiated development programs are also similar to mandatory programs. Some communities require affordability guarantees through rent limitation agreements or sales price restrictions, and occupants may be screened for income eligibility.
The responsible party for screening households varies: some communities perform the screening themselves, others require the developer or property manager to screen households, while still others delegate this responsibility to another entity, such as a housing authority or a community-based non-profit housing corporation. Specific development and regulatory incentives are also negotiated for each project.
23.10.3	Voluntary Approach
A voluntary approach to affordable housing production allows the developer to choose whether or not to include a specified percentage of affordable housing in a residential development. The jurisdiction would strongly encourage home builder participation in its
affordable housing program, and offer regulatory and financial incentives to interested home builders in providing affordable housing within their new developments. A voluntary approach, as the term suggests, cannot compel home builders to participate in an affordable housing program, however. -
23-95
Conununiiy Development Department
■ By
QUAD Consultants
October 31, 1988





t
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
24.1	INTRODUCTION....................................................2
24.1.1	State Policy and Authorization..........................
24.1.2	Related State and Federal Regulation....................
California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act.............
California Endangered Species Act.........................
California Environmental Quality Act......................
Federal Clean Water Act...................................
Federal Endangered Species Act............................
24.1.3	Relationship to the General Plan........................
24.2	SETONG/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES.......................................
24.2.1	Setting.................................................
24.2.2	Assumptions.............................................
24.2.3	Issues..................................................
24.3	OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
m cn ifk 4^	4* to co co co co to
ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES..............................  6
24.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES................................6
24.5	IMPLEMENTATION...........................................10
OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION
24.1	INTRODUCTION
Because of the close relationship between conservation of the City’s resources and maintenance of open space, these two State required Elements are combined into a single Element, the Open Space and Conservation Element.
The conservation segment of the Element identifies the community’s resources and establishes policy for their conservation, development and/or utilization.
The open space segment of the Element identifies the community’s open space resources and establishes policy for their preservation, maintenance and/or use.
24.1.1	STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
Government Code Section65302(d) requires a Conservation Element for the conservation, development, and utilization of a community’s natural and manmade resources. The Conservation Element is required to address the following:
1.	The reclamation of land and waters.
2.	Flood control.
3.	Prevention and control of the pollution of streams and other waters.
4.	Regulation of the use of land in stream channels and other areas required for the accomplishment of the conservation plan.
5.	Prevention, control and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches and shores.
6.	Protection of watersheds.
7.	The location, quantity and quality of rock, sand and gravel resources.
Government Code Section 65560 requires the adoption of an Open Space Element. Open space land is any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to
an open space use and which is designated on a local, regional or State open space plan as any of the following:
1.	Open space for the preservation of natural resources.
2.	Open space used for the managed production of resources.
3.	Open space for outdoor recreation.
4.	Open space for public health and safety.
The State ha* found:
1.	That the preservation of open space land, is necessary not only for the maintenance of the economy of the State, but also for the assurance of the continued availability of land for the production of food and fiber, for the enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation and for the use of natural resources.
2.	That discouraging premature and unnecessary conversion of open space land to urban uses is a matter of public interest and will be of benefit to urban dwellers because it will discourage noncontiguous development patterns which unnecessarily increase the costs of community services to community residents.
3.	That the anticipated increase in the population of the State demands that Cities. Counties and the State, at the earliest possible date, make definite plans for the preservation of valuable open space land and take positive action to carry out such plans by the adoption and strict administration of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as authorized by this chapter or by other appropriate methods.
4.	That in order to assure that the interests of all its people are met in the orderly growth and development of the State and the preservation and conservation of its resources, it is necessary to provide for the development by the State, regional agencies. Counties and Cities, including charter Cities, of Statewide coordinated plans for the conservation and preservation of open space lands.
24
24-2
24.1.2	BELATED STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS
CALIFORNIA SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION ACT1
The Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA) was enacted to ensure that:
1.	Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition.
2.	The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed. wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment.
3.	Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated.
CALIFORNIA ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT
The State of California has adopted the California Endangered Species Act (CESA) as a mechanism to insure and/or encourage consultation with the California State Department of Fish and Game (DFG) when and where proposed pro] ects may potentially affect State listed threatened or endangered species. Project sponsors or lead agencies other than a State lead agency may Informally consult with DFG on any project However, where a State agency Is acting as the lead agency pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). CESA requires the DFG to issue written findings regarding the effects of the proposed project, whether habitat destruction, taking of, or Jeopardy to any threatened or endangered species may occur. CESA further requires State lead agencies to adopt reasonable and prudent alternatives, or If those are found Infeasible, reasonable mitigation and enhancement measures forproj ects which would minimize adverse Impacts to the listed species or Its habitat.
To the extent that State listed threatened or endangered species, or their habitats, as now exist or are determined to exist within the Folsom General Plan Area, the provisions of this act will apply.
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT
The adoption of a General Plan. Element or amendment constitutes a project under the CEQA and the State EIR Guidelines. If it is determined from the initial study that any aspect of the proposed General Plan document or amendment either individually or cumulatively, may significantly affect the environment, the City must prepare an EIR.
FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT
The U.S. Clean Water Act was derived through the 1977 addition of certain amenri-ments to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. The stated objectives of this combined legislation Is to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation's waters. As an Implementation effort of the amended act. Congress adopted Sections 402 and 404. Section 402 provides for an administrative review and permit procedure for the discharge of any pollutant or combination of pollutants, into the Nation's waters. Section 404 provides for a review and permit procedure for the discharge of dredged or fill material Into the Nation's navigable waterways. Through the adoption of administrative codes by the Army Corp of Engineers and the combined influences of several separate litigations. Clean Water Act Section 404 permits are now required for the placement of fill and/or dredged material In the Nation's navigable waterways and their associated wetlands.
Wetlands, although variously definable by scientists and resource managers, are presently determined by the Army Corp of Engineers for the purposes of asserting Section 404 permit authority by using the following combined criteria: frequency of Inundation, soil type, character and chemistry, and vegetation. Unfortunately, many wetlands areas have not been formally reviewed under these criteria. In fact, determinations are not routinely made by the Army Corp of Engineers unless a specific request Is made.
Therefore, to the extent that wetlands do now exist or are determined to exist in the Folsom General Plan Area, a Section 404 permit Issued by the Army Corp of Engineers will be a prerequi-
‘Public Resources Code Section 2712.
2-
24-3
site for construction of any project which proposes to place fill or dredged material in waterways of their associated wetlands.
FEDERAL ENDANGERED SPECIAL ACT
The U.S. Endangered Species Act (as amended in 1982) states as its purpose “to provide a means whereby the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened species depend may be conserved, to provide a program for the conservation of such endangered species and threatened species, and to take such steps as may be appropriate to achieve the purposes to the treaties and conventions set forth in Subsection 1 of this section”. To achieve this goal, the act, pursuant to Section 9 as contained therein, it is unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to:
1.	Import any such species into, or export any such species from the United States.
2.	Take any such species within the United
States or the territorial sea thereof.
3.	Possess, sell, deliver, carry, transport, or ship, by any means whatsoever any such species taken in violation thereof.
In this regard, the term to “take* is specifically defined as follows:
Section 3(19). The term “take” means to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, trap, capture, or attempt to engage in any such conduct.
Further, administrative interpretations of harass or harm have extended statutory protection to the habitats of threatened or endangered species. Violations of the act may result in criminal or civil penalties or both.
To the extent that federally listed threatened or endangered species, or their habitats, do I now exist or may be shown to exist within the Folsom General Plan Area, the provisions of this act will apply.
24
24.1.3	RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL	,
PLAN
The Open Space and Conservation Element of the General Plan directly effects the Land Use Element, Parks and Recreation Element and indirectly effects the Safety Element.
24.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES
24.2.1	SETTING
Volume HI. Chapter 82.0 of the General Plan and the Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) describe the setting of the Folsom area and the data base upon which the General Plan has been prepared. This section briefly summarizes the community setting and highlights those resources and open spaces Identified for preservation, maintenance and conservation.
Resources identified as requiring preservation, management and/or enhancement in the City of Folsom are:
1.	The quality and quantity of ground water.
2.	The quality and quantity of surface waters, including Folsom Lake, the American River. Humbug Creek, Blue Ravine Creek and Willow Creek and other known wetland areas.
3.	Woodland vegetation, including Valley Oaks and Blue Oaks.
4.Sensitive habitats including but not limited to: riparian vegetation. Including that found along Humbug Creek: Blue Ravine Creek. Willow Creek. Hinkle Creek, and the American River: vernal pools and potential pool habitats including but not limited to those found in the lower Mormon Island Marsh Area: and remnant Valley Bunch Grasslands such as those known to occur near the confhienceof Humbug and Blue Ravine- - - -Creeks.
5.Wildlife. including such sensitive species as the Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle. Swainson’s Hawk, Tricolored Blackbird and Tiger Salamander.
24-4
S.Fisheries, including Folsom Lake. Lake Natoma. theAmerican River. Humbug Creek. Blue Ravine Creek and Willow Creek.
7 .Minerals identified by the State Division of Mines and Geology, including lode gold, placer gold, copper and zinc.
8.	Rock and gravel.
4.	The State Prison site, which provides a large, visual open area in the City.
5.	The physical form of Folsom’s neighborhoods.
6.	Ease of movement.
7.	Access to pedestrian and bicycle trails.
9.	Energy, electricity and natural gas.
WILDLIFE
10.	Air (see Chapter 32, Air Quality Element).
11.	Historic and cultural resources, including the Folsom Historic District. Coloma Road/ Pony Express route. Old Folsom Power House. Folsom Gold Mining District. Prairie City, Cohn House, Folsom Depot. First California Passenger Railroad (Sacramento Valley - Placerville), and other sites as identified by the California Archaeological Inventory dated June 1. 1987.
Those open space’s identified as requiring preservation are:
1.	American River Corridor
2.	Humbug Creek
3.	Blue Ravine Creek
4.	Hinckle Creek
5.	Willow Creek
6.	Lake Natoma
7.	Folsom Lake
8.	Willow Hill Reservoir, if feasible
24.2.2	ASSUMPTIONS
QUALITY OF LIFE
Folsom’s quality of life is characterized by:
1.	The diverse natural setting, including the American River, tributary streams, natural vegetation, topography, native wildlife, and other unique features of the landscape.
2.	Developed parks and open space.
3.	The Historic District and other historic places throughout the community.
Wildlife to be protected include, but are not limited to the following sensitive species:
1.	Tricolored blackbird
2.	Swalnson's Hawk
3.	Tiger Salamander
4.	Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle (Federally Listed as Endangered)
HABITATS
Sensitive habitats to be protected include but are not limited to:
1.	Northern Hardpan Vernal Pools
2.	Valley Bunch Grasslands
3.	Freshwater Marshlands
4.	Riparian Forests and Woodlands
5.	Oak Savannah and Woodlands
6.	Permanent and Seasonal Wetlands
RECREATIONAL LANDS
Recreational amenities such as rivers, streams, lakes, undisturbed clusters of trees, wildlife habitats and the passive and active recreational opportunities they represent are. if protected and managed, a resource to be enjoyed by future generations. Reasonable public visual and physical access to these resources is essential.
PUBLIC SHALL BENEFIT
When trade offs are made-between thepres-ervation of identified resources/open spaces and development, the City and the public shall cumulatively receive the greater short term and long term benefits of such trade.
2
24-5
24.2.3	ISSUES
Issues identified during the preparation of the Open Space and Conservation Element include but are not limited to:
LOSS OF RESOURCES
As development of the City proceeds, natural resources and open space as identified in Section 24.2.2 may be substantially reduced, or in a worst case, be eliminated.
COST OF PROTECTION
How does the City pay for acquisition, rehabilitation. enhancement, maintenance and operation of its resources and open spaces.
PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT/PUBLIC NEED BALANCE
If land is preserved for the protection of resources and open space, this limits the ability of property owners to develop their land. Development incentives may be required to make the preservation of the City's resources viable to the property owner.
24.3	OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 23
To preserve existing heritage trees through a City Ordinance.
POLICY 23.1
The City shall continue to enforce the Tree Preservation/Landscape Ordinance and identify heritage trees to be preserved. Site designs shall consider building and parking configurations which will preserve as many heritage trees as possible.
I POLICY 23.2
I Replacement trees shall be required when-I ever existing trees are removed.
24
POLICY 23.3
The City may allow proposed development
to be concentrated on a portion of a site and include taller buildings or smaller lot sizes to preserve a greater number of existing trees.
GOAL 24
To ensure that projects contain landscaping and trees that compliment the City’s natural character.
POLICY 24.1
Development projects shall contain landscaping of common or public areas, surface parking areas, and streets bordering the project.
POLICY 24.2
Prior to the granting of a building permit, a project must have an approved landscaping plan showing the location, type, and proposed maintenance of landscaping.
POLICY 24.3
The developer or property owners shall be
as part of the project approval for residential developments where there are common areas, and for all commercial and industrial developments. The City will require the establishment of a landscaping maintenance district or other legally binding maintenance agreement and will reserve the power to enforce the maintenance agreement through appropriate means.
POLICY 24.4
The City shall adopt a landscaping ordinance with standards for:
1.	Preferred types of plants and materials.
2.	Agreements to ensure the continued maintenance of landscaped areas.
3.	Minimum sizeof trees upon planting?- ■ ~
4.	Amount of landscaping area.
GOAL 25
Wherever feasible, to preserve, acquire, rehabilitate, enhance and maintain the identified resources for the use and enjoyment of present and future generations. The identified
24-6
resources include, but are not limited to:
POLICY 25.4
1.	Northern Hardpan Vernal Pools and Associated Sensitive Flora
2.	Valley Bunch Grasslands and Associated
Sensitive Flora
3.	Freshwater Marshlands and Associated
Sensitive Flora
4.	Riparian Forests and Woodlands and Associated Sensitive Flora
5.	Oak Savannah and Woodlands and Associated Sensitive Flora
6.	Permanent and Seasonal Wetlands and
Associated Sensitive Flora
7.	American River Corridor
8.	Humbug Creek
9.	Blue Ravine Creek
10.	Hinkle Creek
11.	Willow Creek
12.	Lake Natoma
13.	Folsom Lake
14.	Willow Hill Reservoir. If feasible
15.	Trlcolored Blackbird
16.	Swalnson’s Hawk
17.	Tiger Salamander
18.	Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle
19.	Folsom Boulevard Scenic Corridor, from
Highway 50 to Sutter Street
20.	Greenback Lane Scenic Corridor, from the
Folsom City Limits to Riley Street
21.	East Natoma Street Scenic Corridor, from
Oak Avenue Parkway to the El Dorado
County Line
22.	Folsom-Auburn Road Scenic Corridor, from the Folsom City Limit or to Greenback Lane
POLICY 25.1
The surface and groundwater quality of Folsom shall not be degraded from City standards.
POLICY 25.2
The City may obtain fee title or protective easements of identified resources.
POLICY 25.3
Sensitive habitat areas and open space shall have their borders defined by public access ways, and/or shall have views from adjacent buildings oriented toward the areas.
The City shall require that a qualified biologist conduct a vegetative/wildlife field survey, and analysis prior to consideration of development applications for projects within or adjacent to sensitive habitat areas and potential habitats for sensitive wildlife and floral species.
POLICY 25.5
The City shall adopt standards for the designation. enhancement and maintenance of identified sensitive habitat areas.
POLICY 25.6
The City shall establish a vegetation preservation ordinance which:
1.	Specifies native or “naturalized" vegetation which should be given highest priority for preservation.
2.	Requires an applicant to show the approximate location of existing priority vegetation.
3.	Specifies the quantity and manner of vegetation which must be planted for replacement.
POLICY 25.7
Trees and other vegetation comprising riparian or other special habitats targeted for preservation should be preserved regardless of whether they are heritage trees.
GOAL 26
The City shall actively encourage the restoration and maintenance of historic buildings or sites.
POLICY 26.1
Identification and publication of available federal, state and private funding sources and Incentive programs.
2
24-7
POLICY 26.2
The City should adopt consistent standards for development, public improvements, alley utilization, and frontage improvements for the original 50' x 140* lots situated within the original town boundaries, including the area generally bounded by Bidwell Street, Riverway. Stafford Street and Folsom Boulevard.
GOAL 27
To preserve, acquire, rehabilitate, enhance and maintain the City’s identified open spaces for passive and active recreational uses.
POLICY 27.1
The City shall encourage the improvement of public access to recreational facilities and open spaces through:
1.	The publication of a trails and recreation guide which maps the trails, open spaces, and parks within the City of Folsom and shows the interconnection with trails and facilities in adjoining communities. The guide shall describe the facilities and hours of operation.
2.	The City should require the new parks and open spaces shall be easily accessible to the public. Including the mobility impaired.
POLICY 27.2
The City shall develop parkway plans for each identified sensitive habitat area and should include:
1.	Provisionforpedestrian. bike and/or equestrian trail(s) with connections to adjacent trail systems.
2.	Provision for trailhead/parking areas spaced along parkways.
I 3. Consideration of the development of inter-I pretive centers or trails within parkways.
24
for the identified scenic corridors including but not limited to:
1.	Folsom Boulevard Scenic Corridor, from
Highway 50 to Sutter Street.
2.	Greenback Lane Scenic Corridor, from the
City Limits to Riley Street.
3.	East Natoma Street Scenic Corridor, from the proposed Oak Avenue Parkway to the El Dorado County Line.
4.	Folsom-Auburn Road Scenic Corridor, from the City limits to Greenback Lane.
POLICY 27.4
The City shall encourage land owners to consolidate identified habitats, open space and park lands between separately owned development projects and individually owned properties where feasible.
GOAL 28
To provide for the production of natural resources when compatible with the goals and policies of this General Plan.
POLICY 28.1
The City should adopt water conservation measures which reduce water consumption, by user type.
POLICY 28.2
The quality and quantity of surface water runoff from a property shall not exceed existing flows or existing quality or shall comply with City standards for off-site drainage. The City shall implement a surface-runoff water quality moini-toring program to insure compliance with City standards.
POLICY 28.3
The City should maintain existing and develop new sources of water to ensure adequate. long term and high quality water supplies.
The City shall adopt a Scenic Corridor Plan
24-8
POLICY 28.4
The City shall when feasible require new development on dredge tailings to reclaim the tailings in conformance with the guidelines and regulations of the California Division of Mines and Geology.
POLICY 28.5
Where feasible, the City shall protect existing or future mining and/or gravel extraction sites from encroachment of non-compatible uses through phasing of development and performance standards. The City recognizes that, as a practical matter, the prospects for mining and/ or gravel extraction are extremely unlikely in view of the restrictions upon the issuance of surface mining permits Imposed by Ordinance No. 613 adopted in response to an initiative measure.
POLICY 28.6
RELATED GENERAL GOALS AND POLICIES CONT.
GOAL 5
POLICY 5.1 POLICY 5.2 POLICY 5.3
GOAL 6
POLICY 6.1
GOAL 7
POLICY 7.4
RELATED LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 8
POLICY 8.1 POLICY 8.2 POLICY 8.3 POLICY 8.4 POLICY 8.7
GOALS
POLICY 9.2 POLICY 9.3
The City shall encourage community wide recycling in an effort to conserve natural resources and reduce solid waste disposal. This may be established through the development of recycling programs promoted and sponsored by the City with non-profit groups. These programs could Include but not be limited to curbside recycling programs, siting of a recycling center or drop off collection centers.
GOAL 10
POLICY 10.1 POLICY 10.2 POLICY 10.3 POLICY 10.5
GOAL 11
POLICY 112 POLICY 11.5 POLICY 11.6 POLICY 11.7 POLICY 11.8
24.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED GENERAL GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 12
POLICY 12.4
GOAL 14
POLICY 14.1 POLICY 14.3
GOAL 16
POLICY 16.2 POLICY 16.3 POLICY 16.8
RELATED TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 17
POLICY 17.6 POLICY 17.7 POLICY 17.10 POLICY 17.11
2
24-9
related pares and recreation ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED PARES AND RECREATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES GOAL 36
24.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
24.5	IMPLEMENTATION
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department Planning Commission City Council
•	Target Dates: Start: June 1989
Complete: October 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Parson Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars______________________________________
120/56,000	$200	$500 $6,700 General
Fund
Developer Fees
PARES, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE MASTERPLAN
A Master Plan for Parks. Recreation and Open Space shall be prepared which contains specific requirements and criteria for development. access, use and maintenance of paries, open space and natural areas within the City including:
PARES AND RECREATTONELEMENTUPDATE
Update the Parks and Recreation Element to include applicable goals and policies of the Open Space and Conservation Element and to exclude specific development standards which are to be contained in the Parks. Recreation and Open Space Master Plan (see program 5.2.1).
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27
• Resource Groups/Agendes/Organlzations
Sacramento County Department of Parks and Recreation
State of California Department of Parks
California State University at Sacramento University of California at Davis Local Community Colleges
1.	Provision for improving public access to recreation areas and open space with guidelines and standards for the design of access ways making provision for access by all segments of the community including the mobility impaired.
2.	Guidelines and standards for the improvement of parks and open space areas which define the appropriate level of maintenance, access, and improvements in sensitive habitat and open space-areas.
3.	Guidelines for incorporating educational activities and interpretive centers into the open space and sensitive habitat areas.
4.	A plan for consolidation of identified open space, natural habitat areas and park lands.
24
24-10
5.	Landscape requirements for parks and open space including design standards for improvements (trails, fences) in open space areas.
6.	In order to preserve special habitats develop management plans for identified sensitive/ special habitat areas.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICIES 27.1; AND 27.2; GOAL 25 - POLICIES 25.5; 25.6; AND 25.7
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
Sacramento County Department of Parks and Recreation
State California Department of Parks and Recreation
California State University at Sacramento University of California at Davis Community College Department of Fish and Game
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: May 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
200/510,000	$1,000 $2,500 $13,500 Developer
Fees, User Fees
PARES AND RECREATION ORDINANCE
Update the Parks Ordinance with respect to the Goals and Policies of the Parks and Recreation Element and amend as necessary.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL T7
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 4
•	Resource Group/Agency/Organization
State Division of Parks and Recreation
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Parson Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/$1,800	$250	$300 $2,350 User Fees
WATER CONSERVATION
Review the existing Uniform Building Code requirements for water conservation measures and revise as necessary to reduce water consumption where feasible.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 28 - POLICY 28.1
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
University Cooperative Extension State Department of Water Resources
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Building Inspect Department
•	Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: March 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR		
Person Hours/ Dollars	Printing	Direct Total Funding
40/$1,800	$200	$200 $2,200 Developer Fees
GRADING ORDINANCE - WATER QUALITY
The Grading Ordinance is to be modified to require quantity of surface water runoff from a property to not exceed existing flows or quality will not be degraded below existing City standards.
24-11
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 25 - POLICY 25.1; GOAL 28 - POLICY 28.2
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 14
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Central Valley Region
USDA Soil Conservation Service
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: June 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars____________________________________
4041,800	$100	$300 $2200 Permit Fees,
Developer Fees
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS - TITLE 17
Include in the Subdivision Ordinance incentives to property owners (density bonuses, height bonuses etc.) to facilitate consolidation of identified habitat areas, open space and park lands.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 25 - POLICY 25.6; AND 25.7; GOAL 27 - POLICIES 27.4
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Cross Referenced To: Title 16
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
Developers
Realtors
Banks
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: June 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars___________________________________
8043,600 $1,000	$900 $5,500 Developer
Fees
REFERENCE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Update the Zoning and Grading Ordinances as necessary to reference development standards for quality and quantity of surface water runoff from a property subject to a development permit.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL25-POLICY25.1;GOAL 28 - POLICY 28.2
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
Cross Referenced To: Title 14
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
USDA Soil Conservation Service Regional Water Quality Control Board. Central Valley Region
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department Building Inspection Department
•	Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1989
24
24-12
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/$1,800	$100	$200 $2,100 General
Fund
PROJECT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Modify the Code to require a qualified biologist conduct a vegetative/wildlife survey, analysis, and If applicable a mitigation program to be submitted with development applications for projects within or adjacent to sensitive habitat areas and potential habitats for sensitive wildlife and floral species.
•	Implements: Goal 25 - Policies 25.4:25.6
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organlzatlons
State Department of Fish and Game US Department of Fish and Wildlife US Army Corps of Engineers
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department City Council
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1989
USE PERMITS
Develop a special use permit procedure as part of the Zoning Code to allow natural resource production within the City Limits. Develop standards for noise control, dust control, air quality maintenance, and safety to be made conditions of approval.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL28-POLICIES28.4AND
28.5
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organlzatlons
State Department of Resources. Division of Mines and Geology
State Office of Noise Control Air Pollution Control District Department of Public Services
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Building Inspection Department
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: August 1989
Complete: March 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
80/53,600	$1,000 $900 $5,500 Developer
Fees
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding --Dollars______________________________________
40/51,800	$200	$200 52,200 Application
Fees
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS
Include the Zoning Code incentives to property owners (density bonuses, height bonuses etc.) to facilitate consolidation of Identified habitat areas, open space and park lands.
2
24-13
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 8 - POLICY8.7-GOAL 25 - POLICY 25.7 - GOAL 27 -POLICY 27.4
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Cross Referenced To: Title 16
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
Conservancy
State Office of Planning and Research
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency
2. Landscape plans for new developments shall comply with adopted guidelines and standards (to be referenced In the ordinance) including but not limited to:
A.	Standards and guidelines for landscaping of common and public areas, surface parking areas, and streets.
B.	Guidelines and standards for sizes, quantl-tlesandtypesoflandscaplngmaterialswhlch compliment the City’s natural character and are suitable to the Folsom area.
C.	Method of Irrigation and maintenance.
D.	Bonding mechanisms and agreements to assure the Installation and long term maintenance of landscape areas.
Community Development Department
• Target Dates: Start: January 1989 Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR		Funding
Person Hours/ Dollars	Printing Direct Total	
80/$3,600	$1,000 $900 $5,500 Developer Fees	
UPDATE LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE.
Adopt a Landscape Ordinance which includes:
1.	Tree Preservation Ordinance (existing Tree Preservation Ordinance to be evaluated and modified as necessary to comply with General Plan Goals and Policies) Including but not limited to:
24
A.	Requirements for replacement of trees removed from a site (size. type, number of trees to be replaced).
B.	Allowance for concentration of development on a site in order to preserve trees in accordance with adopted guidelines and standards. Require specific plans for development under this provision on sites of five acres or more.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 23 - POLICIES 23.1; 23.2; 23.3 - GOAL 24 - POLICIES 24.1; 24.2; 24.3; AND 24.4
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Titles 12. 16 and 17
•ResourceGroups/Agendes/Organlzatlons
Local Chapter of California Native Plant Society
University of California at Davis. School of Landscape and Architecture
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: August 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours? Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
300/S12.000 $3,000 $3,000 $18,000 Developer Fees
24-14
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
Develop and adopt Landscape Standards which include:
1.	Tree preservation guidelines (existing Tree Preservation Ordinance to be evaluated and modified as necessary to comply with General Plan Goals and Policies) including but not limited to:
A.	Guidelines for replacement of trees removed from a site (size. type, number of trees to be replaced).
B.	Guidelines and standards to allow the concentration of uses on a site in order to preserve trees.
C.	Water conservation practices in landscape irrigation practices, irrigation systems and landscape materials which are low water consumers.
2.	Criteria for evaluation of landscape plans including but not limited to:
A.	Standards and guidelines for landscaping of common and public areas, surface parking areas and streets.
B.	Guidelines and standards for sizes, quantities and types oflandscaping materials which compliment the City’s natural character and are suitable to the Folsom area.
C.	Method of irrigation and maintenance.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 23 - POLICIES 23.1; 23.2; AND 23.3 - GOAL 24 - POLICIES 24.1; 24.2; 24.3; AND 24.4 - GOAL 28 - POLICY 28.1
• Folsom Municipal Code: Titles 12.16 and 17
Community Development Department Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: August 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars___________________________________
300/512,000 $3,000 $3,000 $18,000 Developer Fees
GUIDELINES FOR WATER QUALITY MAINTENANCE
City to establish guidelines and standards for development and construction practices which will ensure the maintenance of water quality. Quantity shall not exceed existing flows and existing quality shall not be degraded or compliance with City standards for off site drainage. Evaluate present City standards for adequacy. A water surface runoff water quality monitoring program shall be established.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL25-POLICY23.1-GOAL 28 - POLICY 28.2
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 14
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Central Valley Region
USDA Soil Conservation Service
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations.
Local Chapter of California Native Plant Society
University of California at Davis, School of Landscape and Architecture
•	Responsible Agencies
.Public Works Department
• Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1989
24-15
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars__________________________________
40/51,800	5200 $200	52,200 General
Fund
development adjacent to open space
Adopt development standards for properties adjacent to sensitive habitat areas and open space areas which require orientation of the development away from the open space area or bordering the open space area with public access ways.	•
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 25 - POLICY 25.3
•	Cross Referenced To: Title 17 - Zoning
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
Local Chapter of California Native Plant Society
University of California at Davis. School of Landscape and Architecture
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
• Target Dates:	Start: January 1989
Complete: June 1989
groups or a local college or university as a student project.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICY 27.1A -GOAL 29 - POLICY 29.6
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
Sacramento County Department of Parks and Recreation
State of California Department of Parks and Recreation
California State University at Sacramento University of California at Davis Local Community Colleges US Army Corps of Engineers US Bureau of Reclamation State Reclamation Board State Department of Resources. Division of Mines and Geology Sacramento County General Services
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department City Fire Department
•	Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: August 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars____________________________________
120/55.400	$400	$600 $6,400 Developer
Fees
24
TRAILS. RECREATION AND SAFETY GUIDE
A Subcommittee to the Parks and Recreation Commission will oversee the publication of a trails, recreation and safety guide for the use and enjoyment of parks and open space within the City of Folsom. Publication of the Guide may be accomplished in coordination with local civic
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars_____________________________________
100/54,500	$2.000 51,500 $8,000 Developer
Fees,
Grant Funds
LANDSCAPE. MAINTENANCE AND PLANTING GUIDE
Develop a landscape planting and maintenance guide for general distribution to City residents. including information on water conservation practices in landscape irrigation and use of landscape materials.
24-16
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 23 - GOAL 24 - GOAL 28 -POLICY 28.1
•	ResourceGroups/Agencies/Organizations
Local Chapter of California Native Plant Society
University of California at Davis. School of Landscape and Architecture
Bicycling Clubs Sierra Club Service Clubs
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding
Dollars__________________________________
10054,500 $2,000 $1,500 $8,000 General Fund
HISTORIC PRESERVATION PROGRAM • WSSLUC. INFORMATION
Make available information on historic preservation including funding sources to the general public.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 26 * POLICY 26.1
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizatlons
American Institute of Architects
State Historic Preservation
Office
Local Historic Societies
•	Responsible Agencies
City Council
Community Development Department Building Inspection Department
•	Implementing Agency
Building Inspection Department
• Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: July 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total	Funding
Dollars_____________________________________
205900	$500 $250 $1,650	General
Fund,
Grant Funds
HISTORIC PRESERVATION PROGRAM -STANDARDS
Adopt standards for development in the historic downtown including the following: standards for development, public improvements, alley utilization, and frontage improvements for the original 50' x 140* * lots situated within the original town boundaries, including the area generally bounded by Bidwell Street, River Way. Stafford Street and Folsom Boulevard.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 28 - POLICY 26.2
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizatlons
American Institute of Architects State Historic Preservation Office Local Historic Societies
•	Responsible Agencies
City Council
Community Development Department Building Inspection Department
•	Implementing Agency
Building Inspection Department
• Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: February 1990.
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR			
Person Hours/ Dollars	Printing	Direct Total	Funding
2551.125	$50	$250 $1,425	General Fund
24-17
WATER CONSERVATION EDUCATION PROGRAM
Develop a Citywide water conservation program which includes public education encouraging water saving practices and awareness.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 28 - POLICY 28.1
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/ Organizations
California State University, at Sacramento
University of California at Davis University Cooperative Extension State Department of Water Resources
•	Responsible Agencies
Public Works Department Building Inspection Department
•	Implementing Agency
Building Inspection Department
• Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: March 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/$1,800	$350	$400 $2,550 Developer Fees
VEGETATION PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
Establish a vegetation preservation ordinance which:
1.Specifies native or “naturalized" vegetation which should be given highest priority for preservation.
I' ■
2.Requires an applicant to show the approximate location of existing priority vegetation and methods proposed to retain the identified priority vegetation.
3.Specifies the quantity, manner, and maintenance of vegetation which must be planted for replacement.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 25 - POLICIES 25.6; AND 25.7
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
Local Chapter of California Native Plant Society
University of California at Davis, School of Landscape and Architecture
California Chapter Nature Conservancy California Department of'Fish and Game
’• Responsible and Implementing Agency Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: February 1989
Complete: August 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
300/$12,000 $3,000	$3,000 $18,000 Developer
Fees
OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
1.	The City shall investigate methods of preserving open space including the formation of a City Open Space District, the formation of a local land holding trust, or the use of existing conservation organizations. Methods of preservation shall be evaluated using the following factors:
A.	Match the preservation needs of each identified area with a suitable preservation method.
B.	Determine which mechanisms of holding - land (fee title, easements etc.) will be mutually acceptable to the property owner and
the City.
24
24-18
C.	Identify funding mechanisms and determine the financial feasibility for each preservation method.
2.	In evaluating potential conservator organizations to hold open space the City should consider the following factors:
A. Each group’s criteria for accepting land, match the preservation needs of each lden-tlfledareawithasuitableconservatorgroup.
5. Which mechanisms of holding land will be mutually suitable to the property owner. City and conservator group.
C.The financial feasibility for placing each area in a conservancy program and possible funding mechanisms.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 25 - POLICIES 25.2*. AND 25.6
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
Public Trust for Land
People for Open Space
Nature Conservancy
State Department of Fish and Game
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: March 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars__________________________________
200/$9,000	$225 $2,000 $11.225 Grant
Funds
2
24-19
24
FIGURE 24-1
NOTE: This map is for information ONLY See FEMA maps (on file with the City) for accurate boundaries.
FLOOD HAZARD ZONES — CITY OF FOLSOM
24-20
M
*
FIGURE 24-2
M

a ' V-'-v-
&W--

Prepared For The City of Folsom Community Development Department
■ .By
Connerly arid Associates
October 31, 1988
fife.'
-V


-'Sf; v -*?'r --
25.1	INTRODUCTION....................................................2
25.1.1	State Policy and Authorization..........................
25.1.2	Related State and Federal Regulations...................
25.1.3	Relationship to the General Plan........................
25.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTION/ISSUES.......................................
25.2.1	Setting.................................................
25.2.2	Assumptions.............................................
25.2.3	Issues..................................................
co co to to to to to
25.3	SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.........................3
25.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES ...............................3
25.5	IMPLEMENTATION............................................5
SAFETY ELEMENTS
25.1	INTRODUCTION
The Safety Element of the City of Folsom aims at reducing death, injuries, damage to property and economic and social dislocation resulting from fire, flood and geological hazards. Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of the MEA provide background data on the City’s geological, soils and hydrological resources. These chapters also identify, through text and Illustrations, the City’s seismic, geological and flooding hazards and are incorporated herein by reference.
Hazardous wastes and toxics are addressed in the Hazardous Materials Element, Chapter 34.
25.1.1	STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
The Safety Element Is a mandatory element of the General Plan under Section 65302(1) of the Government Code. The Element Is required to address the protection of the community from fires and geological hazards Including features necessary for such protection as evacuation routes, peak load water supply requirements, minimum road widths, clearances around structures and geological hazard mapping areas of known geological hazards.
25.1.2	RELATED STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS
CALIFORNIA SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION ACT1
The Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA) was enacted to ensure that:
1.	Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition.
2.	The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment.
3.	Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated.
The Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act requires Cities and Counties containing designated fault zones to include policies and standards in their General Plans for new development withhin the fault zones.
25.1.3	RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The Safety Element of the General Plan is directly related to the Land Use Element and Conservation and Open Space Element.
25.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES
25.2.1	SETTING
The Folsom Planning Area Is located east of the City of Sacramento In the lower foothills on the eastern edge of the Sacramento Valley, adjacent to the American River Canyon. The setting provides for a number of safety Issues to be addressed.
The City of Folsom is adjacent to Folsom Lake and several dams which are fed by the American River, therefore the threat of flooding Is present Earthquake faults are located within the region along the Sierra Foothill Range and subsequent seismic shaking could affect areas of Folsom. The State Department of Mines places Folsom In Zone 1 (low severity) on Its Earthquake Intensity Map and low in the Landslide category. Some housing areas are located adjacent to open range land: wildfire could be a threat. Downtown Folsom contains some older commercial areas which are not constructed in accordance with contemporary fire codes and some land uses contain hazardous or flammable materials. Folsom Is a growing and expansive area and the City must provide adequate emergency services. Since the City of Folsom is located adj acent to the American River Canyon, there is limited outside access for emergency services through the canyon. Evacuation plans and the- movement of emergency equipment and materials need to be coordinated with surrounding agencies and communities.
‘Public Resources Code Section 2712.
25
25-2
25.2.2 ASSUMPTIONS
POLICY 29.2
Some of the hazards and problems concerning safety are:
1.	Dam failure and subsequent flooding.
2.	Flooding of the American River and Folsom Lake.
3.	Earthquakes and damage following seismic shaking.
4.	The destruction of older downtown commercial areas by fire.
5.	The destruction of housing areas adjacent to open range land.
6.	The lack of proper emergency services for an expanding community.
7.	Diminished evacuation capacities during an emergency.
25.2.3	ISSUES
1.	Providing adequate fire protection for all areas considering the potential hazards that exist.
2.	How does the City plan for the threat of floods and the subsequent damage that might arise?
3.	What are the evacuation plans and procedures that need to be initiated within and outside the community to ensure a successful evacuation in the event of a disaster?
4.	What is the level of emergency services needed to keep pace with an expanding community and will the City keep pace?
25.3	SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 29
To protect lives and property from unacceptable risks resulting from natural and manmade hazards.
POLICY 29.1
Fire and Police Department personnel/resident population ratios shall be maintained at adequate levels as defined by the City Council.
The City shall maintain a fire prevention and retention program for buildings.
POLICY 29.3
The City shall develop standards for building within the 100 year floodway to assure that the water flows above stream and downstream from a property will not be altered from existing levels.
POLICY 29.4
The City shall work with the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers in developing standards for development within the inundation boundary resulting from a failure of Folsom Dam or the dikes retaining Folsom Lake.
POLICY 29.5
The City shall prepare, publish and coordinate an emergency response plan which addresses medical care, escape routes, mutual aid agreements, temporary housing and communications.
POLICY 29.6
The City shall encourage the preparation and distribution to the general public of a safety guide for the use and enjoyment of Folsom’s resources.
POLICY 29.7
The City shall cooperate with SMUD’s efforts in preparing and publishing an emergency evacuation plan for Rancho Seco Nuclear Power Plan.
25.4 RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
2
25-3
RELATED GENERAL GOALS
AND POLICIES (CONT.)
GOAL 5
POLICY 5.1 POLICY 5.2 POLICY 5.3
GOAL 6
POLICY 6.1 POLICY 6.2 POLICY 6.3
GOAL 7
POLICY 7.1 POLICY 7.2 POLICY 7.3 POLICY 7.4
RELATED LAND USB ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 8
POLICY 8.7
GOAL 9
POLICY 9.2
GOAL 10
POLICY 10.2 POLICY 10.6
GOAL 16
POLICY 16.1 POLICY 16.2 POLICY 16.4
RELATED TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 17
POLICY 17.4 POLICY 17.9 POLICY 17.10 POLICY 17.12 POLICY 17.14
GOAL 22
POLICY 22.1 POLICY 22.2
RELATED OPEN SPACE AND
CONSERVATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 25
POLICY 25.1
GOAL 28
POLICY 28.1 POLICY 28.2 POLICY 28.3 POLICY 28.4 POLICY 28.5 POLICY 28.6
RELATED NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 30 POLICY : POLICY: POLICY: policy: policy : POLICY: policy: policy: policy : policy: policy:
RELATED AIR gUAUTT ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 31
POLICY 31.1 POLICY 31.2 POLICY 31.3 POLICY 31.4 POLICY 31.5
GOAL 32
POLICY 32.1
RELATED PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 36
POLICY 36.4
RELATED PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 40
POLICY 40.1 POLICY 40.2 POLICY 40.3 POLICY 40.4
RELATED HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 41
POLICY 41.1 POLICY 41.2 POLICY 41.3 POLICY 41.4 POLICY 41.5 POLICY 41.6 POLICY 41.7 POLICY 41.8 POLICY 41.9 POLICY 41.10 POLICY 41.11

25*4
25.5	IMPLEMENTATION
PUBLIC SAFETY CODE REVIEW
Review existing City Codes with public safety provisions and update codes as necessary to comply with the Goals and Policies of the General Plan as follows:
1.	Adopt prescribed ratios of personnel to populatlonfor Fire and Police Departments.
2.	Adopt a fire prevention program for areas with high fire risk such as the Sutter Street historic area and grasslands and natural habitat areas within the City.
3.	Adopt standards for development In the 100-year and 500-year floodways which will ensure that such development will not alter stream flows.
4.	In cooperation with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, adopt standards for development within areas subject to inundation from a failure of Folsom Dam or the dikes retaining Folsom Lake.
5.	Prepare, publish and coordinate an emergency response plan which addresses medical care, escape routes, mutual aid agreements, temporary housing and communications.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 29 - POLICIES 29.1; 29.2; 29.3; 29.4; 29.5; AND 29.6
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 9
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/ Organizations:
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Bureau of Reclamation State Reclamation Board State Department of Resources.
Division of Mines and Geology Sacramento County General Services
•	Responsible Agencies
Fire Department
Community Development Department Public Works Department City Council
•	Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: June 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars__________________________________
180/58,100	$200	$1,000 $9,300 General
Fund
TRAILS. RECREATION AND SAFETY GUIDE
A Subcommittee to the Parks and Recreation Commission will oversee the publication of a trails, recreation and safety guide for the use and enjoyment of parks and open space within the City of Folsom. Publication of the Guide may be accomplished In coordination with local civic groups or a local college or university as a student project.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICY 27.1A; GOAL 29 - POLICY 29.6
• Resource Groups/Agencles/Organlzatlons
Sacramento County Department of Parks and Recreation
State of California Department of Parks and Recreation
California State University at Sacramento
University of California at Davis Local Community Colleges U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Bureau of Reclamation State Reclamation Board State Department of Resources.
Division of Mines and Geology Sacramento County General Services
2:
Parks and Recreation Commission
25-5
Community Development Department Public Works Department Fire Department
•	Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: August 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollar_______________________________________
100/54,500	$2,000 $1,500 $8,000 Developer
Fees,
Grant Funds
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PROCEDURES
Existing emergency response plans shall be reviewed and updated as needed. The emergency response plans shall be published, shall provide for agency coordination and shall address medical care, escape routes, mutual aid agreements and temporary housing and communications in the event of fire, flooding, inundation, earthquake, hazardous materials spill or other emergency situation. The Bureau of Reclamation should be consulted regarding current studies on dam safety and future improvements.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 29 - POLICY 29.5: GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.9; AND 41.10
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 9
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/ Organizations
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department Sacramento General Services Department
California Highway Patrol CALTRANS
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Bureau of Reclamation
•	Responsible Agencies
Public Works Department Fire Department Police Department
•	Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
• Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: February 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR Person Hours/Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/$1,800	$100	$200 $2,100 General Fund
25
25-6

•?.
Community Development Department
•’’I'
By
•S.	..’A.
Brown and Buntin Associates
October 31, 1988






NOISE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
26.1	INTRODUCTION..................................................2
26.1.1	State Policy and Authorization........................2
26.1.2	Related State Regulations............................ 2
26.1.3	Relationship to the General Plan......................3
26.2	SETONG/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES.....................................3
26.2.1	Setting...............................................3
26.2.2	Assumptions.........................................  3
26.2.3	Issues................................................9
26.3	NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.............................12
26.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES...................................14
26.5	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM.......................................14
26.5.1	Land Use Compatibility Criteria......................14
26.5.2	Specific Policies....................................16
NOISE	----------
26.1	INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Noise Element is to mitigate noise conflicts where they presently exist and to minimize future noise conflicts by the adoption of policies and implementation measures designed to achieve land use compatibility for proposed development.
The contents of a Noise Element and the methods used in its preparation have been determined by the requirements of Section 65302(f) of the California Government Code and by the “Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan (Reference 1) adopted and published by the California Office of Noise Control (ONC) in 1976. The ONC Guidelines require that certain major noise sources and areas containing noise sensitive land uses be identified and quantified by preparing generalized noise exposure contours for current and projected conditions within the community. Contours may be prepared in terms of either the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) or the day-night average level (Ldn)1, which are descriptors of total noise exposure at a given location for an annual average day. It is intended that the noise exposure information developed for the Noise Element be incorporated into the General Plan to serve as a basis for achieving land use compatibility within the community. It is also intended that noise exposure information be used to provide baseline levels for use in the development and enforcement of a local noise control ordinance to address noise produced by non-preempted noise sources.
26.1.1	STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
Section 65302(f) of the California Government Code mandates that the General Plan for each City contain a Noise Element which is designed to identify and appraise noise problems in the community.
The State Office of Noise Control has established guidelines which require that current and projected noise levels be analyzed and quantified for the following noise sources:
1.	Highways and freeways.
2.	Primary arterials and major local streets.
3.	Passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and ground rapid transit systems.
4.	Commercial, general aviation, heliport, helistop, and military airport operations, aircraft overflights, jet engine test stands, and all other ground facilities and maintenance functions related to airport operation.
5.	Local industrial plants. Including, but not limited to. railroad classification yards.
6.	Other ground stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as contributing to the community noise environment.
Noise contours are required for these sources, stated in terms of the CNEL or Ldn, and may be used as a guide for establishing a pattern of land uses that minimizes the exposure of community residents to excessive noise.
26.1.2	RELATED STATE REGULATIONS
Other State Laws and regulations regarding noise control are directed toward aircraft, motor vehicles and noise in general.
California Administrative Code. Title 21. Subchapter 6. establishes noise level criteria for airports in California. These regulations apply to the airport operator, and are enforced by the County in which the airport is located. A Noise Impact Boundary based upon the 65 CNEL contour is established, and measures are specified to attain land use compatibility with respect to aircraft/airport noise.
The California Vehicle Code sets noise emission standards for new vehicles, including, autos, trucks, motorcycles and off-road vehicles. Performance standards are also applied to vehicles operated on public streets and roadways. Section 216 of the Streets and Highways Code regulates traffic noise as received at schools near freeways. The Harbors and Navigation Code regulates noise emissions from new motorboats and those operated in or upon inland waters.
‘For an explanation of terminology used in this report refer to the Glossary.
26
26-2
Title 24 of the California Administrative Code regulated Interior noise levels within multiple-occupancy dwellings affected by noise from traffic, aircraft operations, railroads and industrial facilities. The State Penal Code (Section 415) prohibits loud and unusual noise that disturbs the peace, while the Civil Code defines public nuisance which may be caused by noise. The California Environmental Quality Act includes noise as one of the factors in determining environmental impacts.
26.1.3	RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The Noise Element is most related to the Land Use and Circulation Elements of the General Plan. Its relationship to the Land Use Element is direct in that the implementation of either Element has the potential to result in the creation or elimination of a noise conflict between differing land uses. The Land Use Element must be consistent with the Noise Element by preventing the development of incompatible adjacent land uses, preventing impacts upon noise sensitive uses and preventing encroachment upon existing noise producing facilities.
26.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES
26.2.1	SETTING
Based on discussions with the City ofFolsom staff regarding potential major noise sources, it was determined that there are several potentially significant primary sources of community noise within Folsom. These sources include traffic on major roadways and highways, railroad operations. aircraft operations at Mather Air Force Base, and industrial activities.
Analytical noise modeling techniques and noise measurements were used to develop generalized Ldn noise contours for the major roadways. railroads and Industrial noise sources.of. the City of Folsom for existing (1986) and future (2006) conditions.
Analytical noise modeling techniques make use of source-specific data including average levels of activity, hours of operation, seasonal fluctuations, and average levels of noise from
source operations. Analytical methods have been developed for a number of environmental noise sources including roadways, railroad line operations, railroad yard operations, industrial plants and aircraft/airport operations. Such methods will produce reliable results as long as data inputs and assumptions are valid for the sources being studied. The analytical methods used in this report closely follow recommendations made by ONC, and were supplemented where appropriate by field-measured noise level data to account for local conditions. It should be noted that the noise exposure contours presented in this report are based upon annual average conditions, and are not intended to be site-specific where local topography, vegetation or Intervening structures may significantly affect noise exposure at a particular location.
A community noise survey was conducted to describe existing noise levels in noise-sensitive areas within the City ofFolsom so that noise level performance standards could be developed to maintain an acceptable noise environment.
26.2.2	ASSUMPTIONS
ROADWAYS
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (FHWA-RD-77-108) was used to develop Ldn contours for Highway 50 and major roadways in Folsom. The FHWA Model is the analytical method presently favored for traffic noise prediction by most State and local agencies, including CALTRANS. The FHWA Model is based upon reference energy emission levels for automobiles, medium trucks and heavy trucks, with consideration given to vehicle volume, speed, roadway configuration, distance to the receiver and the acoustical characteristics of the site. The FHWA Model was developed to predict hourly LEQ values for free-flowing traffic conditions, and is generally considered to be accurate within 1.5 dB. To predict Ldn values it is necessary to determine the. hourly distribution of traffic for a typical 24-hour day and adjust the traffic volume input data to yield an equivalent hourly traffic volume.
Traffic data representing annual average traffic volumes for existing and future conditions were obtained from CALTRANS and Wilbur Smith and Associates as summarized in the General
2
26-3
Plan data base. The day/nlght distribution of traffic and the truck mix was based upon CALTRANS file data and Brown. Buntln and Associates (BBA) estimates. Using the General Plan data and the FHWA methodology, traffic noise levels as defined by Ldn were calculated for existing (1986) and projected future (2006) traffic volumes. Distances from the center of the roadway to Irin contour values of 60 and 65 dB are summarized In Table 26-1. Input data are presented in the data base of the General Plan.
RESIDENTIAL
, | w | Single 'Fanllyt2-3.fi/ac4.
I Mm'i Single Family High Density/ LE22J Mobllehome Park (4-6.9/acl
I urn I MulU-Famlly Lav Density LZZ_J(7-U.9/ae)
I uvn I MultO-Fanaly Medium 1 ^^,1 Density I12-17.fi/ac)
I I Multi-Family High Density l*fSgJ(18-2S/act
Folaom General Plan Update •PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE
Induatttal/OSce Park Fade..
Proposed Park h*-	! Open Space
PubHe Eli
coiocnacxAL I HC 4 Neighborhood Cammerctai I OC | General CongnerBal I ABC I Artettal CoininriUal I HC I Highway Commrroal I CC | Community Commeraal
ntaiy School
| Central Commercial Mixed Diet. W3C | Regional Community CA I Speciality Cuniiueiual Plat
| BC | Sutter St HSstorie Commercial 1 BFC | Busmeao PrnfaosinnoJ Office
It should be noted that since calculations did not take into consideration shielding caused by local buildings or topographical features, the distances reported in Table 26-1 should be considered as worst-case estimates of noise exposure along roadways in the community. Noise contour maps were prepared from the data contained in Table 26-1 to allow implementation of this Noise Element. See Figure 26-1 for noise contours designated on Land Use Map.
o
I JHB I Junior High School I m I Highschool
Ptopeaed Elementary @> Proposed Junior High School
Proposed High School	P
60 dB Ldn Contour Freoray (U.S. 5d Arterial Road (6 lanes)
Proposed Arertal Road 16 lanes) Community Center Boundry Rail Transit Station Rail Transit
Proposed Study Rt/Future Bridge Crossing
Proposed Intersection Proposed Specific Area Boundry Pettits of Historic Interest Park A Ride Lot
26-4
TABLE 26-1
NOISE CONTOUR DATA TO Ldn CONTOURS DISTANCE IN FEET, CENTER LINE OF ROADWAY
SEGMENT NOS.	DESCRIPTION	CURRENT 60 Db	FUTURE 60 Db
Highway 50 1 2 3	Folsom Boulevard to Prairie City Road Prairie City Road to Scott Road Scott Road to Sacramento County Line	524 518 530	1.071 991 947
Folsom Boulevard 4	Highway 50 to Lddesdorff	194	402
Bidwell Street 5	Folsom Boulevard to Riley Street	73	57
East Bidwell Street 6 7	Coloma to Blue Ravine Blue Ravine to SP RR Tracks	63 53	143 136
Scott Road 8	SPT RR Tracks to Highway 50	35	252
Riley Street 9 10	Lddesdorff to Natoma Street Natoma Street to East Bidwell	93 55	119 83
Sutter Street 11	Folsom Boulevard to Coloma	15	n/a
Natoma Street 12 28	Folaom Boulevard to Folaom Dam Road Folsom Dam Road to County Line	57 93	87 272
Folsom-Auburn Road
13	Orrenhark Lane to Oak Avenue Parkway	127	305
14	Oak Avenue Parkway to Folsom Dam Road	114	255
27	Folaom Dam Road to County Line	101	595
Oak Avenue Parkway			
15	Main Avenue to Folsom-Aubum Road	21	
16	Folsom-Aubum to End	20	
American River Canyon Drive
17 18	Greenback Lane to Craw Canyon Drive Crow Canyon Drive to Oak Avenue Parkway	50 18	67 41
Greenback Lane 19	Main Street to Madison Avenue	119	170
20	Madison Avenue to Folsom-Aubum	204	248
Prairie City Road 21	Highway 50 to Blue Ravine Road	35	217
Sibley Street 22	Blue Ravine Road to Figueroa Street	39	169
Blue Ravine Road 23	Folsom Boulevard to East Natoma	39	225
Folsom Dam Road 24	Folsom-Aubum to East Natoma	20	30
Madison Avenue 25	Main Street to Greenback Lane	200	145
Lddesdorff Street 26	Folaom Boulevard to Greenback Lane	92	78
I
2
26-5
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
Aircraft/airport noise exposures typically consist of a number of brief, relatively noisy events punctuated by long periods of relative quiet between aircraft overflights. The annoyance due to aircraft noise exposures is reasonably well predicted by using the CNEL descriptor, which averages the total noise exposure over an annual average day. In California, the 65 dB CNEL contour is defined by the Administrative Code (Title 21) as the Noise Impact Boundary for airport noise exposures, although there is some speculation that a CNEL of 60 dB is a better indicator of adverse public reaction for small general aviation airports.
For the Noise Element, airport noise exposures should be evaluated by comparison to the CNEL contours developed for Mather Air Force Base reported by the Mather Air Force Base Comprehensive Land Use Plan prepared by Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG), or by the latest AICUZ report for Mather Air Force Base. These noise contours have been plotted on a map of the City, and should be considered in evaluating noise impacts in the vicinity of Mather Field.
RAILROADS
The Southern Pacific Transportation Company (SPRR) operates a switch engine locomotive on a twice-weeldy scheduled basis between Sacramento and the MCLRR yard in Placerville. Called the “Placerville Local”, this train carries a small number of cars between the two Cities, usually on Wednesdays and Saturdays. The cumulative dally noise exposure from this operation is less than 60 dB Ldn at 50 feet from the track centerline, based upon BBA noise measurement data obtained in the Sacramento area. On a single event basis, the maximum noise level during a train passage is about 92 dBA at 50 feet if the horn is used. SPRR line operations do not presently create a significant noise impact in the City of Folsom. No estimates of future operational levels are available from the SPRR
INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES
The production of noise is an inherent part of many industrial processes, even when the best
available noise control technology is applied. Noise production within an industrial facility is controlled indirectly by Federal and State employee health and safety regulations (OSHA and CAL-OSHA), but exterior noise emissions from industrial operations have the potential to exceed locally acceptable standards at noise sensitive land uses.
Industrial noise control Issues focus upon two objectives: to prevent the introduction of new noise-producing uses in a noise sensitive area, and to prevent encroachment of noise sensitive uses upon existing industrial facilities. The first objective can be achieved by applying performance standards to proposed new industrial uses. The second objective canbemet by requiring that new noise sensitive uses in proximity to existing industrial facilities Include mitigation measures to ensure compliance with the same performance standards.
REPRESENTATIVE INDUSTRIAL SOURCES
The following descriptions of existing industrial noise sources in Folsom are intended to be representative of the relative noise impacts of such uses, and to identify specific noise sources which should be considered in the review of development proposals in their environs. The locations of these noise sources are shown by Figure 26-1.
J&M Cabinets: 9477 Greenback Lane: The primary noise source associated with the operation is a fan and cyclone unit used to control sawdust. This equipment operates from 7:30 am. to 4:30 p.m. weekdays, and occasionally for four hours of Saturdays. The noise level at the nearest residence is about 51-52 dBA. The estimated location of the 60 dB Ldn contour is shown on the noise contour maps on file at the City of Folsom.
Contact: Tom Barnett, Co-Owner (May-28, 1987)
Fischer Cabinets: 804 Reading Way: The primary noise source associated with this operation is a fan and cyclone unit which operates from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 or 5:30 p.m. weekdays. The noise level at the nearest residence is about
26
26-6
57-58 dBA The 60 dBA Ldn contour for this facility lies within 50 feet of the fan and cyclone unit.
Contact: Linda Waller. Office Manager (May 28. 1987)
•	Intel Corporation: Prairie City Road at Highway 50: There are no significant noise sources associated with the Intel facility. A large cooling tower located in the southwest portion of the site produces a noise level of about 54-55 dBA at a distance of 400 feet. The 60 dB Ldn contour lies within the property boundaries.
•American River Aggregates: North of Prairie City Road: This operation consists of processing dredge-tailings for rock and asphalt production. An asphalt batch plant and a rock plant are present, each of which is a significant noise source. The facility is typically open 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., with rock processing beginning as early as 6:00 a.m. Days of operation are usually Monday through Friday, although weekend operations may occur.
According to the Plant Manager, this facility has perhaps two years remaining to operate under the current lease, as the property is proposed to be developed as an industrial park. If development occurs as proposed, the aggregate processing operation would no longer be a significant noise source. If development plans change so that the aggregate plant remains in operation, proposed noise-sensitive land uses in the plant vicinity should be evaluated for potential noise Impacts.
Contact: John Kemp, Plant Manager
•	Pacific Gas and Electric Substation: South of Scott Road: The noise produced by this electrical substation consists of a steady “hum" producing a constant noise level of 52 DBA at a distance of about 100 feet. The 60 dB Ldn contour forthis facility lies within WO feetrof the-nearest transformers and fans.
• Bay City Building Materials and Teichert Industries Ready Mix Plant: Levy road: These cement batch plant operations are capable of producing noise due to on-site front loader and heavy truck movements in delivering and ar-
ranging cement mix materials. The primary noise sources, however, are cement truck engines. which must be run at relatively high speeds to spin the cement mixing drum as the ready mix materials are loaded from the batch plant. Current operations occur during daytime hours and the Ldn 60 dB contours are located within the site boundaries and the adj acent open space. Noise levels from the cement loading operations would exceed the performance standards of the Noise Element at the property lines, however. Noise sensitive land uses should therefore not be placed in close proximity to these facilities unless an acoustical analysis has been prepared to ensure compliance with the performance standards.
• Aerojet General Corporation: Folsom Boulevard at Aerojet Road: Although located outside the Folsom City Limits, the Aerojet facility conducts noise producing operations which may affect areas within Folsom. Noise sources involved in Aerojet operations include testing of rocket engines, large hovercraft fans and high-pressure fire nozzles. Other engine testing could occur in the future. Noise produced by rocket engine testing typically include a brief loud impulsive noise at ignition, followed by several second of sustained lower noise levels. Fan and nozzle testing may consist of sustained noise levels. Testing is usually conducted during daytime hours.
Because of the variability in the nature of noise-producing Aerojet activities, it Is not possible to develop representative noise level contours to address all potential noise impacts. It may be supposed, however, that noise from Aerojet operations would primarily affect the southwest portion of the City, along Highway 50. For this reason, noise sensitive development proposed for the South Folsom Planning Area between Folsom Boulevard and Prairie City Road should be required to include consideration of Aerojet noise impacts in any acoustical analysis ■prepared to address the noise exposuresrof Highway 50 and Mather Air Force Base. Aerojet has provided two noise studies to the City that are incorporated into the EIR and should be referenced in appropriate noise studies.
Contact: Ed Meyer (June 19, 1987)
to
©
26-8
FIGURE 26-2

Q: Community Noise Survey Sites
A: Industrial Area Surveyed
COMMUNITY NOISE SURVEY
As required by the ONC Guidelines, a community noise survey was conducted to document noise exposure In areas of the community containing noise sensitive land uses. The following noise sensitive land uses were Identified within the City of Folsom:
1.	AH residential uses.
2.	Schools.
3.	Long-term care medical facilities, such as hospitals, nursing homes, etc.
sion integrating sound level meter fitted with a 1 / 2 Inch microphone, a Larson-Davis Laboratories Model 700 environmental noise analyzer, and a Metrosonics dB 604 environmental noise analyzer. The measurement systems were calibrated in the field prior to use with acoustical calibrators, and comply with all pertinent requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) forType 1 (Precision) sound level meters. The community noise survey results indicate that typical noise levels in noise sensi-. tive areas of Folsom are In the range of45-55 dB Ldn. Noise from traffic on roadways is the controlling factor for background noise levels in the City. In general, the areas of Folsom which
--------------------------------- TABLE 26-2------------------------------
SUMMARY- OF MEASURED NOISE LEVELS AND ESTIMATED DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE LEVELS (LDN) IN AREAS CONTAINING NOISE SENSITIVE LAND USES
LEVEL, dBA ESTIMATED
SITE DESCRIPTION	LD(1)	LD(2) LN Ldn
I	Lakeside Village Recreation Center	50.2	45.6	36.1	47.7
2	North end of Reading Way	47.7	47.5	46.3	52.9
3	Cimarron and Fausset Courts	43.1	44.9	38.9	46.6
4	Mount Olive Lutheran Church	45.5	48.7	38.0	47.6
5	Theodore Judah School	47.2	44.9	42.5	49.7
6*	110 River Ridge Way	50.1	-	45.4	52.8
7*	125 Mesquite	45.7	-	44.1	50.8
8*	110 Willow Creek	49.3	-	46.5	53.5
•Long-Term Monitoring Site
LD LEQ during day time hours (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) LN LEQ during night time hours (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.)
Noise monitoring sites were selected to be representative of typical conditions In areas of the community where such uses are located. Short-term noise monitoring was conducted during three periods of the day and night on May 28. and May 29. 1987. so that reasonable estimates of Ldn could be prepared. Three long-term noise monitoring sites were established to establish day night statistical trends during the period. The data collected Included the LEQ and other statistical descriptors. Noise monitoring sites, measured noise levels and estimated Ldn values of each site are summarized in Table 26-2: monitoring sites are shown by Figure 26-2.
Community noise monitoring equipment consisted of a Bruel and KjaerType 2230 preci-
contaln noise sensitive uses are relatively quiet except along major roadways.
Figures 26-3 and 26-4 Illustrate ambient noise levels at the long-term monitoring sites over typical 24-hour weekdays.
26.2.3	ISSUES
NORTHWEST FOLSOM
Light Industrial operations on Greenback Lane have the potential to result In noise conflicts at nearby residential receiver locations. Activities at the BLM and Folsom Lake SRA Corporation Yards could affect future residential development In that area. Enforcement of a noise
2
26-9
control ordinance would address most current concerns.
CENTRAL FOLSOM
Light and heavy industrial activities in existing Industrial parks have the potential to result in noise conflicts at nearby residential areas. Noise complaints have been received regarding cabinet shops and auto buffers. Enforcement of a noise control ordinance would address most current concerns.
Activities at the Folsom Rodeo grounds have the potential to result in noise conflicts at adjacent residential areas and residential areas located across the AmericanRiver. Cltypermltsfor use of this facility should consider the potential noise impacts of loudspeaker systems for rodeos or concerts and other noise-producing activities.
NORTH CENTRAL FOLSOM
Aside from future traffic on major roadways. there are no apparent noise concerns in this area at present, but future developments in
the adjoining East Folsom Area could affect residential receivers near Blue Ravine Road. Implementation of the specific policies of the Noise Element will minimize the creation of noise conflicts within this portion of the City.
SOUTH FOLSOM
Future residential ares within this Planning Area may be affected by noise from traffic on major roadways, aircraft operations at Mather Air Force Base, Aerojet activities and future industrial development. Implementation of the specific policies of the Noise Element will minimize the creation of noise conflicts within this portion of the City.
EAST FOLSOM
Future residential areas within this Planning Area may be affected by noise from traffic on major roadways, aircraft operations at Mather Air Force Base, and future industrial developments. Implementation of the specific policies of the Noise Element will minimize the creation of noise conflicts within this portion of the City.
FIGURE 26-3
26-10
FIGURE 26-3
Ambient Noise Levels: 125 Mequite
Lmox
Lsq
L50
Lmin
SPL. dBA	SPL. dBA
FIGURE 26-4
Ambient Noise Levels: 110 Willow Creek
Time Of Day
Lmox
Leq
150
Lmin
Oft-l 1
26.3 NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 30
To protect the citizens of Folsom from the harmful effects of exposure to excessive noise and to protect the economic base of Folsom by preventing the encroachment of incompatible land uses within areas affected by existing noise-producing uses.
POLICY 30.1
Provide sufficient noise exposure information in the General Plan data base so that existing and potential noise impacts may be effectively addressed in the land use planning and project review processes.
POLICY 30.3
Protect areas within the City where the present noise environment is within acceptable limits.
POLICY 30.4
Areas within the City of Folsom shall be designated as noise impacted if exposed to existing orprojected exterior noise levels exceeding 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or the performance standards of Table 26-3 of the Noise Element.
Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by five dBA for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises.
Noise from single occurrences such as the passage of locomotives, heavy trucks or aircraft should also be evaluated in terms of single event
-------------------------------—TABLE 26-3 ------------------------------------
NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NEW PROJECTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Noise created by non-transportation-related noise sources associated with new projects or developments shall be controlled so as not to exceed the noise level standards as set forth below as measured at any affected residentially designated lands or land use situated in either the incorporated or unincorporated areas. New residential development shall not be allowed where the ambient noise level due to non-transportation-related noise sources win exceed the noise level standards as set forth below:
EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS. DBA
CUMULATIVE NUMBER OF MINUTES DAYTIME 7:00 AM NIGHTTIME 10:00 P.M. CATEGORY	IN ANY ONE-HOUR TIME PERIOD	TO 10:00 P.M.	TO 7:00 AM.
1	30	50	45
2	15	55	50
3	5	60	55
4	1	65	60
5	0	70	65
POLICY 30.2
Develop and implement effective strategies to abate and avoid excessive noise exposures in the City by requiring that effective noise mitigation measures be incorporated into the design of new noise-generating and new noise-sensitive land uses.
noise levels. The maximum noise level created by such an event may have the potential to result in activity interference even though the cumulative noise exposure in terms of Ldn Is within acceptable limits. The potential for sleep disturbance is usually of primary concern in such cases, and should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
26
26-12
POLICY 30.5
New development of residential or other noise sensitive land uses will not be permitted in noise impacted areas unless effective mitigation measures are incorporated into the project design to reduce noise levels to:
1.	For noise due to traffic on public roadways, railroad line operations and aircraft: 60 dB Ldn/ CNEL or less in outdoor activity areas, and interior noise levels to 45 dB Ldn/CNEL or less. Where it is not possible to reduce exterior noise due to these sources to 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or less by incorporating a practical application of the best available noise-reduction technology. an exterior noise level of up to 65 dB Ldn/CNEL will be allowed. Under no circumstances will interior noise levels be permitted to exceed 45 dB Ldn/ CNEL with the windows and doors dosed.
2.	For non-transportation related noise sources: achieve compliance with the performance standards contained within Table 26-3.
3.	If compliance with the adopted standards and policies of the Noise Element will not be achieved, a statement of overriding considerations for the project must be provided.
POLICY 30.6
When industrial, commercial land uses or other uses Including non-transportation related noise sources are proposed which would affect areas containing noise sensitive land uses, noise levels generated by the proposed use shall not exceed the performance standards contained within Table 26-3.
POLICY 30.7
Prior to approval of proposed development of residential or other noise-sensitive land uses in a noise impacted area, an Acoustical Analysis may be required. The acoustical analysis shall:
1.	Be the responsibility of the applicant.
2.	Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
3.	Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and locations to adequately describe local conditions.
4.	Include estimated noise levels in terms of Ldn/CNEL and/or the standards of Table 26-3 for existing and projected future (20 years hence) conditions, with a comparison made to the adopted policies of the Noise Element.
5.	Include recommendations for appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies and standards of the Noise Element. Where the noise source in question consists of intermittent single events, the report must address the effects of maximum noise levels in sleeping rooms in terms of possible sleep disturbance.
6.	Include estimates of noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been implemented.
POLICY 30.8
The City of Folsom shall endeavor to develop and employ procedures to ensure that requirements imposed pursuant to the findings of an acoustical analysis are Implemented as part of the prqj ect review and building permit processes. The appropriate time for requiring an acoustical analysis would be as early in the project review process as possible so that noise mitigation may be an integral part of the project design.
POLICY 30.9
Noise level criteria applied to land uses other than residential or other noise sensitive uses shall be consistent with the standards in Figure 26-5.
POLICY 30.10
The City of Folsom shall enforce the State Noise Insulation Standards (California Administrative Code. Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code (UBC). Title 24 requires that an acoustical analysis be prepared for all new developments of multi-family dwellings.
26-13
condominiums, hotels and motels proposed for areas within the 60 dB Ldn/CNEL contour of a major noise source for the purpose of documenting that an acceptable interior noise level of 45 dB Ldn/CNEL or below will be achieved. UBC Chapter 35 requires that common wall and floor/ ceiling assemblies within multi-family dwellings comply with minimum standards concerning the transmission of airborne sound and structure-borne impact noise.
POLICY 30.11
relative to the roadway should incorporate an earth berm so that the total height of the solid portion of the barrier (such as masonry or concrete) does not exceed six feet.
2.	The total height of a noise barrier above roadway elevation should normally be limited to 12 feet.
3.	The noise barriers should be designed so that their appearance is consistent with other noise barriers in the project vicinity.
The City of Folsom shall adopt a community noise control ordinance to address noise complaints and to provide local industry with performance standards for future development and equipment modifications. The ordinance should be consistent with the model noise control ordinance contained in the data base of the General Plan.
POLICY 30.12
The City of Folsom shall actively enforce existing sections of the California Vehicle Code relating to adequate vehicle mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
POLICY 30.13
The findings and specific policies of the Noise Element shall be incorporated into the City of Folsom Zoning Code as appropriate.
POLICY 30.14
26.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED HOUSING AND POLICIES
RELATED GENERAL GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
The City of Folsom shall periodically review and update the Noise Element to ensure that noise exposure information and specific policies are consistent with changing conditions within the community and with noise control regulations enacted after the adoption of this Element.
.POLICY 30.15 .
If noise barriers are required to achieve the noise level standards contained within this Element. the following construction practices are I recommended:
1.	Noise barriers exceeding six feet in height
26.5	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
26.5.1	LAND USE COMPATIBILITY CRITERIA
The ONC “Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan", include recommended exterior and interior noise level standards for local jurisdictions to Identify and prevent the creation of incompatible land uses due to noise. The ONC guidelines contain a land use compatibility table which describes the compatibility of different land uses with a range of environmental noise levels in terms of Ldn or CNEL.
26
26-14
FIGURE 26-5
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY COMMUNITY NOISE ENVIRONMENTS
LAND USE CATEGORY
Residential - Single Family Duplex, Mobile Home
Residential - Multi-Family
Transient Lodging -Motel, Hotel
School, Library, Church, Hospital, Nursing Home
Auditorium, Concert Hall, Amphitheatre
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
Playground, Neighborhood Park
Golf Course, Stable, Water Recreation, Cemetery
Office Building, Business, Commercial & Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture
COMMUNITY NOISE
INTERPRETATION
23 NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
CONDITIONALLY
ACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with dosed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
■ CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
CONSIDERATIONS IN DETERMINATION OF NOISE - COMPATIBLE LAND USE
A.	NORMALIZATION NOISE EXPOSURE
INFORMATION DESIRED
Where sufficient data exists. evaluate land use suitable with respeet to a "normalized* value of CNEL or L^,. Normalized values are nhtatngd hy adding nr anhlrartlng thn	d—1 In Tab)- 1
to the measured or calculated of CNEL or LM.
B.	NOISE SOURCE CHARACTERISTICS.
The land uae-nolae compatibility recommendations should be viewed in relation to specific source of the noise. For example, aircraft and railroad noise Is normally made up of higher single noise events than auto traffic but occurs less frequently. Therefore, different sources yielding the same composite noise exposes do not necessarily create thesame noise environment. The State Aeronautics Act uses 65 dB CNEL as the criterion which airports must eventually meet to protect existing residential communities from unacceptable exposure to aircraft noise. In order to facilitate the purposes of the Act. one of which to encourage land compatible with the 65 dB CNEL criterion wherever possible, and In order to facilitate the ability of airports to
comply with the Act. residential uses located In Community Noise Exposure Areas greater than 65 dB should be discouraged and considered located within normally unacceptable areas.
C.	SUITABLE INTERIOR ENVIRONMENTS
One objective oflocatmg residential units relative to a known noise source Is to maintain a suitable Interior noise environment at no greater than 45dB-CNELaf Lfc. This requirement, coupled, with the measured or calculated noise reduction performance of the type of structure under consideration, should govern the minimum acceptable distance to noise source.
D.	ACCEPTABLE OUTDOOR ENVIRONMENTS
Another consideration, which In some communities is an overriding factor, fa the destre for an acceptable outdoor noise environment. When this is the case, mote restrictive standards for land use compatibility, typically below the maximum considered "normally acceptable* for that land use category, may be appropriate.
Source: California Office of Noise Control
Figure 26-5 is provided as a guide concerning the sensitivity of different land uses to their noise environment. It is intended to illustrate the range of noise levels which will allow the full range of activities normally associated with a given land use. For example, exterior noise levels in the range of 50-60 dB Ldn are generally considered acceptable for residential land uses, since these levels will usually allow normal outdoor and indoor activities such as sleep and communication to occur without interruption. Industrial facilities, however, can be relatively insensitive to noise and may often be located in a noise environment of up to 75 dB	without
significant adverse effects.
Noise compatibility criteria based upon Ldn values are to be applied to evaluating proposed noise sensitive land uses with respect to established transportation noise sources such as traffic on public roadways, railroads and airports. The applicability of Ldn based criteria for such sources has been well documented in terms of expected public response and legal responsibilities.
The noise standards in Table 26-3 are to be applied as performance standards for proposed industrial and commercial land uses and other land uses involving new locally-regulated noise sources which may affect noise sensitive land uses. Similarly, the noise standards in Table 26-3 are to be applied to determine whether a proposed noise sensitive use is compatible with an existing locally-regulated noise source.
26.5.2	SPECIFIC POLICIES
ANNUAL UPDATE
The City will update all Elements of the General Plan. An annual report will be made to the Planning Commission and City Council on the status of the General Plan Program
•	Responsible Agency
Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agencies
Community Development Department Planning Commission City Council
• Target Dates: Start: November 1989 Complete: On-Going
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR				
Person Hours/ Dollars	Printing	Direct	Total	Funding
80/53,600	$300	$400	$4,300	General Fund
HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE
Update the Housing Element to Include applicable goals and policies of the General Plan.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30
•	Resource Group/Agency/Organization
California Housing and Community Development Department
•	Responsible Agency
Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agency
Planning Commission City Council
•	Target Dates: Start: December 1988
Complete: February 1989
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30 - POLICY 30.14	ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
• Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations	Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
State Office of Noise Control	
State Office of Planning and Research State Office and Housing and Community Development	120/31,000	$200	$500	$6,700 General Fund, Developer Fees
26-16
NOISE CONTROL
REFERENCE NOISE ORDINANCE
Revise the City’s Building Code as necessary to:
1.	Require effective noise mitigation measures be incorporated into the design and construction of new noise-generating and new noise-sensitive land uses.
2.	Require compliance with mitigation measures identified in acoustical analyses.
3.	Enforce Noise Insulation Standards (California Administrative Code. Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the UBC.
4.	Adopt building standards and guidelines for development in noise impacted areas.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30 - POLICIES 30.2; 30.5; 30.6; 30.8; AND 30.10
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 14
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organlzations
Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Central Valley Region
USDA Soil Conservation Service
•	Responsible Agency
Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency
Building Inspection Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: July 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR				
Person Hours/ Dollars	Printing	Direct	Total	Funding
20/$900	$100	$100	$1,100	General Fund
Revise the Zoning Code to reference the Noise Ordinance where appropriate.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Resource Group/Agency/Organization
State Division of Health
•	Responsible Agency
Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agency
City Council
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COST
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
20/$900	$200 $200 $1,300
NOISE ORDINANCE
Adopt a Noise Ordinance to be consistent with the model noise control ordinance contained in the data base of the General Plan and which implements the specific policies of the Noise Element of the General Plan Including the following measures:
1.	Procedure for addressing noise complaints.
2.	Provlde local industry with performance standards forfuture development and equipment modifications.
3.	Require that effective noise mitigationmeas-ures be incorporated into the design of new noise-generating and new noise-sensitive land uses.
4.	Protect areas within the City where the present noise environment is within acceptable limits.
2
26-17
5.	Designation, of noise impacted areas within the City according to Policy 30.4 of the Noise Element.
6.	New development of residential or other noise sensitive land uses will not be permitted in noise-impacted areas unless effective mitigation measures are incorporated into the project design to reduce noise levels to:
•	Aircraft: 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or less in outdoor activity areas.
•	Interior noise levels to 45 dB Ldn/CNEL or less.
Where it is not possible to reduce exterior noise due to these sources to 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or less by incorporating a practical application of the best available noise-reduction technology, an exterior noise level of up to 65 dB Ldn/CNEL will be allowed. Under no circumstances will interior noise levels be permitted to exceed 45 dB Ldn/CNEL with the windows and doors closed.
7.	Adopt performance standards contained within Table 26-3 of the Noise Element for non-transportation related noise sources.
8.	Noise level criteria shall be consistent with the Noise Element Policy 30.9.
Enforcement of the State Noise Insulation Standards (California Administrative Code. Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the UBC. Title 24 requires that an acoustical analysis be prepared for all new developments of multi-family dwellings, condominiums, hotels and motels proposed for areas within the 60 dB Ldn/CNEL contour of a maj or noise source for the purpose of documenting that an acceptable interior noise level of 45 dB Ldn/CNEL or below will be achieved. UBC Chapter 35 requires that common wall and floor/ ceiling assemblies within multi-family dwellings comply with minimum standards concerning the transmission of airborne sound and structure-.bome impact noise.
9.	Require acoustical analyses in accordance with the above paragraph and prior to consideration of proposed development of residential or other noise-sensitive land uses in a noise-impacted area. An acoustical analy-
•	Be the responsibility of the applicant.
•	Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
•	Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and locations to adequately describe local conditions.
•	Include estimated noise levels in terms of Ldn/ CNEL and/ or the standards of Table 26-3 for existing and projected future (20 years hence) conditions, with a comparison made to the adopted policies of the Noise Element.
•	Include recommendations for appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies and standards of the Noise Element. Where the noise source in question consists of intermittent single events, the report must address the effects of maximum noise levels in sleeping roams in terms of possible sleep disturbance.
•	Include estimates of noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been implemented. If compliance with the adopted standards and policies of the Noise Element will not be achieved, a statement of overriding considerations for the project must be provided.
lO.New equipment and vehicles purchased by the City of Folsom shall comply with noise level performance standards consistent with the best available noise reduction technology.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30 - POLICIES 30.2; 30.3; 30.4; 30.5; 30.6; 30.7; 30.8; 30.9; 30.10; 30.11; 30.12; 30.13; AND 30.14
•	Folsom Municipal Code: New Title
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizatlons
State Office of Noise Control Sacramento County Health Department
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
26
26-18
Community Development Department
• Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars___________________________________
140/$6,300	$400	$800 $7,500 General
Fund
GENERAL PLAN DATABASE MAINTENANCE
Maintain and update on a regular basis the database prepared for the General Plan, including but not limited to the following areas:
NOISE
Develop and continually update a database as part of the General Plan Program containing noise exposure information for the City so that noise related Issues can be addressed In the land use planning process.
GROUND WATER MONITORING
Cooperate with the County of Sacramento In developing a computerized, county-managed database on water quality. Seek funding to provide for a County assisted testing program, to continue to Improve information about water quality In the City.
MEDICAL STATISTICS
Cooperate with the Sacramento County Health Department to compile statistics on medical problems potentially related to hazardous materials, and support efforts to gather this information on a statewide basis..
• Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
State Department of Health Sendees
Sacramento County Health Department State Office of Noise Control
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30 - POLICY 30.1; GOAL 41 - POLICY 41.6
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: On-Going
ESTIMATED COSTS OVER SIX MONTHS:
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
3S/$1,620	$100	$400 $2,120 General
Fund,
Development Fees ElRs
CALIFORNIA VEHICLE CODE
The City of Folsom shall actively enforce existing sections of the California Vehicle Code relating to adequate vehicle mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30 - POLICY 30.12
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 10
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
State Motor Vehicle Department State Air Resources Board State Office of Noise Control
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Police Department
•	Target Dates: Start: Continuance of
Existing Program. Complete: On-Going
•	Estimated Costs Per Year
No additional costs.
26-19
... ' •; ■ r? sp.-
Prepared For The City of Folsom Community Development Department
By . '	.
QUAD Consultants
October 31, 1988

W. .....

PAGE
31.1	INTRODUCTION....................................................2
31.1.1	State Policy and Authorization...........................2
31.1.2	Related State and Federal Regulations....................2
31.1.3	Relationship to the General Plan.........................2
31.1.4	Relationship to Adjacent Jurisdictions...................2
31.2	SETONG/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES.......................................2
31.2.1	Setting..................................................2
31.2.2	Assumptions..............................................3
31.2.2	Issues...................................................4
31.3	PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.................5
31.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES.....................................10
31.5	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM.........................................11
Parks and Recreation Master Plan...............................11
Pedestrian and Bicycle Master Plan.............................12
Title 4 - Parks and Recreation.................................12
Incentive Programs...........................................  13
Trails, Recreation and Safety Guide............................13
PARK & RECREATION
31.1	INTRODUCTION
• California Environmental Quality Act
1
Recreation is the self-rewarding voluntary use of leisure time for refreshment, diversion or renewal of the individual.
The Parks and Recreation Element identifies Folsom's diverse recreational facilities and activities and establishes policy for acquisition, development, administration and utilization of Folsom’s parks and recreation resources. All park and recreation facilities shall be located, constructed, operated and maintained In accordance with the goals, policies and standards contained herein.
31.1.1	STATE POLICY AND
AUTHORIZATION
• Government Code Section 65300
The Park and Recreation Element Is an optional element of the Folsom General Plan and has been prepared in accordance with Government Code Section 65300 et. al. Local governments are allowed to adopt “any other elements or address any other subjects which...relate to the physical development of the county or city" (Government Code Section 65303). Optional elements have the same force and effect as mandatory ones. Including required consistency of proposed zoning, subdivisions, public works and specific plans. The Land Use Element, the Open Space and Conservation Element, and Circulation Element are required to address issues related to the development and operation of parks and recreation facilities.
31.1.2	RELATED STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS
•Quimby Act (Government Code Section 66477)
The Quimby Act allows local agencies to establish ordinances requiring residential subdivision developers to provide land or in-lieu fees for park and recreation purposes, and specifying acceptable uses or restrictions on the expenditure of such funds. The Act requires that the City adopt a Recreation Element If it Is to enact a parkland dedicatlon/fee ordinance.
The adoption or amendment of the general plan and its elements constitutes a project under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the State EIRGuidelines. If any aspect of the proposed general plan document or amendment. Individually or cumulatively, may significantly affect the environment, the City must prepare an Environmental Impact Report (EIR).
31.1.3	RELATIONSHIP TO THE
GENERAL PLAN
The Parks and Recreation Element directly effects the Land Use Element. Open Space and Conservation Element. Circulation Element. Public Facilities Element and indirectly effects the Housing Element and Noise Element.
31.1.4	RELATIONSHIP TO ADJACENT JURISDICTIONS
The following agencies own and/or administer recreation facilities within and/or adjacent to the City of Folsom:
United States - Bureau of Reclamation
State of California - Division of Parks and Recreation
State of California - Division of Fish and Game
State of California - Department of Corrections
County of Sacramento - Parks and Recreation
County of El Dorado - Parks and Recreation
Folsom-Cordova School District
Los Rios Community College District
31.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES
31.2.1	SETTING
Volume III. Chapter 82.0 ofthe General Plan and the Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) describe the setting of the Folsom area and the data base upon which the General Plan has been prepared. The following tables summarize the recreation facilities of the City of Folsom.
31-2
3
TABLE 31-1
RECREATION FACILITIES 				
Total Parks (City Owned):		Total ACREAGE	
		(City Owned):	
Mini Parks		Mini Parks	
Developed -	1	Developed -	1
Undeveloped -	6	Undeveloped -	6
		Active -	1
		Passive -	6
		Total-	7
Neighborhood Parks		Neighborhood Parks	
Developed -	1	Developed -	5
Undeveloped -	2	Undeveloped -	31
		Active -	5
		Passive -	16
		Special Use -	15
		Total-	36
Community Parks		Community Parks	
Developed -	2	Developed -	60
Undeveloped -	3	Undeveloped-	141
		Active -	108
		Passive -	78
		Special Use -	15
		Total-	201
School/Parks		School/Parks	
Developed -	0	Developed -	0
Undeveloped -	12	Undeveloped -	117
		Active -	76
		Passive -	41
		Total-	117
Nature Areas/		Nature Areas/	
Parkways 2		Parkways	
31.2.2 ASSUMPTIONS
OPEN SPACE AND BIKEWAYS
The open space for preservation of natural resources and the open space for trails are listed In this element for purposes of a complete description of recreation related facilities. Policies
affecting open space for preservation are contained In the Open Space and Conservation Element. Policies affecting bikeways and trails are contained In the Transportation and Circulation Element.
JOINT USE AGREEMENTS
The City of Folsom and the Folsom Cordova Unified School District have a Joint Use Facility Agreement which allows the City and the District to share facilities. These agreements are assumed to continue. Approximately sixty percent of all City recreation programs are held at school facilities. Due to scheduling constraints, school facilities are currently at maximum use levels. Joint use with other agencies Is encouraged.
INCREASED DEMAND FOR RECREATION
Residents are more health conscious and recognize the benefits of recreational activities. Demands are increasing on recreation facilities and programs because of this awareness. This trend is assumed to continue through the planning period.
LATCH is i uS
There has been an increase In famines where both parents work. This has created a demand foryouth recreation activities. The State is presently assisting with grants to cover the start-up cost of developing before and after school programs. It is assumed that the number of latch key kids will continue to increase In Folsom.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT
The City receives strong support from the community in developing and maintaining the parks and recreation system. This community support Is anticipated to continue.
IMPACTED FACILITIES
The City of Folsom is growing rapidly with a corresponding Increase In the demand for recreation services and facilities. The growth has surpassed the availability of present facilities and programs. This growth is assumed to continue.
31-3
HUMBUG CREEK/WILLOW CREEK PARKWAY
1
The State Department of Fish and Game (DFG) Is assisting in the preservation of the Humbug Creek/Willow Creek Parkway as an ecological reserve. Standards and policies for this area have been developed, based upon past actions by the City Council and the DFG. It is assumed that Fish and Game will continue to lead the preservation effort.
CITY FOCUS
It is assumed that the City will focus its planning, development and maintenance operations onmlniparks, neighborhood parks, school/ parks, special use areas and community parks. Within the City boundaries the City will work with the state, Sacramento County and Los Rios Community College District in the development and operation of Regional Parks and open space / parkways.
ACTIVE RECREATION ACREAGE
Active recreation acreage Is defined as land which can be developed into high use facilities. High use facilities include, but are not limited to such facilities as. soccer fields, hardball diamonds, softball fields, football fields, gymnasiums, tennis courts, and swimming pools.
PASSIVE RECREATION ACREAGE
Passive recreation acreage is defined as land designed for a low activity level. Passive recreation acreage Includes, but is not limited to. picnic barbecues areas, shaded tuifed area, tot lots, shaded pavilion areas, walking trails, and nature trails.
CHANGE IN RECREATION NEEDS
It is assumed that as the community grows and diversifies the recreational and leisure needs of the community will change.
31.2.2	ISSUES
Issues identified during the 1988 preparation of the Parks and Recreation Element include but are not limited to:
RESPONDING TO CHANGING RECREATION PROGRAM NEEDS
As new residents settle in Folsom, the City is having to adjust the recreation programs and facilities to meet the communities needs. As an example, more youth now live in Folsom and there is a significant demand on youth activities.
MAINTENANCE AND DEVELOPMENT
The development of new facilities have been delayed because funds may not be available for their ongoing maintenance.
COST OF DEVELOPING PARKLANDS
While the City receives land or fees for parklands. significant parcels of parkland are not developed. Funds are limited for the construction of facilities and therefore dedicated parklands are not being utilized for their Intended purpose. It may take years to develop these parklands.
KEEPING PACE WITH GROWTH
The City continues to lag in the development of parks and recreation facilities and staff in relation to its growth in population.
CHANGE IN PROGRAMING. POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
As the demands on the Parks and Recreation staff and facilities increase, the City has had to resort to more elaborate tracking and administrative procedures for organized use of facilities and programs. This Increase in paperwork, in order to insure equity. Is making it more time consuming and cumbersome for persons and groups to sign up to use facilities. Residents perceive that these procedures less friendly.
COST OF PROGRAMS AND MAINTENANCE
There are limited dollars within the City’s general fund for recreation programs and maintenance of parks and recreation facilities. New sources of funding need to be obtained.
31-4
3
31.3	PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
A complete listing of Folsom’s Goals and Policies listed is in Chapter 13. The Goals and Policies of the Parks and Recreation Element are presented below followed by related goals and policies of the Folsom General Plan.
The first goal of the General Plan establishes the tone and direction of all subsequent goals and policies. Goal 1 is restated here to set the tone of this Parks and Recreation Element.
GOAL 1
To retain and enhance Folsom's quality of life, separate identity and sense of community. Folsom's identity arid quality of life are defined by:
1.	The diverse natural setting, including the
American River, its tributary streams, natural vegetation, topography, native wildlife, and other unique features of the landscape.
2.	Developed parks and open space.
3.	The historic district and other historic places throughout the community.
4.	The State prison site, which provides a large, visual open area in the City.
5.	The physical form of Folsom's neighborhoods.
6.	Ease of movement.
7.	Public access to pedestrian and bicycle trails.
POLICY 1.1
New development shall preserve and/or enhance to the maximum degree feasible, the existing natural vegetation, landscape features and open space, consistent with the Goals and Policies of this Plan.
POLICY 1.2
Existing viewsheds and opportunities for viewsheds shall be incorporated into the design of new developments.
POLICY 1.3
Each residential neighborhood shall be planned with at least one park/ recreational/
school area within one half mile of each residential unit.
POLICY 1.4
Each new residential development shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access to parks or schools located within or near the development. 1-5 Each new residential development shall be designed with a system of local streets, collector streets, and access to an arterial road that protects the residents from through-traffic. Street improvements that would enhance circulation in existing developments shall also be identified.
POLICY 1.6
Folsom’s historic district shall be enhanced and maintained through the improvement of public facilities.
POLICY 1.7
Historic buildings or locations shall be preserved or Incorporated into the design of new developments whenever possible.
POLICY 1.8
The City shall prepare an inventory of historically and culturally significant buildings and sites. At the conclusion of the Inventory, if it is determined that there are buildings or sites of local, state or national significance, the City or other concerned parties (such as the State or the Historical Society) shall be given the first right of refusal for the purchase of the site and/or building in the event that development of the site will result in the demolition or significant alteration of the structure.
POLICIES 1.9
The riparian habitats of the American River, its tributaries, other watercourses, ponds and reservoirs in Folsom, shall be preserved in their natural state and/or in conformance with a Department of Fish and Game approved development and management plan.
POLICY 1.10
When development incentives are required for the preservation of identified resources and
31-5
1
open spaces, the City and public shall cumulatively receive the greater short-term and longterm benefits of such incentives.
The goals and policies of the Parks and Recreation Element are:
GOAL 35
To achieve and maintain qualityparkswhich provide optimum satisfaction to the leisure and recreation needs of the citizens.
POLICY 35.1
The City shall construct parks with originality and innovation in design that provide challenge and self-renewal to the user and viewer.
POLICY 35.2
The City shall develop a listing of equipment standards and design guidelines for parks and recreation facilities.
POLICY 35.3
The City shall maintain its parks and recreation facilities in accordance with City adopted maintenance standards.
POLICY 35.4
The City shall encourage, where appropriate, the inclusion of bikeways, walkways, and equestrian trails in parks, parkways, and open space acreage.
POLICY 35.5
Where feasible, park sites throughout the City shall be integrated with the Bikeways Master Plan and bicycle trails outside the City such as the American River Bike Path.
POLICY 35.6
The City shall encourage the development of parks with night-use capability.
POLICY 35.7
The City shall encourage construction of shelters, such as pavilions, arbors, lattice cano-
pies. etc. to form shade and shelter for year round use. In conjunction with the shelters, the planting of trees shall be encouraged to increase the shade areas and aesthetics of the parks.
POLICY 35.8
Park sites shall be accepted by the City if judged to be useful for passive and/or active uses. Land constrained by drainage, slopes, and structures which limit the full recreational use of the site shall not be accepted as parkland acreage. Such lands may be accepted as open space or parkway acreage. Credit or partial credit for constrained lands may be allowed if they are found to be useable or can be made useable in compliance with the standards for parkland dedication included in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan and Parkland Dedication Ordinance.
POLICY 35.9
Easements and designated openspace/natu-ral areas shall not be credited as parkland acreage. These areas may be used for parkland but shall not be credited for Parkland pursuant to the parkland dedication ordinance.
These easements, natural areas and designated openspaces are an existing resource within Folsom as identified in the General Plan and that to credit these lands for Parkland would reduce the full potential of open space that the City requires in order to achieve and maintain the desired quality of life.
POLICY 35.10
The City shall actively encourage the protection and preservation of natural habitats identified in the Open space and Conservation Element.
POUCY35.il
The City shall strive to acquire and develop parklands within existing neighborhoods which comply with the standards of this Element and the General Plan.
POLICY 35.12
The following standards are the minimum acceptable standards for parks, open space and recreation facilities in the City of Folsom:
31-6
3
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PARES AND RECREATIONFACILrnES
•	parkland Acreage Standard
Five acres perthousand population (5 acres/ 1.000 persons).
•	PARKLAND
Generalized areas are designated on the Land Use Map of the General Plan for park acreage credit. Those lands which are consistent with the goals and policies of this element and the general plan shall be credited as parkland. Utility easements, floodplains and parkway acreages. those lands already committed to a use shall not be credited as parkland.
•	PARK CATEGORIES
In order to provide a balance, parks have been categorized in terms of their function and sizes. The acreages listed are approximate desirable sizes. The categories are:
•	Mini Parks (1 to 2 acres) - Specialized facilities that usually serve a concentrated or limited population or specific group such as tots or senior citizens. Mini parks may -feature children’s play areas, quiet game areas, landscaping and some sport activities such as multi-purpose courts if space allows. Ideal in dose proximity to apartment complexes, townhouses, or elderly housing. May be used to enhance beauty of the city.
•	Neighborhood Parks (10 to 20 acres) - A recreation area which provides for indoor and outdoor programs and activities. Neighborhood recreation parks should serve one neighborhood, and be centralized within that neighborhood, a park which can be
•	Special Use Areas (undetermined) - Within
the Cltythere are special use areas which do not fit easily in the other categories.
•	Community Parks (20 to 60 acres) - A recreation area which provides recreational opportunities for several neighborhoods. Community parks should avoid duplication of facilities already provided in neighborhood rec-
reation parks, and where suitable, be located adjacent to a secondary school. It should include such facilities as an aquatic center, provision for evening recreation, indoor facilities, amphitheater, specialized athletic fields, tennis, handball, basketball courts, large and small picnic areas, and barbecue facilities, convenient parking, tot play apparatus and restrooms.
•	Regional Parks (200 + acres) - A recreation
area which provides some remoteness from the urban setting or has features of regional significance including opportunities not possible in other parks within the city park system. This type of park serves a population within a large region - usually those within an hour’s travel time. A regional park may be the joint effort of more than one government agency. It should be developed to preserve existing natural areas, areas of great scenic beauty. or areas of historical interest. A regional park could Include such facilities as arboretums, camping areas, boating and fishing facilities, bicycling, equestrian and hiking trails, and other special use facilities.
•	Open space/Natural Areas/Parkways (un-
determined) - Natural habitat areas, stream courses, utility easements or other corridors designated in the Open space and Conservation Element and/or Circulation Element for purpose of preservation of natural features or circulation. Open space is clearly distinguished from parkacreage and shall not be calculated or credited as parkland acreage. Parkways shall be preserved in their natural state with a network of trails for walking, cycling and horseback riding. Parkways are classified as open space for the preservation of natural resources and shall not be credited as parkland acreage.
SPACE STANDARDS
Park sites and related standards are based on Table 31-2. User distribution, user preference, accessibility, availability, and economic factors are to be individually considered.
31-7
31
TABLE 31-2
PARK ACREAGE STANDARDS
PARK CATEGORY	SERVICE AREA	DESIRABLE SIZE	ACRES/1000 POPULATION	POPULATION
Mini Park	Less than 1/4 mile radius	1-2 acres	.5 to 1 acre	1.000-2.000
Neighborhood Park	l/4-l/2mile radius	15 acres	2.5 to 3.5	2.000-5.000
Community Park	Several Neighborhoods 1-2 miles	45 acres	2.5 to 3.5	12.000-25.000
Special Use Recreation Area./ Natural Area/ Wildlife Area/ Parkway	Not applicable standard	Variable depending on desired size	Variable	Within community 25.000 - 50.000
Regional	Several communities within one hour driving time radius	200 + acre	5 to 10	Contiguous to or encompassing natural resources
GOAL 36
To acquire and Improve land and facilities for recreational use In pace with local needs.
POLICY 36.1
The City shall acquire and develop sufficient lands to meet the recreational needs of the citizens.
POLICY 36.2
The City shall encourage the creation of a series of parks that serve as focal points for surrounding neighborhoods.
POLICY 36.3
The City shall encourage the development of parkways and greenbelts as an integral link between the city-wide park system.
POLICY 36.4
The City shall monitor the condition of all facilities In order to repair and replace equipment as needed, and Insure that state safety standards and guidelines are being met.
POLICY 36.5
The City shall develop programs to identify and attain alternative sources of funding for the acquisition and development of parklands and financing of recreation programs.
FGUCY36J6
The City shall improve undeveloped and developed parkland as financially feasible.
POLICY 36.7
The City shall develop and maintain a capital Improvement program for long term and short term recreation projects.
31-8
GQAL37
To achieve and maintain quality recreation activities which provide optimum satisfaction to the leisure and recreation needs of the citizens.
POLICY 37.1
The City shall encourage the provision of programs and activities designed to meet the recreational needs of the residents of Folsom.
POLICY 37.2
The City shall continue to develop facilities and programs for indoor and outdoor activities directed toward the needs of the neighborhoods served.
POLICY 37.3
The City shall encourage the incorporation into parks and recreation planning the needs of all age groups, handicapped, and special interest groups.
POLICY 37.4
The City shall encourage the expansion of services to senior citizens and latch key kids.
POLICY 37.3
The City shall encourage and/or co-sponsor various ethnic programs and activities of local interest.
POLICY 37.6
The City shall encourage that residents of Folsom be given first priority in participation of recreation sponsored programs, activities, and leagues.
POLICY 37.7
The City shall encourage or co-sponsor programs that Involve the entire family, e.g. Family Fun Faire. Sports & Field Day. community picnics. and Kite Day.
GOAL 38
To involve and inform the residents, merchants, and visitors of the need for public participation in planning, development, and proper maintenance of recreation facilities.
POLICY 38.1
The City shall strive to implement registration procedures which require minimal paperwork for individuals and groups.
POLICY 38.2
The City shall encourage citizen participation in park and recreation planning through the Park and Recreation Commission.
POLICY 38.3
The City shall encourage neighborhood beautification projects, anti-pollution drives, recycling and other conservation activities that enhance the environment.
POLICY 38.4
The City shall develop a handbook of facility use and maintenance for groups and individuals using City facilities.
POLICY 38.5
The City shall continue to publish and advertise recreation programs, leagues and special events at a minimum of three times per year.
GOAL 39
To effectively use the resources of the City of Folsom and other governmental entities (such as school districts, county, state, and federal agencies) to accomplish coordinated, effective planning of recreation and leisure activities.
POLICY 39-1
The City shall encourage those agencies actively providing recreational programs and activities to continue those programs and activities.
31-9
POLICY 39.2
The City shall encourage the use of college interns in all areas of parks and recreation.
POLICY 39.3
The City shall encourage the use of community residents to instruct special interest programs: e.g. fishing, fly-tying, gun safety, dance, etc. The City may serve as coordinator for such programs by providing facilities, public relations. instructors, and by paying instructor fees.
POLICY 39.4
The City shall encourage the aid of State or County park rangers. i.e. Folsom Lake State Recreation Area, to provide leadership in programs that inform the community on topics such as conservation and fire-safety.
POLICY 39.8
The City shall continue the execution of a joint use. and development arrangement with the Folsom Cordova Unified School District and encouraging an agreement with the Los Rios Community College District.
POLICY 39.6
The City shall work cooperatively with the County Department of Parks and Recreation, State Department of Parks and Recreation. State Department of Corrections and State Department of Fish and Game in coordinating facility development and program offerings.
31.4 RELATED GOALS AMD POLICIES
RELATED GENERAL GOALS AND POLICIES CONT.
POLICY 2.3 POLICY 2.4
GOAL 3
POLICY 3.1 POLICY 3.2 POLICY 3.3
GOAL4
POLICY 4.4
GOAL 5
POLICY 5.1 POLICY 5.2 POLICY 5.3
RELATED LAND USE GOALS
AND POLICIES
GOAL 7
POLICY 7.1 POLICY 7.3 POLICY 7.4
GOAL 8
POLICY 8.1 POLICY 8.3 POLICY 8.4 POLICY 8.5 POLICY 8.6 POLICY 8.7
GOAL 9
POLICY 9.1 POLICY 9.2 POLICY 9.3
GOAL 16
POLICY 16.3 POLICY 16.8
RELATED TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 17
POLICY 17.1 POLICY 17.10 POLICY 17.11 POLICY 17.12 POLICY 17.13 POLICY 17.14

RELATED HOUSING GOALS
AND POLICIES
GOAL 20
POLICY 20.1
31-10
3
RELATED OPEN SPACE AND ------
CONSERVATION GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 23
POLICY 23.1 POLICY 23.2 POLICY 23.3
GOAL 24
POLICY 24.1 POLICY 24.2 POLICY 24.3 POLICY 24.4
GOAL 25
POLICY 25.2 POLICY 25.3 POLICY 25.5 POLICY 25.6 POLICY 25.7
GOAL 27
POLICY 27.1 POLICY 27.2 POLICY 27.4
GOAL 28
POLICY 28.1 POLICY 28.2 POLICY 28.4
RELATED SAFETY GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 29
POLICY 29.3 POLICY 29.6
RELATED NOISE GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 30
POLICY 30.2 POLICY 30.3 POLICY 30.4 POLICY 30.5 POLICY 30.6 POLICY 30.9
RELATED AIR QUALITY GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 31
POLICY 31.9
GOAL 32
POLICY 32.1
GOAL 33
POLICY 33.2
RELATED PUBLIC FACILITIES GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 40
POLICY 40.1 POLICY 40.2 POLICY 40.3
31.5	IMPLEMENTATION
PARES AND RECREATION MASTER PLAN
A Master Plan for Parks and Recreation shall be prepared which contains specific requirements and criteria for development, access, use and maintenance of parks, open space and natural areas within the City including:
1.	provision for improving public access to recreation areas and open space with guidelines and standards for the design of access ways making provision for access by all segments of the community including the mobility impaired:
2.	guidelines and standards for the improvement of parks and open space areas which define the appropriate level of maintenance, access, and improvements in sensitive habitat and open space areas*.
3.	guidelines for incorporating educational activities and Interpretive centers into the open space and sensitive habitat areas:
4.	a plan for consolidation of identified open space, natural habitat areas and park lands;
5.	landscape requirements for parks and open space including design standards for improvements (trails, fences) in open space areas:
6.	develop management plans for identified sensitive/speclal habitat areas in order to preserve special habitats.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICIES 27.1; AND 27.2 GOAL 25: - POLICY 25.5; 25.6; AND
25.7
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
Sacramento County Department of Parks and Recreation State of California Department of Parks and Recreation California State University. Sacramento University of California, Davis Local Community Colleges Department of Fish and Game
•	Responsible Agency
Park and Recreation Commission
Implementing Agency Public Works Department
• Target Dates
Start: May 1988 Complete: March 1989
1
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direc Total Funding Dollars_____________________________________
100/39,000	$3,000 $3,000 $15,000 Developer
Fees
User Fees Genera] Fund
pedestrian and bicycle master plan
The City shall update its bicycle masterplan and Include a pedestrian and equestrian components. showing the location and type of routes/ links to to schools and parks, and other recreational destinations. The City’s Development Standards will include design standards for pedestrian and bicycle paths, lanes, and routes. Road improvements or extensions shall be designed to Include bicycle and pedestrian paths, lanes, or routes where these are indicated in the master plan. Bicycle paths, lanes, and routes will be clearly marked. The County of Sacramento will continue to be responsible for maintenance of the American River bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian trails.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 17 - POLICY 17.10
Responsible Agency
Park and Recreation Commission Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agency Public Works Department
•	Target Dates Start: July 1988
Complete: March 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars______________________________________
200/59,000	$500	$500 $10,000 General
Fund,
Developer Fees
TITLE 4 - PARES AND RECREATION
PARES AND RECREATION ORDINANCE
Update the Parks Ordinance with respect to the Goals and Policies of the Parks and Recreation Element and amend as necessary.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 4
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/ Organizations
•	Funding:
General Fund State Grants Volunteer Groups
•	Resource Groups
Bicycle clubs
Equestrian clubs
Civic organizations Interested in
pedestrian, bicycling, and equestrian issues
State Department of Parks and Recreation
•	Responsible Agency
Park and Recreation Commission
•	Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates Start: October 1988
Complete:March 1989
31-12
3
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printin Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/$1,800	$250 $300 $2,350 User
Fees,
General Fund
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS
Indude Incentives to property owners In the zoning Code to facilitate consolidation of identified habitat areas, open space and park lands.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICY 27.4 GOAL 8 - POLICY 8.7
•	Folsom Municipal Code:	Title 17
•	Cross Referenced to: Title 16
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organlzatlons
Nature Conservancy
State Office of Planning and Research
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Parks and Recreation Commission Public Works Department
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates Start: January 1988
Complete: January 1989
TRAILS. RECREATION AND SAFETY GUIDE
A subcommittee to the Parks and Recreation Commission will oversee the publication of a trails, recreation and safety guide for the use and enjoyment of parks and open space within the City of Folsom. Publication of the Guide may be accomplished In coordination with local civic groups or a local college or university as a student project.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 27 - POLICY 27.1A GOAL 29 - POLICY 29.6
• Resource Groups/Agencies/ Organizations
Sacramento County Department of
Parks and Recreation
State of California Department of
Parks and Recreation California State University. Sacramento University of California. Davis Local Community Colleges U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Bureau of Reclamation State Reclamation Board
State Department of Resources, Division of Mines and Geology
Sacramento County General Services
• Responsible Agencies
Park and Recreation Commission Community Development Department Public Works Department City Fire Department
• Implementing Agency
Park and Recreation Commission
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
80/53,600	$1,000	$900 $5,500 Developer
Fees
• Target Dates Start: March 1989
Complete: August 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
100/54,500	$2,000 51,500 $8,000 Developer
Fees,
Grant Funds
31-13
t

Prepared For The City of Folsom Community Development Department By
Sierra Research
October 31, 1988

AIR QUALITY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
32.1 INTRODUCTION.......................................................2
32.1.1	State Policy and Authorisation.............................
32.1.2	Related State and Federal Regulations......................
32.1.3	Relationship to the General Plan...........................
to to to
32.2	SETTING..................................................2
32.3	NATIONAL AND STATE
AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS...........................3
32.4	AIR QUALITY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES...................8
32.5	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES...............................9
32.6	IMPLEMENTATION..........................................10
AIR QUALITY
32.1	INTRODUCTION
The Air Quality Element of the General Plan establishes the policies and programs available to the City that are intended to assist in the reduction of emission sources and enhancement of air quality within the City. This Element also emphasizes cooperation among the various jurisdictions involved in regional air quality improvement efforts.
Supporting data can be found in the Technical Appendices.
32.1.1	STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
The Air Quality Element is an Optional Element of the General Plan.
32.1.2	RELATED STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS
Legislative efforts to control air pollution sources and enhance air quality are present at both federal and state levels. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) was created in 1968, and the Federal Air Quality Act was enacted in 1977. Each has established federal and state air quality standards for a variety of pollutants.
32.1.3	RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The Air Quality Element of the General Plan is most related to the Circulation Element and the Land Use Element. Its relationship to the Circulation and Land Use Elements is direct, in that the implementation of portions of those Elements may directly impact air quality.
32.2	SETTING
Meteorological Setting
This section provides a general description of the climatological and meteorological characteristics of the Folsom/Sacramento area.
The climate of the Sacramento Valley is characterized by hot. dry summers and cool, rainy winters. California is situated on the east
side of the prevailing Eastern Pacific high pressure cell which lies over the northeastern Pacific Ocean between Hawaii and the southwestern United States. This high pressure area, characterized by dry. subsiding air and generally fair weather, is strongest during the summer. In the winter, the high pressure cell moves southward and intermittently exerts its influence over California.
Temperatures in the Sacramento/Folsom area exhibit relatively large seasonal and daily variations which are typical of inland locations. Table 32-1 shows mean maximum and minimum temperatures during winter and summer for Sacramento (downtown) and Placerville (no long-term surface temperature data is available for Folsom). As expected, Placerville which lies in the Sierra foothills at an elevation of approximately 2.000 feet, exhibits slightly lower surface temperatures than Sacramento (20 feet). Folsom, which lies between these sites, experiences similar temperatures.
-------TAHLE 32-1_______
MEAN MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM TEMPERATURES IN THE FOLSOM AREA
	MAXIMUM	MINIMUM
January: Sacramento 54o		40o
Placerville	58o	24o
July: Sacramento	94o	59o
Placerville	92o	55o
SOURCE: California Climatological Data (1985). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Volume 89.
Due to the winter storm systems, most of the precipitation in the Sacramento / Folsom area occurs during the winter months. Approximately 90 percent of the annual precipitation falls from November through April. Folsom (Represa) receives approximately 21 inches of precipitation annually. West of Folsom, annual
32-2
3
rainfall across the valley floor is quite uniform: Sacramento (downtown) averages nearly 18 inches per year. East of Folsom, the orographic (lifting of air) effects of the Sierras cause annual precipitation amounts to increase with elevation. Placerville experiences mean annual precipitation of 37 inches.
During the summer, the typical traj ectory of air in Sacramento County flows northeastward from the Delta, then diverges either eastward into the Sierras or northward up the valley. In the winter, the intrusion of marine air into the valley is not as strong. Airflow throughout the Sacramento/Folsom region is generally directed northward (and slightly westward) toward Marysville and Chico where it converges with air flowing down the valley from the north. Figures 32-1 and 32-2 illustrate the prevailing regional airflow patterns.
During the summer of 1980. the CARB funded a comprehensive study of the origin and fate of air pollutants within the Sacramento Valley (Lehrman, 1981). In this field study, detailed meteorological measurements were taken and pollutant monitoring was conducted in conjunction with the release and tracking of a "tracer” gas. Several tracer releases were made, both in downtown Sacramento and northeast of Sacramento (Auburn Boulevard and Watt Avenue) to determine the fate of Sacramento emissions. These tests showed a variety of trajectories. ranging from eastward to northward. The data clearly indicate that during "typical" summertime conditions, the Sacramento emissions plume can often impact the Folsom area.
In summary, the meteorological conditions that exist In the Sacramento area are conducive to high ozone and carbon monoxide concentrations in Folsom.
During the winter, the combination of cool weather, atmospheric temperature inversions, and low wind speeds can contribute to high carbon monoxide concentrations in the vicinity of congested intersections. In the summer, the high temperatures and prevailing winds maximize the extent to which Folsom experiences high ozone levels caused by emissions occurring in the more heavily populated up-wind areas.
32.3	NATIONAL AND STATE AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
National and State Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). have been established for a variety of pollutants. The air quality standards are generally considered the definition of “clean air": however, there has been considerable debate as to whether the levels of the national air quality standards have been appropriately established.
The “primary” national ambient air quality standards are those which are intended to prevent adverse health effects. For some pollutants, there are also more stringent “secondary” standards which are intended to prevent adverse “welfare* impacts, such as degraded visibility or agricultural damage. There is only one category of state air quality standards, with no distinction between health and welfare impacts. However, some state standards have been adopted exclusively based on health impacts (e.g., carbon monoxide), some exclusively based on “welfare" Impacts (e.g.. visibility), and some based on both health and welfare impacts (e.g., oxidant).
NAAQS have been established for six pollutants. They are:
•	Ozone
•	Carbon Monoxide
•	Nitrogen Dioxide
•	Sulfur Dioxide
•	Suspended Particulate Matter
•	Lead
In addition to these six pollutants, state air quality standards have also been established for sulfates, hydrogen sulfide, vinyl chloride, and visibility reducing particles.
All of the state and federal air quality standards are presented in Table 32-2. The maximum allowable concentrations of the various pollutants are listed, along with the specified averaging time over which the concentration is to be measured. As the table shows, the state standards are consistently more stringent than the federal standards.
The Clean Air Act provides that NAAQS cannot be exceeded more than once each year.
32-3
32
Areas which exceed the standard for a particular pollutant twice or more during a year are designated as non-attainment areas for that pollutant. (The only exceptions to the one exceedance allowances are standards which are based on an annual average concentration of a pollutant. For annual average standards, and exceedance in a single year’s average results in a non-attainment designation.)
The non-attainment designation subjects an area to more stringent planning and control requirements. Once an area has been designated non-attainment for a pollutant, the area must show 12 consecutive calendar quarters without any exceedances in order to be redesignated as an attainment area. (The Folsom area is currently designated as non-attainment for ozone, carbon monoxide and suspended particulate matter.)
NOTES: REF. TABLE 32-2
1.	California standards, other than carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide (one hour), nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter - PM10, are values that are not to be equaled or exceeded. The carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide (one hour), nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter - PM 10 standards are not to be exceeded.
2.	National standards, other than ozone and those based on annual averages or annual geometric means, as not to be exceeded more than once a year. The ozone standard is attained when the expected number of days per calendaryearwithmaximumhouriy average concentrations above the standard is equal to or less than one.
3.	Concentration expressed first in units in which it was promulgated. Equivalent units given in parenthesis are based upon a reference temperature of 25oC and a reference pressure of 760 mm of mercury. All measurements of air quality are to be corrected to
a reference temperature of 25oC and a reference pressure of 760 mm of mercury (1.013.2 millibar): ppm in this table refers to ppm by volume, or micromoles of pollutant per mole of gas.
4.	Any equivalent procedure which can be shown to the satisfaction of the Air Resources Board to give equivalent results at or near the level of the air quality standard may be used.
5.	National Primary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary, with an adequate margin of safety to protect the public health. Each State must attain the primary standards no later than three years after the State’s implementation plan is approved by EPA.
6.	National Secondary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary to protect the public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects of a pollutant. Each State must attain the secondary standards within a “reasonable time" after the implementation plan is approved by EPA.
7.	Reference method as described by EPA. An “equivalent method” of measurement may be used but must have a "consistent relationship to the reference method" and must be approved by EPA.
8.	Prevailing visibility is defined as the greatest visibility which is attained or surpassed around at least half of the horizon circle, but not necessarily in continuous sectors.
9.	At locations where the State standards for oxidant and/or suspended particulate matter are violated. National standards apply elsewhere.
10.	Measured as ozone.
ARB Fact Sheet 38 (Revised 8/86).
32-4
TABLE 32-2
j. A A A A	\	..k
-----
'	X' i
'4 /P-4d
li__Li__Li' i
OUTHEAST
DESERT
SOUTH CENTRALCOAST>g \
t« CA4I*O«NIA •*>!*•
cmroKKU Au rcscurccs soabo XCSO**CT»IC «U OlVlSION 4/S4
NORTH CENTRAL COAST
• TC «•
CALIFORNIA
PREDOMINANT SURFACE
WIND FLOW PATTERNS
32-5
FIGURE 32-1
SOUTHEAST
«• M
1	I... ■
1*	*i« i*w«i
CAtlfOlNlA All SCSOUlCn BOARO AWOttTRiC CAfA OIVISI^I < '3«
CALIFORNIA
PREDOMINANT SURFACE
WIND FLOW PATTERNS
SOUTH CENTRAL COAST
32-6
FIGURE 32-2
Ambient Air Quality Standards
Pollutant	Averaging Time	California Standards'		National Standards 2		
		Cdnewoan	Lfaotod 4	3 J	Sreaneary 3'*	turned 7
Onoant 10	1 ►fafcT	0.10 oom (300 ugrrrG)	Ufrvwouc Phommery	•	•	•
OZOAB	IHour	-	-	0.12 pd" (235wgmO|	Same aa Pfwmry Sfi±.	Etaytane Qiemflwmne seance
Ciraon UonsziOa	(How	SO ton (10 irqnrO)	Hoo dtp—Bii Wrw«d	SO ppm (lOmgmd)	San* •• Pnrrwy	Hareditparave Irtaved SpecToacaoy (NOR
	1 Hair	Sppm	SpacTaaeopy	25 ppm (AOmpHJ)	Standvm	
Ningen Otaitae	Anrua Altarage	•	GaaRiaaa	lOOugmd (OSS ppm)	Sanaa	Gaa Aiaaa Oxmlimraairanea
	IHotr	ajsepm (470ugtm0)	MKim	-	Piimary SkL	
Sulk* Dwude	Anrual Araraga	.♦		00 upmti (0 M ppm)	•	
	2«Hatr	C3S asm (131 wtyflO)	Utemiotac	aCSwgmd (0.14 ppm)	-	
	3 Hot	•		•	1300 ugnm (OS ppm)	
	1 Haw	OJSoom (tHugmO)		•	-	
Sussanoad Pmcuiaa Ut£w	Amal Gao ma ox Uaan	MugrrO	Sza Silieaaa War High Vebma Sampler	•	-	•
	24 Heir	SugfTfl				
SuicbaPbb PvvcutBXa Uttar	AnraaJ Gaomaax Uaan	-	-	73ugma	couptra	Hgft Volume Sampling
	24 Hw	•		200 w/iifl	iSupftns	
SuttfttM	24 Hair	2SugM	Tweidmaeve Barium Sutaata	•	-	•
	30 day Aaarag.	UutynO	Atarae Abaarpaan	-	-	Alone Abaerpaan
	CtUnaar Qutnr	•		Uugmd	Samaee Primary Sat	
Wycr«9an SuiUe	IHotr	0.03 aem (42ugmO)	CadmunHyd* aaada STRwout	•	•	-
Vinyl Chleriae (Ciierssrane)	21 Hour	0.010 ppm (2twtyrrO)	Tadar Bag CaUacaon. Gaa Chramasgrapriy	•	•	-
Viability Radtang Pwbdaa	1 obearvaaan	h auAbant amount preraing MbbZiy * 10 miat whan ffw ta hvnbiy ie lata ran	ta reduce tae e taat ran tatae 70 Xa	•	•	■
Applicable Only in the Lake Tahoe Air Basin						
C&.'ton UonosiOe	their	I ppm (7fngml)	ton	•	•	•
Viiibitiiy Aaduong ParodM	1 obMrvuon	ta surtaeM amoum e raduca r» pr»vwfe«g visibAiy * ta	taan a	wfiwt tie mtaWB hwttatp ’• taw rv4n 7QlL		-	•	•
32-7
2
32.4	AIR QUALITY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 31
To improve the air quality of the City of Folsom including:
1.	Achievement and maintenance of ambient air quality standards established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the California Air Resources Board.
2.	Minimizing public exposure to toxic or hazardous air pollutants.
3.	Limiting visibility reducing particulate matter in the atmosphere.
4.	Minimizing public exposure to air pollutants which create a public nuisance through Irritation to the senses or unpleasant odor.
POLICY 31.1
Because the City of Folsom shares the air basin with other jurisdictions, and suffers from poor air quality due to regional ozone violations, the City shall work cooperatively with other members of the Sacramento Area Council of Governments, the Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District, the California Air Resources Board. CALTRANS, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency toward the development of a consistent and effective approach to the regional air pollution problem. The City will participate In the updating of the 1982 Air Quality Plan, and incorporate Air Quality Plan update measures into the General Plan.
POLICY 31.2
The City shall use consistent and accurate procedures approved by the California Air Resources Board in the review of projects which may have air quality impacts. Comments on the analysis shall be solicited from the Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District and the Air Resources Board.
more stringent vehicle emission standards and enhancements to the Smog Check program through active participation in hearings held by the State Legislature, the California Air Resources Board and the Bureau of Automotive Repair.
POLICY 31.4
To minimize air quality impacts mitigation measures shall be required for transportation emissions associated with all development estimated to generate 2.000 or more trips per day. Measures may include:
1.	Project proponent funding of roadway improvements.
2.	Commercial/industrial project proponent sponsorship of van pools or club buses.
3.	Project proponent funded transit subsidies sufficient to reduce emissions from transit through the substitution of diesel-fueled buses with buses powered by alternative fuels, such as methanol and electric.
4.	Commercial/industrial project sponsored daycare and employee services at the employment site.
5.	Park and ride lots.
POLICY 31.S
The City shall work with the Air Resources Board or Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District in establishing a carbon monoxide monitoring program in order to accurately determine the status of carbon monoxide air quality and to quantify the impacts of growth and development in the Folsom area.
POLICY 31.6
Non-retail industrial and non-retail commercial projects which directly emit air pollutants should be located in areas designated for industrial development, and separated from residential mixed use areas.
POLICY 31.3
POLICY 31.7
The City shall encourage the adoption of
All employers of 50 or more full time employees per shift shall develop and implement
32-8
3
incentive-based trip reduction programs for their employees. Incentives may include:
1.	Provision of reserved and preferentially located parking spaces for the exclusive use of employees who actively participate in ride-sharing.
2.	Provision of secure bicycle storage facilities.
3.	Provision of shower and locker facilities for use by employees who commute by non-motorized means.
4.	Distribution by employers of current information regarding the availability, cost and schedules of public transit.
5.	Employer provision of economic Incentives to maximize the use of transit, ridesharing, van pooling and non-motorized transportation.
POLICY 31.8
The City shall participate in the development of a regionally consistent transportation emissions accounting system so that transportation emission reductions are accounted for. and those responsible receive appropriate credit.
POLICY 31.9
The City should encourage bicycle usage through the development and maintenance of a safe and comprehensive bikeway system which includes:
1.	The provision of securely anchored bicycle racks.
2.	Sidewalks in residential development with protective curbing and adequate lighting.
POLICY 31.10
The City of Folsom shall develop, as part of its transportation plan and the Transportation and Circulation Element of the General Plan, a transit development plan so that Folsom residents may safely and conveniently use transit for work, school, shopping, recreational and other trips within the City and outside of the City.
GOAL 32
To minimize public exposure to toxic or hazardous air pollutants.
POLICY 32.1
Reference Policy 31.6.
GOAL 33
To minimize visibility-reducing particulate matter in the atmosphere.
POLICY 33.1
Reference Policy 31.7.
POLICY 33.2
Reference Policy 31.9.
GOAL 34
To minimize public exposure to air pollutants which create a public nuisance through irritation to the senses or unpleasant odor.
32.S	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
32-9
related land use element GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
32.6	IMPLEMENTATION
AIR AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD
limitations prevent the Department of Health Services from performing all the State’s inspection duties. Since these inspections are vital to protecting public health and preventing improper use or disposal of hazardous materials. Folsom should take over this responsibility while seeking supporting funds from the State.
2.Underground storage tank program: Coordinate with the Sacramento County Health Department and the State to increase review of permit applications, and monitoring of tank testing programs and leaking tank clean-ups.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 31 - POLICIES 31.1; AND 31.2; GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.1; 41.3; 41.4; 41.6; 41.7; 41.10; AND 41.11
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
State Department of Health Services State Department of Food and
Agriculture
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration
Sacramento County Sheriffs Department California Highway Patrol CALTRANS
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department Fire Department Police Department
Sacramento County Health Department
Establish an Air Pollution and Hazardous Materials Technical Advisory Board composed of representatives from all City Departments and the Sacramento County Health Department, which will seek technical information and input from State, local and federal regulating agencies in order to develop the City’s hazardous materials management program.
l.The City shall seek a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the State Department of Health Services to obtain authority for the regulation of hazardous waste generators in Folsom. Currently, resource
•	Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: On-Going
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
48/52,160	$50	$500 $2.710 General
Fund,
Development Fees
32-10
LOCAL CONTROL STRATEGIES
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM ORDINANCE
Inventory and develop control strategies for toxic air contaminants in Folsom.
Such strategies would include obtaining a carbon monoxide (CO) meter from the Air Resources Board or Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District to be used in a local CO monitoring program.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL31-POLICIES31.1:31.2: 31.3; 31.5: 31.6; GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.8: 41.9; AND 41.10
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
State Air Resources Board Sacramento County Air Pollution Control
District
Sacramento Regional Transit Sacramento Area Council of
Governments
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department
•	Responsible Agency
City Council
Develop and adopt a transportation systems management ordinance which incorporates the specific policies of the General Plan Air Quality Element.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 31-POLICIES 31.3; 31.4; 31.5; AND 31.7; GOAL 17 - POLICY 17.19
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
State Air Resources Board Sacramento County Air Pollution Control
District
Sacramento Regional Transit Sacramento Area Council of Governments
•	Responsible Agencies
Public Works Department Community Development Department
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1990
•	Implementing Agencies
Community Development Department Building Department
•	Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: On-Going
ESTIMATED COSTS OVER SIX MONTHS
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars_____________________________________
48/52,160	$50	$500 $2,710 Development
Fees, User Fees
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
PROGRAMING SET-UP
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars______________________________.
120/55,400 $500	$1,35057,250 Development
Fees,
General Fund
32-11

••••••-•w •
g
'-	-4*4 V .’-.’SA??



jw--.	: ??-.
Prepared By The City of Folsom Community Development Department

October 31, 1988

33.1	INTRODUCTION.................................................2
33.2	CONTENTS OF AREA FACILITIES PLANS............................2
33.3	EXISTING PUBLIC FACILITIES...................................3
33.4	POLICIES AND STANDARDS FOR THE PROVISION OF
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES...............................6
33.5	PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES.................6
33.6	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM...............................
12
3
PUBLIC FACILITIES
33.1	INTRODUCTION
The Public Facilities Element Is an optional element of the General Plan, as set forth in Section 65303 of the State Planning, Zoning and Development Laws. This Element is prepared to address the public facility needs of the City of Folsom and to provide a plan for the provision of an appropriate level of public facilities and services to existing and newly developing areas within the General Plan area.
The major content of the Element are the Area Facilities Plans. Initially, four areas have been identified as needing an Area Facilities Plan as required by the Urban Development Policy of the Folsom General Plan that was adopted on June 6,
1983, by Resolution no. 1616. These areas are Allied North, Folsom South, Rancho Creek and East Folsom, as depicted ont he attached map (list page of this Element). The Allied North area Facilities Plan was adopted in conjunction with the American River Canyon Units 4-9 project on September 15, 1986.
The Folsom South Area Facilities Plan was adopted in conjunction with the Folsom South Area Assessment District project on January 10, 1984. A fifth plan the Folsom East Area Facilities Plan was adopted in 1992. These plans are incorporated in this Element by reference. For the Willow Creek Estates, Rancho Diablo, and Willow Creek Estates East subdivisions of the Rancho Creek Area, the subdivision improvement plans were deemed acceptable substitutes for an Area Facilities Plan.
This Element may be amended from time to time to require the preparation of Area Facilities Plans for other areas within the City’s adopted Sphere of Influence and/or areas newly annexed to the City.
As an optional versus mandated Element of the General Plan, this Element may be amended as often as deemed necessary by the City Council to reflect the changing public facilities needs of the community and the specific areas of development. From time to time a suitable substitute to an Area Facilities Plan, as provided for in Section VII of the Urban Development Policy, may be approved and would be included in this document.
33.2	CONTENTS OF AREA FACILITIES PLANS
In addition to the policies contained in Sections VI and VII of the Urban Development
Policy, an Area Facilities Plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following topics:
1.	Description of the plan area, the basis for selection of the proposed boundaries, and the development potential of the area which is based on a comprehensive land use map.
2.	A statement of the plan’s consistency with the Folsom General Plan and the City's Urban Development Policy.
3.	Identification of the nature and extent of facilities necessary to serve the area and a schedule of estimated time within which facilities must be constructed.
4.	Engineer’s estimate of the total cost of such improvements (including plan preparation).
5.	A plan for the equitable apportionment of costs among benefited properties and adjustments thereofbased upon the time such costs are paid.
6.	The nature of the obligation of each land owner or developer.
7.	Discussion of the options available to finance the improvements, including, but not limited to, construction by developers, an assessment district, fees, or a combination of these and/or other provisions.
8.	Provision for amendments to the plan, which may result from changes in the plan area, development patterns, etc.
9.	Provisions to refund or reimburse landowners who construct facilities with excess capacity, beyond the ultimate need of their developments.
10.	A statement which recognizes that the financial commitments required pursuant to such plans are not in lieu of other municipal service and facilities fees. The financial commitments of landowners/developers shall be taken into account by the City in determining the extent of the imposition of such other municipal service and facilities fees.
33-2
11 ^statement which recognizes that the Area
Facilities Plan Is not intended to be responsible for the provision of all possible public facilities that will be needed in the future and that there are or may be additional costs/fees established by the City and other jurisdictions (such as school districts) that may apply to the area. However, the plan must address the need for all public facilities which may reasonably be assumed to be necessary during buildout of the area.
12.Provislonsforthe administration of the area plan and the collection and distribution of funds.
33.3	EXISTING PUBLIC FACILITIES
The City of Folsom currently provides the following municipal services and resources:
SCHOOLS
The City of Folsom is part of the Folsom Cordova Unified School District. The District currently operates three elementary schools (Grades K through six). one junior high (Grades seven through eight) and one high school (Grades nine through twelve) in the City. Locations of the existing schools are shown In Figure 33-1. For further discussion of the existing and proposed schools In the City, refer to the MEA Chapter 13. pages 13-13 to 13-16.
POLICE PROTECTION
The City of Folsom Police Department Is currently headquartered at City Hall in somewhat cramped facilities, including a temporary office trailer. There are currently 22 sworn officers and eight non-swom personnel In the Department. It Is the goal of the Department to achieve a staffing level of two sworn officers per every 1,000 population. Assuming a current population of 14,000 for the City without the Prison, the police force is about six men short. Locations of existing stations are shown In Figure 33-2. For further discussion of the existing and projected needs of the Police Department, refer to the MEA, Chapter 13, page 13.6.
FIRE PROTECTION
The City of Folsom is served by Its own
Fire Department, headquartered In Station 35, at 48 Natoma Street, next to City Hall. There are two other fire stations In operation currently in the City and a third one Is under construction. Locations of these stations are shown In Figure 33-2. RefertotheMEA, Chapter 13, pages 13-16 to 13-19 for more discussion on the Fire Department projected needs to serve future City growth.
WATER
Currently, the City of Folsom obtains its water supply primarily from Folsom Lake under an entitlement from the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation for 22.000 acre-feet per year or approximately 19.6 million gallons per day (MGD) on an annual average basis.
In addition to the Folsom Lake water supply, the City also purchases water from the San Juan Suburban Water District (SJSWD, under contract to supply a minimum of 700 acre-feet per year of water to the Ashland area of the City, north of the American River. Figure 33-3 summarizes the quantities of water received by the City during 1984-1986. Referto the MEA. Chapter 13, pages 13-1 to 13-8 for further discussion of City on water supply and consumption.
SEWER
The City of Folsom Is served by separate sanitary sewer (waste water) and drainage (storm water) collection and disposal systems. Figure 33-4 Illustrates the existing sewer system of the City. Referto the MEA. Chapter 13 pages 13-8 to 13-10 for existing and projected demands of the City’s sewer sanitary system.
SOLED WASTE
The City has its own solid waste pick-up service. The waste Is transported to the County Landfill Site.
TELEPHONE
Local telephone service Is provided by Pacific Bell.
CABLE
The City is served by Sacramento Cable Company.
33-3
33-4
33-5
GAS
FIRE PROTECTION
33
t
I
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PGandE) provides natural gas to the City. The utility company anticipates no major problems in serving newly developing areas in the City.
ELECTRIC
The Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD) provides electric power to the City.
LIBRARY
The City of Folsom is served by the Sacramento City and County Public Library system. A small branch is presently located in a shopping center at 608 East Bidwell Street. With the City’s present growth rate, this facility will soon be inadequate: therefore, the City strongly supports construction of a permanent facility to serve the long-term needs of the community. This facility would ideally be located in the central commercial mixed-use district
33.4	POLICIES AND STANDARDS FOR THE PROVISION OF PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES.
The following is a brief summaxy of the current and/or proposed City standardsforpublic facilities and services including water, sewer, fire, police and schools.
WATER
The MEA (Chapter 13.2) and EIR (Section 50.13.2) discuss in detail the City’s existing water supply and estimated demands for future water supply. Table 33-1 lists the existing water supply and consumption for the City. Table 33-2 lists the ultimate water demands at buildout based on the Preferred Alternative Land Use Map.
SEWER
The MEA (Chapter 13.2) and the EIR (Section 50.13.3) discuss the sewer capacity at existing and proposed buildout levels. Figure 33-5 presents the existing average flow capacity for the City.
Table 33-3 summarizes existing fire fighting staff in the City. The EIR and MEA thoroughly discuss the projected needs for fire protection and staffing. The MEA uses a rough estimate; of two firemen per 1.000 population to project the number of firemen required at buildout population.
POLICE PROTECTION
The Police Department for the City of Folsom is currently under staffed. The goal of the department is to have two sworn officers per 1.000population (see MEApage 13-16). TheCity withacurrentpopulatlonofappraxtmately 14,000 (excluding prison population) is understaffed by six men. For a more detailed explanation of projections for police protection see Section
50.13.6	of the EIR
SCHOOLS
The MEA and the EIR address the school district needs (see Chapter 13 of each document) in detail. Table 33-4 presents the enrollment and capacity level for the existing schools within the City.
LIBRARY
While the City does not have direct control over the library system, the City encourages and will facilitate the construction of a permanent library in the central commercial mixed use district, to meet the long-term needs of Folsom citizens. If no site in the central business district is feasible, other sites within the city limits may be considered.
33.5	PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 40
To set targets for the ultimate build-out of the City, to plan for the provision of public facilities and services to meet this level of development. and to phase development according to the capacity of public facilities and services to meet those targets.
33-6
TABLE 33-1
EXISTING WATER SUFFIX AND CONSUMPTION CITY OF POISCM WATER SERVICE AREA
1984	1985	1986
	A-F/Y	M3)	A-F/Y	MGD	A-F/Y	M3)
SUDDlV						
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation*	16,178	14.46	15,837	14.07	15,043	13.43
San Juan Suburban Water District**	1,000	0.89	1,089	0.97	1,595	1.42
TOTAL SUFFIX	17,187	15.35	16,483	15.04	16,638	14.86
SS?sunptipp						
Aerojet General Raw Water**	13,616	12.16	12,748	11.38	10,711	9.56
Ccnmercial and Industrial*** (Including Intel)	1,071	0.96	1,396	1.21	1,800	1.61
Residential****	2.500	2.23	2<72fi	2,45	4.125	
TOTAL CONSUMPTION	17,187	15.35	16,843	15.04	16,638	14.86
*	Data from USER, Cecile		Leslie,	teleoon,	May 8,	1987.	
** Data frun Folscm Water Ccnpany treatment plant records. *** Data teas Folsaa Water Ccnpany billing records.
**** Derived from total supply less all other consumption.
33-7
TABLE 33-2
ULTIMATE WATER EEMANQS FUTURE POISCK WATER SERVICE AREA
SERVICE AREA	TOTAL ANNUAL		TREATED WATER ERODUCIICN REQUIREMENTS M3D
	AC-FT/YR		
		M3D	
Service Area 1			
City of Folsan	4,000	3.6	8.4
Nimbus	2.000 6,000	ItS 5.4	_1*S 10.2
Service Area 2			
City of Folsan	8,700	7.8	18.0
Aerojet	JL24Q 10,940	2.0 9.8	20.0
Service Area 3*	2,240	2.0	4.6
Aerojet**	-.SxlZP	6.0	——
TOTAL EXISTING SERVICE AREA	25,900	23.2	34.8
East Annexation Area	10,440	9.3	21.4
Industrial Reserve	3.600	-2*2	Ax2
TOTAL PROPOSED SERVICE AREA	39,940	35.7	60.4
SOURCE: J.M. Moxtganery, Consulting Engineers, Inc.
City of Folsom Water System Implementation Plan for East Annexation Area. April 1986.
* This figure does not include Intel oaanittnent of 2.5 M3D water supply.
** Aerojet contract of June 1986 reduces this amount to five M33, however, treated water supply coraitment increases to three MSD.
33-8
FIGURE 33-5
NOTES: — SRSCD Interceptor Capacity is 12.5 HGD (PWWF) (1)
— Measured flow in Nov. 1986 & 2.6 MGO (ADWF)
including 0.6 MGO (ADWF) Prison flow.
— Conversions: 1.0 MGD (ADWF) - 2.3 MGD (PWWF)
1.0 MGD (ADWF) Z 325 GPD - 3080 ESD
NUMBER OF EQUIVALENT SINGLE DWELLINGS
PEAK WET WEATHER FLOW IN MGD (PWWF)
EXISTING SEWAGE FLOW CAPACITY FOR THE CITY OF FOLSOM
REFERENCES: (1) J.R. Gaffney, Principle Civil Engineer. County of Sacramento, Department of Public Works, Water Quality Division. Letter to Mayor Jack Kipp of the City of Folsom, Dated March 3, 1987
33-9
TABLES 33-3 AND 33-4
FIRE DEPARTMENT STAFFING AND EQUIPMENT
STATION
STAFFING	_____
PER SHIFT TOTAL FIRE

£T________
EMERGENCE
No. 35	5
No. 36 (to be	4
relocated and
expanded)
No. 37	2
Under Construction
No. 38	2
15 ladder Truck 2 Ambulances Fire Engine Grass Truck
12 Fire Engine 1 Ambulance Tanker
6 Fire Engine Tanker
6 Fire Engine Tanker
SOURCE: Fire Marshall W.G. Murdock, May 5, 1987.
EXISTING SCHOOLS IN THE CITY OF IDLSCM
NAME OF SCHOOL	CAPACITY ENROUMENT
T. Judah Elementary	726	772
B. Spentz Elementary	582	548
C. Sundahl Elementary	415	0
Folsom Junior High	498	305
Folsom High	1,000	788
SOURCE: J.C. Miller, Facilities Supervisor,
Folsom Cordova Unified School District, personal contact, May 5, 1987.
POLICY 40.1
No permit for construction shall be issued for any new development not served by existing municipal facilities until the following conditions have been met:
1.	The applicant can provide for the installation and/or financing (through fees or other means) of needed public facilities.
2.	The project is included in the area covered by an existing facilities plan approved by the City.
3.	The project can be served by on-site or private facilities meeting City and County health and safety requirements.
POLICY 40.2
The City shall require the preparation of a facilities plan for an identified area when:
1.	Development of an area necessitates the provision, extension, and/or expansion of municipal services and facilities which are not customarily constructed by a developer or
2.	There is a need for services or facilities not otherwise funded by regular City fees: or
3.	The construction of the necessary services and facilities cannot be logically or economically provided by one landowner/developer in the normal sequence of orderly development.
POLICY 40.3
An area facilities plan shall Include, but not be limited to the following:
1.	Description of the plan area, the basis for the selection of the proposed boundaries, and the development potential of the area which is based on a comprehensive land use map.
2 A statement of the plan’s consistency with the Folsom General Plan and the City’s Urban Development Policy.
3.	Identification of the nature and extent of facilities necessary to serve the area and a schedule of estimated time within which facilities must be constructed.
4.	Engineer’s estimate of the total cost of such improvements (including plan preparation).
5.	A plan for the equitable apportionment of costs among benefitted properties and adjustments thereofbased upon the time such costs are paid.
6.	The nature of the obligation of each land-owner or developer.
7.	Discussion of the options available to finance the improvements, including, but not limited to. construction by developers, an assessment district, fees, or a combination of these and/or other provisions.
8.	Provisions for amendments to the plan, which may result from change in the plan area, development patterns, etc.
9.	Provisions to refund or reimburse landowners who construct facilities with capacity beyond the ultimate need of their developments.
10.	A statement which recognizes that the financial commitments required pursuant to such plans are not in lieu of other municipal service and facilities fees. The financial commitments of landowners/developers shall be taken into account by the City in determining the extent of the imposition of such other municipal service and facilities fees.
11.	A statemant which recognizes that the area facilities plan is not intended to be responsible for the provision of all possible public facilities that will be needed in the future and that there are or may be additional costs/fees established by the City and other jurisdictions (such as school district) that may apply to the area. However, the plan must address the need for all public facilities which may reasonably be assumed to be necessary during buildout of the area.
33
33-11
12.	Provisions for administration of the area plan and the collection and distribution of funds.
POLICY 40.4
33
All new development projects shall be planned for an urban level of services:
1.	Sidewalks, gutters, and storm drains constructed to standards established by the City, except for residential estates and other projects when appropriately excluded.
2.	Sanitary sewer lines of appropriate size to accommodate the project and that will tie into the City’s main lines.
3.	Public or private roads that can accommodate at least two lanes of traffte.
4.Parking and circulation systems that accommodate emergency vehicles and equipment.
POLICY 40.S
The City shall annually monitor the City’s available municipal water supply to ensure adequate reserves exist to serve projected water demand. In the event pro) ected demand exceeds supply, the City may take the following actions to prevent the anticipated shortfall.
1.	Condition development approvals on the availability of identified water supplies.
2.	Building permits covered by the former
General Plan area should be restricted until such time as the City determines adequate supplies exist to allow unrestricted hookups to the municipal water system.
3.	Seek to renegotiate municipal water contracts with large water demand users.
4\Within the qrea known as the East Area Facilities PlansArea consisting of approxi-matfefv 3,900 acfc^s, and any area south of U.S. Highway 50 whteh could be annexed bo the CitySlje City shhU not approve a final' subdfvislorvtpap or fmal parcel map, or
tatitlement which would, permit the nhement of construction lrntil such theCity has acquired an additional upplyswhich is adequate tcrsupply evelopmqnt as required under the
uiutui Developmfent Policy.^
33.6	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
The major portion of the implementation program for the Public Facilities Element will be through the preparation and adoption of Area Facilities Plans. The Plans will be used to insure that areas of future development will be adequately served by the needed facilities. The Plans will provide for: 1) options available to finance the improvements. 2) the provisions to reimburse or refund landowners who construct facilities with excess capacities, and 3) provisions for amendments to the plan if necessary due to changes in the plan area.
33-12
TEXT AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 33.0 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND CHAPTER 40.0 AREA PLANS AND SPECIFIC PLANS
General Plan Amendment - 33.0 - (Public Facilities Element) 33.5 (Public Facilities Element Goals and Policies)
Goal 40 - Policy 40.5 (4)
4.	For any area south of U.S. which could be annexed to the City or the area known as the East Area
Facilities Plan area consisting of approximately 3,900 acres, the City shall no approve a final subdivision map or final parcel map. or other entitlement which would permit the commencement of construction until such time as the City has acquired an additional water supply which is adequate to supply such development as required under the Urban Development Policy. This prohibition shall not preclude the approval of final parcel maps covering all or a portion of the property covered by an approved tentative subdivision map, where multiple final subdivision maps are to be filed pursuant to Government Code Section 66456.1
A.	Additional water supply as discussed above may include water conservation programs as may be established by the City of Folsom.
B.	That it is not necessary that the entire additional water supply be available at one time. Policy 40.5 contemplates that development may be staged and it is only necessary that there is sufficient supply to service the proposed development. For example, if a proposed development creates a demand for 3,000 acre feet, such development is entitled to proceed once the City has acquired an additional 3,000 acre feet supply.
C.	Acquired water supply shall mean portable water contractually committed or available on demand.
Page 33-12A Resolution No. 3798 September 10, 1992
I
PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT ------------------
RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES CONT.	I
GOAL9	I
POLICY 9.1	I
POLICY 9.2	I
POLICY 9.3	I
GOAL 10	I
POLICY 10.4	I
POLICY 10.9	I
GOAL 11	I
POLICY 11.4	I
POLICY 11.5	I
POLICY 11.7	I
POLICY 11.8	I
POLICY 11.10	I
GOAL 12	I
POLICY 12.6	I
GOAL 13	I
POLICY 13.6	I
GOAL 15	I
POLICY 15.5	I
GOAL16	I
POLICY 16.1	I
POLICY 16.2	I
POLICY 16.3	I
POLICY 16.4	I
POLICY 16.5	I
POLICY 16.6	I
GOAL 17	I
POLICY 17.1	I
POLICY 17.2	I
POLICY 17.4	I
POLICY 17.5	I
POLICY 17.6	I
POLICY 17.7	I
POLICY 17.8	I
POLICY 17.9	I
POLICY 17.10	I
POLICY 17.11	I
POLICY 17.16	I
POLICY 17.17	I
POLICY 17.20	I
GOAL 20	I
POLICY 20.1	I
POLICY 20.3	I
GOAL 22	I
POLICY 22.1	I
POLICY 22.2	I
GOAL 24	I
POLICY 24.3	I
GOAL 27	I
POLICY 27.2	I
PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT __________________
RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES CONT. I
GOAL 28	I
POLICY 28.1	I
POLICY 28.3	I
GOAL 29	I
POLICY 29.1	I
POLICY 29.2	I
POLICY 29.5	I
GOAL 35	I
POLICY 35.1	I
POLICY 35.2	I
POLICY 35.3	I
POLICY 35.4	I
POLICY 35.5	I
POLICY 35.6	I
POLICY 35.7	I
POLICY 35.8	I
POLICY 35.9	I
POLICY 35.10	I
POLICY 35.11	I
POLICY 35.12	I
GOAL 36	I
POLICY 36.1	I
POLICY 36.2	I
POLICY 36.3	I
POLICY 36.4	I
POLICY 36.5	I
POLICY 36.6	I
POLICY 36.7	I
GOAL37	I
POLICY 37.1	I
POLICY 37.2	I
POLICY 37.3	I
POLICY 37.4	I
POLICY 37.5	I
POLICY 37.6 POLICY 37.7
GOAL 38	I
POLICY 38.1	I
POLICY 38.2	I
POLICY 38.3	I
POLICY 38.4	I
POLICY 38.5	I
GOAL 39	I
POLICY 39.1	I
POLICY 39.2	I
POLICY 39.3	I
POLICY 39.4	I
POLICY 39.5	I
POLICY 39.6	I
33-13
33-14
ALLIED NORTHs;
FOLSOM III. W»OI»I»
FACILITIES PLAN AREAS
CITY OF FOLSOM MAP

f ••. r;; ^k; ■ •; ?o*
■■ ?• /“'vfe ;•• .	-•'- .. j -	.:' ;
"?W< ’
: W- ■" -
;-.;:>A .v .A-'.	"
."’. - --' -• vv ■: ;-3.	<■.._..
;• ^--5.; ■ •■••/•.' .	;
-- •,. ., •. • '• •
<’5-'	-	■ ■••• <•'. '. a;*,-.'? •'
'4J

.?’•* • .*-••r “ •■-
>-
*	• “•< <-' • A ?
ft'
\. .■••	.<>.«> ■■ ■.' ir-f	-•»•»	■	■ a * ■ _	■ * W«	■k.*
-‘.- :.?■ •;■
:-$.- \ •;
'1 ‘'''	•,??	V-.:- "- - • '^'US '-'5..''	7.‘?-.4'' - •■ • r »■'
Prepared For The City of Folsom
‘ i ;' -
■';'	-t'
: . ■;
■a,	a-	--.a•;/•.
?	By.<5sO'	v
QUAD Consultants
- •••• ■-■^Vr ■ V .	•'
-• '‘-'.‘"P ..’■ "•• '••* /• . *'; • ’••• ' '.-
October 31, 1988

Q
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
34.1	INTRODUCTION......................................................2
34.1.1	State Policy and Authorization............................
34.1.2	Related State and Federal Regulation......................
34.1.3	Relationship to the General Plan..........................
to to to
34.2	SETTING................................................3
34.3	HAZARDOUS MATERIALS GOALS AND POLICIES.................5
34.4	RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES............................ 6
34.5	IMPLEMENTATION.........................................7
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
34.1	INTRODUCTION
34
Hazardous materials are found in every gas tank, under kitchen sinks, in commercial transports, and in most places of employment. Likewise. hazardous waste creates disposal questions for every part of today's society, ranging from households to industry. Over the past two decades, concern over the proper use and handling of hazardous materials has prompted a wide array of regulations from different levels of government. As budget crises have cut back Inspection and enforcement capabilities at the state and federal levels, more of the responsibility for carrying out programs has been shifted to local governments.
34.1.1	STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
This Hazardous Materials Element is an optional Element of the General Plan and supplements the Safety Element presented in Chapter 25.
34.1.2	RELATED STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATION
Legislative efforts to control hazardous materials began in the last century as the federal government moved to protect waterways from pollution. Today, several dozen major state and federal acts serve to regulate hazardous materials in California.
In diverse areas such as air pollution, water pollution, underground tanks, disclosure ordinances. hazardous waste, and worker protection. California has passed legislation that advanced or significantly expanded the scope of hazardous materials regulation.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY
Local government agencies interact with the network of regulations covering hazardous materials in six ways. Each determines the ability of local government to act to address a problem. These situations are:
1.	Mandate: Some federal or state regulations require local agencies to implement a program. and often provide little freedom to
modify the program to suit local resources or needs. This is true of the underground storage tank programs. Local governments are often placed in the position of having to collect fees or otherwise provide for the funding for a state-mandated program.
2.	Conditional Authority: Local government may be given the authority over a regulatory program, provided certain* conditions are met. (Typically. the local government has to be capable of administering the program and has to request the authority.)
3.	De Minimis: Strictly interpreted, this phrase means that state and federal governments will not concern themselves with small matters. Practically speaking, it means local governments may have an opportunity to impose more restrictive standards or requirements than are contained in state or federal regulations.
4.	Unregulated Area: An area or program not mentioned at all in federal or state statutes. The federal Constitution leaves unregulated matters to the states. The California Constitution provides local governments the authority to regulate unmentioned areas.
5.	Exemption: Some products or areas may be specifically exempted from federal or state regulations, and local governments are precluded from imposing any restrictions.
6.	Pre-emptlon: The authority to regulate some areas is specifically reserved by higher levels of government, and local governments are unable to impose any restrictions, even within their own communities. For example, the authority to regulate the commercial use and transportation of high-level radioactive materials is reserved by the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which delegates the authority to the State of California.
34.1.3	RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
This Element is directly related to the Safety
34-2
and Land Use Elements and indirectly to the Open Space and Conservation Element.
and refers to individuals or firms that manufacture. store, use. ship, recycle, or dispose of these materials as handlers.
34.2	SETTING/ASSUMPTIONS/ISSUES
SAFETY AND EXPOSURE STANDARDS
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PROBLEMS
Chemical substances play a major role In the high standard of living we enjoy. Among other things, these substances have made improvements possible In our clothmg, food, shelter. transportation and entertainment. Yet the last few years have been full of reminders that these benefits are not without cost
DEFINITION
For the purposes of this Element. Folsom will use the definition of “hazardous materials” used by the State of California Department of Health Services. Section 66084 of the California Administrative Code states1:
1.	“Hazardous material” means a substance or combination of substances which, because of Its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either.
A.	Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an Increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness*, or
B.	Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when Improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.
2.	Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term “hazardous material” shall be understood to also Include extremely hazardous material.
This definition Is also applied to hazardous waste in Section 25117 of the Health and Safety Code. This definition is not limited to Just those chemicals with long-term detrimental effects. It also includes materials which present a hazard because of their physical nature (explosive, corrosive, flammable, etc.). This General Plan Element addresses all types of hazardous materials
It Is important to understand that there are legally enforceable standards of safety for only a fraction of the hazardous materials In the mar, ketplace and little agreement on acceptable levels of exposure. For example:
• The Federal Food and Drug AdmlnistraVon has set an action level (which is not legally enforceable) for mercury In the edible portion of fish at 1.0 ppm, while the National Academy of Science's recommended guideline for mercury is 0.5 ppm in the whole fish. Other nations have set standards for mercury in fish that range between 0.1 and 1.0 ppm. (StaleWaterResourcesControlBoard. "1983 Toxic Substances Monitoring Program”. Water Quality Monitoring Report No. 85-1-WQ.)
• The State of California Maximum Concentration Level (MCL) for Trlhalomethanes in public water systems with publicly-owned treatment works is 100 ppb. The EPA Suggested No Adverse Response Level (SNARL) for Trlhalomethanes in drinking water is only 0.19 ppb, one five-hundredth of State level. (Burt Ellsworth. DOHS)
• Federal and State standards for concentrations of certain substances in air, water, and tissue have been set using generally accepted methods which use lab animals for test subjects. In very few instances are we absolutely confident that the results from these tests on animals can be related directly to human health. Test results for many more substances either can not be positively related to human health, or are not entirely dear. Worse still, complete tests have been performed on only ten to 20 percent of the over 70,000 chemicals that are In the marketplace.
Despite this uncertainty, regulations attempt to set standards or action levels that will keep human health Impacts at acceptable levels.
1 Source:Califomia Administrative Code, Title 22. Division 4 “Environmental Health”. Chapter 30. Artlde 1, Definitions. Section 66084.
34-3
34
Agencies responsible for worker safety often allow higher exposure levels of toxic substances in the workplace than other agencies allow in the general environment. In California, the approach is to set conservative ambient standards that reduce the risk of cancer to one case per million population. Workplace standards are seldom as stringent. This method accounts for the fact that workplace exposure typically occurs for only eight-hour periods, with recovery times In between. It is also worth noting that In many cases exposure limits are more a reflection of economically practicable control technologies than human health knowledge.
The standards that have been set also do not account for the possibility of synergistic effects or recombinations. Synergism occurs when two or more substances in combination cause damage greater than the simple sum of their individual effects. Recombination occurs when two chemicals present In a medium combine together to form a third substance. The newly created material may have properties which are different from the parent substances. An example of this Is the creation of potent carcinogens called trlhalomethanes when water with chlorine for municipal consumption.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk management Is a technique for evaluating the benefits and costs of safety regulations. It functions to aid	making and prioritize
possible courses of action. In recent years. It has been used to examine pollution standards and exposure levels. This Is done not only to balance costs and benefits of control programs, but to weigh the relative merits of different programs so that limited financial resources may be put to the best use. Before risk management Is applied, a risk assessment must be completed. Risk assessment Is a term which describes the methods used to estimate human health Impacts from bioassay or epidemiological data. This Is a very complex task which Is only partially completed for many common chemicals. For example, there are 35,000 to 40.000 pesticide products In use with federal registration. These products are formulated out of approximately 2,500 different active ingredients. A recent National Academy of
Sciences review of EPA records revealed that complete health effect studies have been submitted on less than ten percent of these active ingredients. In California, roughly 13.000 pesticide products have been registered, formulated from a total of 850 different active ingredients. The California Department of Food and Agriculture reports that very few of these active Ingredients have complete health study documentation as required by the California Birth Defect Preven-tlonAct but nearly 80 percent have at least some scientific evidence supporting their registration.
A detailed explanation of risk assessment Is beyond the scope of this Element, but several factors make it an imperfect science at best. These include:
•	Our poor understanding of the true risk of illness, cancer, or death from exposure to many chemicals. This uncertainty makes it impossible to exactly quantify risk.
•	The Impossible task of isolating the effects of
a single chemical from the thousands we are all exposed to in our lives. Sunlight, campfire smoke, and trace elements In water supplies are all potentially harmful. Low levels of many chemical agents are present In our food, drink, clothing, and air. Most individuals live In several places during their lifetimes, hold several jobs and routinely use a variety of potentially harmful household or garden products. In any of these situations, a person may be exposed to a substance that harms them, though the harm may not be apparent for years. This is particularly true of cancers and problems with fertility.
•	The need to place dollar values on environmental damage, aesthetics, and human death or Illness. Many people resist this effort strongly, and feel that impacts to the environment or human health must be avoided at any cost.
•	The fact that even if risk management were a perfect, quantitative science, its application is in the political arena. The decision which results may not be that suggested by the analysis.
34-4
•	The use of risk assessment to set standards and choose programs will always raise these issues and others. One of the most difficult is that allowing a certain level of pollution or choosing not to Implement a program with high costs and low returns may condemn some unknown individuals to Illness or death. (Risk management as defined here should not he confused with risk management as an organization applies it to determine insurance needs.)
•	Risk management is best used by federal or state agencies to set action levels or standards. since local governments will seldom have the research resources to develop the necessary information.
COORDINATION WITH SACRAMENTO COUNTY
Regulations developed by different levels of government seldom work in perfect harmony. Hazardous material legislation is no exception to this rule. The combined effect of programs Imposed by federal, state, and local government agencies varies from well coordinated to inconsistent. duplicative, or incomplete.
For example, in a society like ours where materials are extremely mobile, transportation is best regulated by higher levels of government. This avoids an inconsistent and confusing multitude of local regulations that would make compliance difficult for transporters crossing Jurisdictional boundaries. Similarly, exposure standards should be set at the federal level because they reflect our understanding of the impacts of these substances on human health.
These impacts will not change in different parts of the country. Also, few state and local jurisdictions have the resources to perform health impact tests on the thousands of substances in use.
There are, however, many programs which are best carried out at the local level. Certainly this is true of those requiring routine inspections or monitoring, such as programs for underground storage tanks or business emergency plans. Local fire or health departments already have inspection programs which can be expanded
to cover these additional concerns. Federal regulation in recent years has shown a trend to turn programs over to state governments for implementation. Similarly, agencies from the State of California have been tinning over some hazardous material programs to local governments through either direct legislative mandate or memoranda of understanding (MOU). An MOU between two or more agencies delineates responsibility and authority for program implementation. Often a program can be better implemented with a local agency’s faster response and knowledge oflocal conditions. Where appropriate. Folsom intends to pursue the localization of hazardous materials programs and enforcement.
The intent of this Hazardous Materials Element and the programs which will be derived from it is to act where it is most appropriate for a local government to act. and where the most good can be accomplished with the effort. Therefore. the following sections of this Element focus on areas where local government programs are appropriate. In most areas the Sacramento County Health Department will have primary responsibility for hazardous materials programs at the local level. The City of Folsom will continue to coordinate with the County in the development and implementation of plans and programs which affect the City and will take a pro-active role in protecting the health and welfare of the citizens of Folsom in this regard.
34.3	HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
GOAL 41
To protect the health and welfare of the residents of Folsom through the management and regulation ofhazardousmaterials inamanner that will focus on preventing problems.
POLICY 41.1
The City shall endeavor to work with industry. community groups, and government agencies to develop an effective, workable, and fair hazardous materials management system.
34-5
34
POLICY 41.2
As much as feasible, the City shall provide information to the general public and interested parties on technical and administrative developments in the field of hazardous materials management.
POLICY 41.3
The City shall endeavor to develop and Implement with Sacramento County, a comprehensive hazardous materials management program.
POLICY 41.4
The City shall expand and strengthen existing Folsom programs where appropriate, to fill In gaps in the current federal, state and local hazardous materials management efforts.
POLICY 41.5
The City shall encourage the effective implementation of workplace safety regulations, and to assure that hazardous material information is available to users and employees. POLICY 41.0
The City shall Improve cooperation, information gathering, and information availability within existing Folsom programs.
POLICY 41.7
The City shall support a household hazardous waste disposal program.
POLICY 41.8
The City shall endeavor to develop land use standards that will reduce the risk of health or environmental damage through Industrial or commercial use of hazardous materials.
POLICY 41.9
The City shall endeavor to protect residents and sensitive facilities from avoidable incidents in the transportation of hazardous materials in the county.
POLICY 41.10
The City shall endeavor to protect residents from avoidable accidents and mishandling of hazardous materials in industrial and commercial facilities.
POLICY41.il
-The City shall support local enforcement of hazardous materials regulations.
34-6
State Department of Food and Agriculture
CALTRANS
California Highway Patrol
California Waste Management Board State Office of Noise Control Golden Empire Health Systems Agency U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Environmental Protection Agency U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration
related open space and CONSERVATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED AIR QUALITY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
RELATED PUBLIC FACILITIES ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
34.5	IMPLEMENTATION
INFORMATION REGARDING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Collect Information regarding applicable regulations and enforcement at the federal, state, county and local levels and make that information available to all members of the community , including businesses and their employees.
• Responsible Agencies
Fire Department Police Department Public Works Department Community Development Department Building Department
• Implementing Agency
Fire Department
• Target Dates: Start: January 1989 Complete: On-Going
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars__________________________________
100/S4.500	$750 $300 $5,550 General
Fund
AIR AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41, POLICIES 41.1; 41.2; 41.3; 41.5; 41.6; 41.7; AND 41.11
• Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizatlons
City Attorney
Sacramento County Health Department Sacramento County Air Pollution Control
District
Sacramento County Sheriffs Department Sacramento Area Council of Governments Regional Transit
Area Fire Departments
State Air Resources Control Board
State Department of Health Services
Establish an Air Pollution and Hazardous Materials Technical Advisory Board composed of representatives from all City Departments and the Sacramento County Health Department, to develop a hazardous materials management program for adoption by the City Council.
1.	For those areas which the above-referenced program finds to be in need of regulation at the local level in order to protect the citizens of Folsom (potentially, some of the state’s inspection duties which are presently unfunded). the City shall seek a MOU with the State Department of Health Services to
34-7
obtain authority for the regulation of hazardous waste generators in Folsom.
34
2.	The City shall coordinate with the Sacramento County Health Department and the state to increase review of permit applications. and monitoring of underground storage tank testing programs and leaking tank clean-ups.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.1; 41.3; 41.4; 41.6; 41.7; 41.10; AND 41.11
•Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
City Attorney
Sacramento County Health Department Sacramento County Air Pollution Control District
Sacramento County Sheriff’s Department Sacramento Area Council of Governments Regional Transit
Area Fire Departments
State Air Resources Control Board State Department of Health Services State Department of Food and
Agriculture
CALTRANS
California Highway Patrol
California Waste Management Board State Office of Noise Control Golden Empire Health Systems Agency U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Environmental Protection Agency U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration
• Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department Fire Department Police Department
Sacramento County Health Department
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
48/52,160	$50	$500 $2,710 General
Fund,
Development Fees
FACILITIES PERMITTING PROCEDURES -HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCLUDING HAZARDOUS WASTE
With input of the Air and Hazardous Material Technical Advisory Board, develop a permit program for facilities which handle hazardous materials, including hazardous waste, and revise the Zoning Code and business license procedures accordingly:
1.	Determine which handlers of hazardous materials would fall under the permit requirement
2.	Develop procedures to review project applications for site suitability, environmental hazards, riskto sensitive facilities, and other factors pertaining to hazardous materials.
3.	Develop an ordinance to cover all storage of hazardous materials including requirements for above ground containment, leak testing and monitoring.
4.	Perform a constraints analysis of hazardous materials Impacts considering transportation. ground water supply, residential areas. environmental protection, and sensitive facilities.
5.	Adopt, in conjunction with Sacramento County, a hazardous waste management plan and implementing ordinances.
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: On-Going
6.	Develop a review procedure for existing facilities so that facilities or locations which are inappropriate would be conditionally permitted, periodically reviewed, and/or phased out.
34-8
7.	Revise business licensing procedures to complement the hazardous materials permitting procedure, including home occupations.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.8; 41.10; AND 41.11
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 17
•	Cross Referenced To: Title 13 and Title 9
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/ Organizations
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department Fire Department City Clerk
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start June 1989
Complete: June 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
60/52,700	$200	$300 $3,200 Permit Fees
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE ORDINANCE
Update the existing Disclosure Ordinance to complement the hazardous materials permitting procedure. Including the following provisions:
1.	Develop a list of occupations that will potentially involve hazardous materials.
2.	Develop business license review procedures to identify operations that involve hazardous materials and Include a com-
prehensive list of chemicals on the business license application which will require compliance with the Disclosure Ordinance.
3.	Prepare a handout statement about a firm’s potential financial and criminal liability if a routine or accidental release of undisclosed toxic chemicals should harm emergency personnel, employees, or the public.
4.	Bring all the appropriate firms in Folsom into the disclosure program, by having all City and County personnel (Building Inspectors, County Health Department Personnel, Fire Inspectors, etc.) report the undisclosed use of hazardous materials to the Environmental Health Branch of the County Health Department and to the appropriate permitting agency.
5.	Include compressed gases over 200 cubic feet in volume in the disclosure requirement.
6.	Provide for Health Department review of business license applications as appropriate.
7.	Provide for staffing to inspect facility and handling practices.
8.	Develop a cost recovery fee schedule that is based on a fixed rate for the basic inspection (depending on the size or complexity of the operation), with a negotiated surcharge if additional staff time is necessary to resolve problems. This strategy is currently used by the APCD and the Underground Storage Tank program.
9.	Design the fee schedule to also cover costs for emergency response training and development of the state mandated area plans (AB 2185).
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41- POLICIES 41.4; 41.S; AND 41.10
• Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department
34-9
34
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Sacramento County Health Department Public Works Department
Fire Department City Clerk
•	Implementing Agencies
Fire Department
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: June 1990
Complete: December 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total	Funding
Dollars
120/55,400	$500	$600 56,500 General
Fund, Business License Fees
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM
Develop standards for transportation of hazardous materials, including wastes, which complement the City’s permitting programs and the regulations of other levels of government.
1.	Identify firms and land uses requiring hazardous material shipping access.
2.	Identify sensitive facilities (schools, hospitals. etc.) and environmentally sensitive areas.
3.	Identify appropriate transportation routes which would avoid sensitive land uses.
4.	Evaluate accident probability and severity.
5.	Identify emergency responses.
6.	Restrict hazardous materials transportation to appropriate routes and time periods.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41 - POLICY 41.9
•	Folsom Municipal Code: Title 9
•	Cross Reference To: Title 17
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizations
California Highway Patrol State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department CALTRANS
•	Responsible Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department Police Department
•	Implementing Agency
Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: June 1990
Complete: December 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/	Printing Direct Total Funding
Dollars _________________________________
100/54,500	$200	$550 $5,250 General
Funds
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE PROGRAM
Develop a household hazardous materials and waste program.
1.	Implement an educational and public awareness program aimed at reducing the use and mis-use of household products containing hazardous materials or generating hazardous waste and promoting recycling.
2.	Implement a household hazardous waste program Including regular collection times at established sites throughout Folsom for hazardous wastes , and hazardous waste containers.
34-10
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.1: 41.3: 41.4; 41.6; AND 41.7
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.4; 41.10; AND 41.11
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
California Waste Management Board Sacramento County Health Department State Department of Health Services
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1989
• Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
California Waste Management Board State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department
•	Responsible and Implementing Agency
Public Works Department
•	Target Dates: Start: October 1989
Complete: May 1990
34
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Parson Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
4842,160	$50	$500 52,710 General
Fund
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MONITORING
Develop a monitoring and enforcement program to control dumping of hazardous mate* * rials into the municipal sanitary and storm sewer systems:
1.	Develop an educational program to inform residential and commercial customers of the impacts of sewer dumping.
2.	Develop a monitoring and enforcement program to control dumping of hazardous materials into the municipal sewer and storm drain systems.
A.	Increase Folsom's ability to respond to complaints.
B.	Establish an enforcement link with the
District Attorney’s Office.
C.	Provide funding for periodic sampling on a rotating basis to identify contamination problems.
D.	Mitigate contamination sources where Identified.
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding
Dollars____________________________________
10044,500	$500 $1,100 $6,100 General
Fund, Fines
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PROCEDURES
Existing emergency response plans shall be reviewed and updated as needed. The emergency response plans shall be published, shall provide for agency coordination and shall address medical care, escape routes, mutual aid agreements and temporary housing and communications in the event of fire, flooding, inundation, earthquake. hazardous materials spill or other emergency situation.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 29 - POLICY 29.5; GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.9; AND 41.10
• Folsom Municipal Code: Title 9
•Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizations
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department Sacramento General Services Department California Highway Patrol
CALTRANS
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
34-11
34
•	Responsible Implementing Agencies
Public Works Department Fire Department Police Department
•	Implementing Agency
Police Department
•	Target Dates: Start: July 1989
Complete: January 1990
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR
Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/51,800	$100 $200 $2,100 General
Funds
SPILL RESPONSE
The City shall cooperate with nearby Jurisdictions to:
1.	Respond promptly to any spills within the City’s jurisdiction or as may be appropriate under mutual aid agreements.
2.	Institute a policy of civil recovery of spill clean-up costs from responsible parties.
3.	Seek the allowable state reimbursements for spill clean-up expenses that are not recovered from a responsible party.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 41 - POLICIES 41.3; AND 41.11
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizatlons
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department
•	Responsible Agencies
Public Works Department Fire Department Police Department
• Implementing Agency
Fire Department
• Target Dates: Start: March 1989
Complete: October 1989
ESTIMATED COSTS PER YEAR Person Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
40/$1,800	$100	$400 $2,300 State General Fund
LOCAL CONTROL STRATEGIES FOR TOXIC AIR CONTAMINANTS
Inventory and develop control strategies for toxic air contaminants in Folsom.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 31 - POLICIES 31.1; 31.2; AND 31.3; GOAL 32 - POLICY 32.1; GOAL 41 -POLICIES 41.8; 41.9; AND 41.10
•	Resource Groups/Agendes/Organizatlons
State Air Resources Board Sacramento County Air Pollution Control
District
Sacramento Area Council of Governments State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department
•	Responsible and Implementing Agencies
Community Development Department Public Works Department
Target Dates: Start: January 1989 Complete: On-Going
ESTIMATED COSTS OVER SIX MONTHS
Person Hours/Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars_____________________________________
48/52,160	$50	$500 $2,710Development
Fees,
User Fees
34-12
34
GENERAL PLAN DATABASE MAINTENANCE
Maintain and update on a regular basis the database prepared for the General Plan, Including but not limited to the following areas:
1.	Noise: Develop and continually update a database as part of the General Plan program containing noise exposure information for the City so that noise related Issues can be addressed In the land use planning process.
2.	Ground Water and Surface Water Monitoring: Cooperate with the County of Sacramento In developing a computerized data base on water quality and seek funding for a County-assisted testing program to continue to improve Information about water quality In the City.
3.	Medical Statistics: Cooperate with the Sacramento County Health Department to compile statistics on medical problems potentially related to hazardous materials, and support efforts to gather this information on a statewide basis.
IMPLEMENTS: GOAL 30 - POLICY 30.1: GOAL 41 - POLICY 41.6
•	Resource Groups/Agencies/Organizatlons
State Department of Health Services Sacramento County Health Department State Office of Noise Control
•	Responsible and Implementing Agencies
Public Works Department Community Development Department
•	Target Dates: Start: January 1989
Complete: On-Going
ESTIMATED COSTS OVER SIX MONTHS
Parson Hours/ Printing Direct Total Funding Dollars
36/$1,620	$100	$400 $2,120 General
Fund,
Development Fees, EIRs
34-13
I
xi.
' ‘ Jr

Prepared By The City Of Folsom > Community Development Department

October 31,1988

iSWr-t-ari -t*'


•l.l-ij-. .v A .

5t * * wv
7-K.:
S'- '-'A'
&* .1^1^-.
TABLE OP CONTENTS
PAGE
40.1	AREA FACILITIES PLANS..............................................2
40.1.1	Folsom South Assessment District............................
40.1.2	American River Canyon Units 4-9.............................
40.1.3	Folsom East Area Facilities Plan............................
40.1.4	Rancho Creek - Briggs Property..............................
40.2	AREA PLANS.........................................................
40.2.1	Folsom Redevelopment Agency/Central Folsom
Redevelopment District.......................................
40.2.2	Historic District Plan......................................
40.2.3	Central Commercial District Flan............................
40.2.4	Humbug Creek/Willow Creek Parkway Plan......................
40.3	SPECIFIC PLANS.....................................................
40.3.1	Russell Ranch Specific Plan.................................
40.3.2	Eastgate/ Broadstone Project................................
40.3.3	Sobrato Development.........................................
co co co co to to to to to to to to to
AREA PLANS AND SPECIFIC PLANS
The purpose of this Section Is to list and inventory the Area Facilities Plans. Area Plans, and Specific Plans.
The City has. through its Urban Development Policy, adopted and proposed a number of Area Facilities Plans.
40.1.1	FOLSOM SOUTH ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
40
The first such adopted Area Facilities Plan accompanied the Folsom South Assessment District. This area adjacent to Highway 50. Included a 2.000-acre assessment district area with an additional 1.000 acres of study area. The Facilities Plan and related documents are on file with the Community Development Department or Public Works Department.
40.1.2	AMERICAN RIVER CANTON UNITS 4-9
This area, also known as the Allied North Facilities Area, had an approved Plan adopted with a440-acre project known as American River Canyon Units 4-9. This project, taken over by Elliot Homes Inc., encompasses a number of land uses Including approximately 1.540 dwelling units and a ten-acre commercial site, a park site and school site.
40.1.3	FOLSOMEAST AREAFAdLITTES PLAN
The East area Facilities Plan covers the Russell Ranch, Teichert Property, Broadstone II and Broadstone III. The total area is 3,900 acres. The Facilities plan provides a more refined depiction and description of facilities required for the East Area. References on maps, or descriptions in text of the East Area Facilities Plan (EAFP), are for general information purposes only. Additional detailed plans will be reviewed and adopted as part of each individual specific plan, the more refined plans will be reviewed for overall compatibility with other facilities needed within the East Area Facilities Plan (EAFP). Resolution No. 3798.
40.1.4	RANCHO CREEK-BRIGGS PROPERTY
This is the fourth Area Facilities Plan and encompasses an area around East Natoma Street. The area Is primarily residential and is largely developed. One parcel of approximately 200
acres known as the Briggs Ranch or Briggs Estate, will be reviewed during late 1988 and 1989 for development permit approvals and approval of the Area Facilities Plan.
40.2	AREA FLANS
40.2.1	FOLSOM REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY/CENTRAL FOLSOM REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
In 1983. the City formed a Redevelopment Agency which encompasses 1,050 acres In the older part of the town. The purpose of formation of the Folsom Redevelopment District was to provide parking for the Historic District, upgrade certain housing areas in the City and provide for public Improvements and beautification of East Bldwell Street. The Agency Is currently, as of 1988. In Its fifth year and has tax Increment of over $350,000 per year. The City has sold bonds In 1987 for $2 million In public projects. The projects will be centered on the three areas that were the reasons the Agency was formed. As a result of the General Plan adoption, an amend-ment to the Redevelopment Plan will be necessary in order to bring the land uses in line with the 1983 Plan.
40.2.2	HISTORIC DISTRICT PLAN
The City Redevelopment Agency has authorized the preparation of a Specific Plan for the Folsom Historic District. During the review of the Implementation program In the General Plan's Land Use Element, the Planning Commission recommended that the Historic District Plan Area be expanded to encompass the entire Folsom Township area. The Plan will be completed In 1989 and will be on file with the Community Development Department.
40.2.3	CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT PLAN
The policies in the Land Use Element that refer to the Central Commercial District discuss a need to formulate a plan for this area. The City's Redevelopment Agency has contracted with a landscape architect. Earth Art Inc., to prepare an East Bldwell Beautification Project which Is to upgrade and provide consistency In the develop-
40-2
ment along East Bldwell Street. It Is expected that this concept, which will include landscaping. street furniture, signage and other amenities. should be expanded to Include the entire Central Commercial District. This type of Plan will be implemented through the Redevelopment Agency and with revisions to the Zoning Code and should provide for a quality development of this area.
40.2.4	HUMBUG CREEK/WHLOW CREEK PARKWAY PLAN
Several Sections of the General Plan discuss this Plan Area. The Plan is to be a linear park system and will run from Lake Natoma eastward to the El Dorado County Line following the Humbug Creek and Willow Creek drainage areas. The Plan is expected to accommodate several issues, including recreation and open space needs, floodway issues, wildlife issues and enhancement of development projects adjacent to the streams. The wetlands issues that have been raised recently will, to some degree, be resolved through the development of this Plan by encouraging the consolidation of wetlands along the two watersheds, in order to maintain an overall balance of open space, wildlife areas and wetlands In the City. This Plan is expected to be developed in late 1988 and 1989 and lntegraed Into adjacent projects with long term maintenance and construction provided in the adoption of the Plan.
40.3	SPECIFIC PLANS
40.3.1	RUSSELL RANCH SPECIFIC PLAN
The Russell Ranch Is part of the East Area Facilities Plan and encompasses 1.700 acres. The Ranch covers approximately 800 acres In El
Dorado County and 400 acres south of U. S. 50 in addition to the 1.700 acres in the Folsom city limits. A conceptual plan has been prepared by the developer. River West Developments. The purpose of the conceptual plan is to introduce the project and provide some basis for which to provide a more definitive Specific Plan at some point In the future. The conceptual Russell Ranch plan, will be reviewed for consistency with the General Plan and revised based on an application which will be reviewed following the Plan adoption.
40.3.2	EASTGATE/BROADSTONE PROJECT
The Eastgate Project, at the Intersection of Highway 50 and East Bldwell off of Scott Road on the northwest comer, encompasses approximately 1000 acres. Similar comments apply to this as with the Russell Ranch Project in that a number of steps should be taken prior to summarizing all of the information needed to develop the property Into a format of a Specific Plan. The project includes a regional mall and accessory uses and is expected to be a very large scale project that will take one or two years of planning in order to actually begin development.
40.3.3	SOBRATO DEVELOPMENT
The Sobrato project encompasses 160 acres and has been earmarked as a Specific Plan Area through the General Plan hearings. The property is expected to be a mixed-use development and is Included In the Redevelopment Area boundaries. Substantial benefits are expected to be derived to the Redevelopment Agency due to the development that Is anticipated on this parcel. The Specific Plan will be developed between the City and developer and also include aspects of the Humbug Creek drainage plan area.
4
40-3
Prepared By The City of Folsom Community Development Department
October 31, 1988
-i- rf- '

■■■ ■ ...
•	- .;?v
60.1	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS..............................2
60.1.1	INTRODUCTION.......................................2
60.2	GENERAL PLAN.........................................2
60.3	SPECIFIC PLANS/MASTER PLAN...........................2
60.4	REDEVELOPMENT PLAN...................................3
60.5	MUNICIPAL CODE.......................................3
60.6	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS..............................  3
60.7	PUBLIC INFORMATION...................................3
60.8	AGENCY COORDINATION..................................4
60.9	ADMINISTRATIVE/PROJECT REVIEW........................4
60.10	DATA BASE/SPECIAL STUDIES...........................4
60.11	ENFORCEMENT/COMPLAINTS............................  4
60.12	MONITORING..........................................5
60.13	ACQUISITION/ABANDONMENT...........................  5
60.14	CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.........................5
60.15	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM SUMMARY......................5
IMPLEMENTATION
60.1	IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
60.1.1	INTRODUCTION
This section of the Folsom General Plan Is an overview of the Plan’s implementation program. consistency aspects and its relationship with other adopted plans. Itls primarily oriented to the individual wanting to know if a proposed development project meets the City’s goals and policies, and as a guide for making the Plan a responsive and current document. Sections
60.7	and 60.8, Public Information and Agency Coordination, describe the role and function of public input In the local planning process.
The discussion on Implementation explains what “tools" are available to implement the General Plan, and Identifies programs and work tasks to keep the General Plan a useful and current policy document for the City. Implementation of the Plan is achieved by various methods the City has at Its disposal through state and local law. The most commonly used Is the City’s Zoning Code (Folsom Municipal Code Chapter 17). Table 60-1 Illustrates compatible zoning and land use designations. Section 60.5 discusses this in greater detail
60
Consistency focuses on how the General Plan is used to evaluate both public and private development and improvement projects. State law mandates consistency between a local jurisdiction’s General Plan and Its zoning, subdivision, capital Improvements programs and other development regulations and land use depisinna
The relationship of other adopted plans to the General Plan is discussed In Sections 60.3 and 60.4, Specific Plans/Master Plans and Redevelopment Plans respectively. It defines what land use and policy provisions of the adopted re-developmentplan, area plans andspedfic/master plans are to be used In evaluating projects and programs against City policy.
60.2	GENERAL PLAN
funding sources are presented for each measure. In addition. Section 60.15 provides a summary of each Element’s implementation program. A summary table is also included which provides easy reference to the Plan’s complete implementation program.
60.3	SPECIFIC PLANS/MASTER PLANS
Perhaps the most versatile method of implementing the General Plan, spedfic/master plans can address a variety of issues and serve a variety of functions. Spedfic/master plans offer the advantage of blending land use with zoning by providing an overall development concept for a project. The City, through the Planned Development process, encourages large landowners/ developers to prepare specific plans. As an overall development plan, these address land use. open space/parkland, circulation, financing mechanisms and public facilities/services.
The environmental work required for these plans is an excellent vehicle for updating the General Plan’s MEA. Subsequent planning efforts can use the MEA as a base document and supplement it with new and updated information data as necessary.
-----A/inur* uiri ---
LAND USE AND
ZONING CONSISTENCY
GENERAL PLAN DESIGNATION	ZONING
Single Family
Single Family High Density Multi-Family Low Density Multi-Family Medium Density Multi-Family High Density
Neighborhood Commercial
General Commercial
Community Commercial
Central Commercial Mixed Use District Regional Commercial Specialty Commercial Industrial/Ofllce Park
R-l-L, R-l-ML. R-1-M.R-2.RMH R-M. R-2 R-M, R-3 R-M. R-4
C-l
C-2, C-3 C-l, C-2 C-2
C-3. CH C-3, HD. BP M-l. M-2, ML.
MF. BP
A section describing Implementation measures and programs is contained In each Element. Implementing actlons/products. responsible/ implementing agency, time frame, costs and
Public
Park/Open Space All Designations
OSC. A-l-A PD. A-l-A OSC
•A variety of zones are consistent with this land use.
60-2
The City also uses specific plans for facilities planning in developing areas of the City. These are particularly useful in planning, financing and construction-timing of major public facilities and services. Such plans could also be used for future transportatlon/drculatlon studies and improvements. Section 40 further describes Specific Plan requirements and opportunities.
60.4	REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
Redevelopment is another effective tool for implementing the General Plan, it allows for direct City involvement in implementing the Plan through land use and fiscal activities. AU redevelopment proj ects and activities are reviewed for General Plan consistency. The City’s redevelopment efforts to date have concentrated on providing development incentives, assisting developers in assembling properties, and financing mechanisms (loans, grants, assessments, and issuing revenue bonds). The City’s older areas and the designated central mrmnerr-tal rfigtrW, have been the focus of redevelopment activities.
The City also coordinates with Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment Agency (SHRA) in county-wide programs for funding sources and housing needs.
60.5	MUNICIPAL CODE
The Folsom Municipal Code (FMC) is the primary implementation tool available to the City. Regulations relating to planning and development can be found in the following chapters:
•	Chapter 12 Streets and Sidewalks
•	Chapter 13 Water and Sewage
•	Chapter 14 Building and Construction
•	Chapter 16 Subdivision
•	Chapter 17 Zoning
Within these chapters are the various ordinances and regulations (i.e., zoning, subdivision. grading, environmental review procedures) that govern all public and private development projects within the City. As such, they implement the various General Plan goals and policies and must be consistent with the Plan.
State Planning Law specifically requires zoning and subdivisions to be consistent with the General Plan. In doing so. the General Plan land use categories have been developed in a manner to allow the broadest range of a particular type of use within the designation. Specific uses and density ranges are identified by zoning. Further refinement of land uses and development guidelines are provided on some properties through the adoption of specific development plans.
Subdivision activity, through the local subdivision ordinance. Implements and must be consistent with the General Plan. Government Code Section 66473.2 provides that no local agency shall approve a subdivision map unless the map, together with its design and improvements. Is consistent with the local General Plan.
60.6	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
City standards/regulatlons for development projects are found In various chapters of the FMC (see Section 60.5 discussion). General Plan policies also address development standards through the application of building Intensities (Le.. density, lot sizes, area and height restrictions). Standards are also referred to In the Implementation program for the Land Use Element
The City has chosen to rely not only on the zoning and subdivision ordinances and other regulations, but is also strongly encouraging the preparation of specific plans for large development proposals. General Plan policies encourage Innovative planning and site design, retention of open space, and mixing of compatible land uses. Development guidelines and an overall development plan are a requirement of the planning development process. This process allows flexibility in Interpreting zoning code standards.
60.7	PUBLIC INFORMATION
Public information and education programs are Important functions of a local planning agency. Several implementation measures call for preparation and distribution of informational handouts on zoning and building regulations, code enforcement activities, development guidelines, and parks and recreation facilities. The primary purpose of these publications Is to assist and Inform residents and developers of the planning agency’s functions and responsibilities.
6
60-3
Another aspect of a public information program involves the periodic review and monitoring of the General Plan. The City will establish and implement a system for monitoring development. implementation programs and plan amendments. As an annual task, such a report would provide the basis for understanding current growth trends, effectiveness of implementation actions, and land use balances.
Noticing and public review/comment opportunities on development projects is another component of a successful public information program. The City shall continue to follow state law noticing and public review/comment requirements. and shall encourage cil-fom participation on local boards, commissions and committees involved with planning issues.
60.8	AGENCY COORDINATION
60
Coordination among various local, regional, state and federal agencies governing Folsom’s growth and development will be encouraged. The City will continue to coordinate with and participate in regional planning efforts designed to address growth and environmental Issues that impact Folsom’s quality of life. Several of the General Plan’s implementation programs can only be implemented through Inter-Jurisdictional cooperation. The Plan calls for the City to work with neighborlngjurisdlctions in solving regional problems, e.g.. traffic, air quality, housing, etc.
Agency coordination also refers to the various City Departments. Review of public works projects, special studies and plans, and maintenance of public service levels require staff expertise from all City Departments.
60.9	ADMINISTRATTVE/PROJECT REVIEW
Administrative review refers to review and monitoring of the General Plan itself. Portions of the Plan will be periodically reviewed and recommended, for revision if necessary. Plan policies will be reviewed and offered for amendment if no longer applicable or reinforcement is deemed necessary. Implementation activities will also be closely monitored and amended or supplemented If necessary. Administrative review is also an effective means of maintaining internal consis-
tency among the various elements and components of the General Plan.
Review of public and private projects is another effective General Plan implementation tool. Development projects should reflect and embody Plan goals and policies through their implementation at the project-specific level. Project review should also focus on plan-project consistency Issues. Plan consistency review is an important step in the project review process. If Inconsistencies exist between the Plan and project, revisions to the project should be called for. If the General Plan is amended for individual projects, local officials must consider the amendment’s impact on the entire community, what is "in the public interest", and its consistency impact on the remainder of the General Plan.
60.10	DATA BASE/SPECIAL STUDIES
The Master Environmental Assessment (MEA), General Plan data base document, will be periodically updated through special studies, project EIRs, and regional data gathering efforts (Le.. Air Quality). The MEA provides an excellent source document for baseline data on which future EIRs may be “tiered" (Government Code Section 15152). Future studies and environmental work will be used to periodically update the MEA.
Special studies (Le.. traffic, vegetation/wildlife. cultural resources) will be required of development proposals as the City builds out. These future studies will provide City staff and local officials with the latest available information necessary when reviewing and conditioning projects.
60.11	ENFORCEMENT/COMPLAINTS
Enforcement of the Municipal Code, and the various building and development regulations, is the objective of the City’s Code enforcement program. Enforcement and abatement is handled on a City or complaint initiated basis. Zoning regulations, sign enforcement, nuisance abatement. and business license matters all fall within the jurisdiction of the code enforcement program and implementation of the General Plan.
60-4
60.12	MONITORING
A monitoring program will be established and coordinated through various City agencies (Community Development. Public Works. Building. Parks and Recreation. Finance). It will focus on development activity including such things as development trends, building permit activity, business license renewals, impacts on municipal services, and land use balances. The City’s computer system will be utilized to connect the various departments to track these activities. This program will also analyze the effectiveness-of the General Plan implementation measures.
60.13	ACgUISITION/ABANDONMENT
Real property to be acquired or disposed of by the City is another tool the City uses In implementing the General Plan goals and policies. In addition, these properties are submitted to the Community Development Department for General Plan consistency review.
60.14	CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
All capital improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year by the City are listed and classified, and a coordinated program is developed for review and recommendation to the City
Council. The City’s Planning Commission annually reviews the proposed CIP for General Plan consistency and implementation.
60.13 IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM SUMMARY
This section briefly summarizes the implementation measures developed to follow-through with the goals of the General Plan as presented in the established policies for each specific goal.
The table summarizes the implementation measures that have been established for the mandatory and optional Elements. Specific implementation measures along with estimated cost and funding sources are provided for each element. Those measures are also referred to in more detail at the back of each Element section.
Included, also, as part of the Implementation Program Summary is a chart listing the Goals of the General Plan and the implementation measures that relate to each specific goal. This chart is useful to aid in determining the corresponding goals and implementation programs for specific projects related to all levels of development and services in the City.
6
60-5
GENERAL PLAN
IMPLEMENTATION WORK PROGRAM
WORK TASK	DEPARTMENT		TIME FRAME	HOURS	COST	REMARKS
LAND USE					
1. Special Plans/Master Plans	A, C	1/89-9/90	-	$120,000-3300.000	$40,000- $100,000 (Cost/Plan)
2.	Grading Ordinance 3.	Incentive Programs	A.C	1/89-6/89	10	$ 475	
(Subdivision Ordinance) 4. Revision of Zoning	A	1/89-6/89	80	$5,500	
Standards and Zones	A	1/89-1/90	1,000	$49,500	
5. Plan Review Procedures	A.B.C	3/89-3/90	40	$2,200	
6. Project Application Requirements	A	3/89-10/90	40	$2,200	
7. Planned Development Process	A	1/89-1/90	40	$1,800	
8. Pre-Zoning Procedures (Annexation)	A	1/89-1/90	20	$ 900	
9.	Density Transfer Ordinances 10.	Incentive Programs	A	1/89-1/90	30	$ 1,350	
(Zoning Ordinance)	A.C.E	1/89-1/90	80	$5,500	
11. Update Development Standards	A. C	6/89-1/90	-	-	
12. Inter-Agency Review and Comment	A	Ongoing	-		1
13. Contribution to SACOG	A	Ongoing			1
14. Coordination with School District	A	Ongoing	-		1
15. Regional Control Strategies	A	Ongoing			1
16. Environmental Review Process	A	Ongoing			1
17. Use of Utility Easement	A. E	Ongoing	-		1
18. Sphere of Influence Study	A, C	1/89-1/90	400	$18,000	WrthLAFCO
19. Capital Improvement Program	A.C	1/89-6/89	150	$7,000	
20. Redevelopment Plan	A.C.G	7/89-12/89	100	$5,550	
21. Folsom Township Plan	A.C.G	1/90-7/90	200	$9,550	
SUBTOTAL			2.190	$211,525-$391,525	
TRANSPORTATION ANO CIRCULATION
60
1. Public Transit Plan	A, C	10/89-10/89	400	$ 19,000	With RT and SACOG.
2. Pedestrian and Bicycle Master Plan	A.C.E	10/89-4/90	200	$ 9.500	
3. Subdivision Street Standards	A, C	6/89-12/89	100	$ 4,500	
4.	Parking Requirements 5.	Transportation System	A, C	1/89-1/90	80	$ 3,600	With Zoning Ordnance Revision.
Management Ordinance	A, C	3/89-10/90	120	$ 7.250	With RT and SACOG.
6. Bicycle and Pedestrian Guide	A. E	1/90-3/90	40	$ 2,300	
7.	Bridge Study 8.	Financing and Construction of	A, C	8/88-6/89	6,000	$305,000	Major Study.
Needed Road Improvements 9. Funding Plans for	A, C	1/89-Ongoing	250	$ 11,500	With CALTRANS.
Transportation improvements SUBTOTAL	A, C	7/89-12/89	500 7,690	$22,500 $385,150	
A * Community Development Department	B » Building Department	C -Public Works Department
D « Police Department E » Parks and Recreation Division F -Fire Department Permits G » Redevelopment Agency
1 - Work Completed in Normal Processing of Development
60-6
WORK TASK
DEPARTMENT
TIME FRAME HOURS	COST
REMARKS
POSSIBLE ADDITIONAL TASKS
1. Regional Traffic Study	A. C	Major Study with Sacramento, El Dorado and Placer Counties.			
2. Special Intersection Improvements Study and Financing Mechanisms	C				Impacted inter-
HOUSING1 1.	New Housing Production 2.	Provisions of Public Services 3.	Revise General Plan Land Use 4.	Housing Rehabilitation and Repair Program 5.	Economic Feasibility of Affordable Housing 6.	Preserve Mobilehome Parks 7.	Mortgage Revenue Bonds 8.	Condominium Conversion 9.	Housing Assistance Program Referrals 10.	Fair Housing Law Compliance 11.	Urban Development Policy 12.	Monitor Employment Growth 13.	Annual Review of Housing Element 14.	Second Unit Ordnance 15.	Permit Review Process 16.	Identification of Possible Locations for Emergency Housing Shelters SUBTOTAL 1 To be completed with Housing Element Amendment OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION 1. Park and Recreation Open Space Master Plan	C		7/89-5/90	200	$13,500	sections study.
2. Park and Recreation Ordinance	C.E	3/89-10/89	40	$2,350	With Parks and
3. Water Conservation Measures	B	10/89-3/90	40	$2,200	Recreation Element
4. Grading Ordinance lor Water Quality Modification of	C	1/89-6/89	40	$2,200	
Existing Ordinance 5. Incentive Programs - Title 17	AC	1/89-1/90	80	$5,500	With Subdivision
6. Reference Development Standards	A. B, C	3/89-10/89	40	$2,100	Ordinance Update. With Zoning and
7. Project Application Requirements	A	3/89-10/89	40	$2,200	Grading Ordinance. With Land Use ElemenL
8. Use Permits - Mining	A. B	8/89-3/90	80	$5,500	
9. Incentive Programs -Zoning Ordinance	A.C	1/89-1/90	80	$5,500	With Zoning Or-
10. Landscape Ordinance Update	A. C	8/89-1/90	300	$18,000	dinance Update.
11. Landscape Standards	A. C	8/89-1/90	300	$18,000	
12. Guidelines tor Water Quality Maintenance	C	3/89-10/89	40	$2,200	
13. Mining and Reclamation					
A « Community Development Department	B « Building Department	C -Public Works Department
D - Police Department E - Parks and Recreation Division F -Fire Department Permits G - Redevelopment Agency
1 - Work Completed in Normal Processing of Development
60-7
WORK TASK	DEPARTMENT		TIMEFRAME	HOURS	COST	REMARKS
Plan/Natural Resource Extraction	A, B	3/89-3/90	80	$5,500	
14. Development Adjacent to Open Space	A	1/89-1/90	120	$6,400	With Zoning Ordinance Update.
15. Trails, Recreation and					
Safety Guide	A.C. F	3/89-8/89	100	$8,000	
16. Landscape Maintenance					
and Planting Guide	A	7/89-1/90	100	$8,000	
17. Historic Preservation Program -					
Public Information	AB	7/89-7/90	20	$ 1.650	
18. Historic Preservation					
Program Standards	AB	7/89-2/90	25	$ 1.425	
19. Water Conservation					
Education Programs	B.C	10/89-3/90	40	$2,550	
20. Vegetation Preservation Ordinance	A	2/89-8/89	300	$18,000	
21. Open Space Preservation SUBTOTAL	A	3/89-3/90	200 2,265	$11,225 $142,000	
SAFETY					
1. Review of Public Safety Code	AC, F	10/89-6/90	180	$9,300	
2. Trails. Recreation and Safety Guide	A, C.F	3/89-8/89	100	$8,000	
3. Emergency Residence Procedures SUBTOTAL	C.D. F	10/89-2/90	40 320	$ 2,100 $19,400	
NOISE					
1. Annual Update	A	11/89-Ongoing	80	$4,300	
2. Housing Element Update	A	12/88-2/89	120	$6,700	
3. Noise Control	B.C	1/89-7/89	20	$1,100	
4. Reference Noise Ordinance -					
Zoning Ordinance	A	1/89-1/90	20	$1,300	With Zoning Ordinance Update.
5. Noise Ordinance	A	3/89-10/90	140	$7,500	
6. General Plan Database Maintenance	C	3/89-Ongoing	36	$2,120	
7. California Vehicle Code SUBTOTAL	D	Ongoing	416	$23,020	
PARK AND RECREATION					
1. Parks and Recreation Master Plan	C	5/88-3/89	100	$15,000	
2. Pedestrian and Bicyie Master Plan	C	7/88-3/89	200	$10,000	
3. Parks and Recreation Ordinance	C.E	3/89-10/89	40	$2,350	With Parks and Recreation Element
4. Incentive Programs - Zoning Ordinance A, C		1/89-1/90	80	$5,500	With Zoning Ordinance Update.
5. Trails. Recreation and Safety Guide SUBTOTAL	A. C.F	3/89-8/89	100 520	$8,000 $40,850	
A » Community Development Department		B - Building Department		C -Public Works Department	
D = Police Department	E - Parks and Recreation Division	F -Fire Department Permits 1 = Work Completed in Normal Processing of Development				G - Redevelopment Agency	
60-8
WORK TASK	DEPARTMENT	TIME FRAME HOURS	COST	REMARKS
AIR QUALITY
1. Air and Hazardous Materials
Advisory Board	C	7/90-Ongoing	48	$2,710
2. Local Control Strategy	A, B	1(V89-Ongoing	48	$2,710
3. Transportation System				
Management Ordinance	A, C	3/89-10/90	120	$7,250
SUBTOTAL			216	$12,670
PUBUC FACILITIES
1. Area Facilities Plans*	A, C
SUBTOTAL
1 Major portion of the implementation program for the Public Facilities Element will be through the preparation and adoption of Area Facilities Plans.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
1. Hazardous Material
Disclosure Ordnance	A, C, F	6/90-12/90	120	$6,500	With City
					Clerk and
					Sacramento
					County Health
					Department
2. Facilities Permitting Procedures -					
Hazardous Materials	A.C.F	6/89-6/90	60	$3,200	With City Clerk.
3. Household Hazardous Waste Program C		3/89-10/89	48	$2,710	
4. Air and Hazardous Materials					
Technical Advisory Board	A. C.D.F	1/89-Ongoing	48	$2,710	With
					Sacramento
					County Health
					Department
5. Emergency Response Procedures	C.D.F	10/89-2/90	40	$2,100	
6. General Plan Database Maintenance	A, C	1/89-Ongoing	36	$2,120	
7. Hazardous Materials					
Transportation Program	A.C.D	6/90-12/90	100	$5,250	
8. Spill Response	C, D, F	3/89-10/89	40	$2,300	
9. Local Control Strategies	A, C	1/89-Ongoing	48	$2,710	
10. Hazardous Materials Monitoring	C	10/89-5/90	100	$6,100	
SUBTOTAL			640	$35,700	
A » Community Development Department	B - Building Department	C -Public Works Department
D - Police Department E - Parks and Recreation Division F -Are Department Permits G - Redevelopment Agency
1 - Work Completed in Normal Processing of Development
60-9




-” f



GLOSSARY
Active Recreation Acreage:
Active recreation acreage is defined as land with less than five percent, slope which can be developed Into high use facilities. High use facilities include, but not limited to such facilities as soccerfields, hardball diamonds, sofiballfields, football fields, gymnasiums, tennis courts, tot lots and swimming pools.
Affordable:
Capable of being purchased or rented by a household with very low, low or moderate income. based on a household’s ability to make monthly payments necessary to obtain housing. Housing is considered affordable when a household pays no more than 30 percent of its gross monthly Income (GMI) for housing.
Arterial Street:
Relatively-hlgh-speed (40-50 mph), rela-tlvely-high-capaclty (up to 50.000 average daily trips) roads providing access to regional transportation facilities and serving relatively long trips, or medium-speed (30-40 mph). medium-capacity (10,000-35,000average daily trips) roads which provide intra-community travel and access to the countywide arterial highway system. Access to arterlals should be provided at collector roads and local streets, but same direct access onto arterlals exists.
Buffer or Buffer Zone: .
An area designed to provide a separation between two, sometimes incompatible land uses.
Central Commercial District:
The primary commercial area serving the needs of entire community. The district Includes retail commercial uses, such as one or more community-level retail centers, professional and corporate offices, financial and real estate services. cultural and entertainment uses, public buildings, and high density residential uses. Cluster Homes:
Homes grouped in close association on a portion of a parcel of land.
Collector Street:
Relatlvely-low-speed (25-30mph), relatively low volume (5,000-20.000 average daily trips) street, typically two lanes, which provides circulation within and between neighborhoods. Collectors usually serve relatively short trips and are meant to collect trips from local streets and distribute them to the arterial network.
Combined (Mixed) Use Building:
A building which contains more than one type land use. such as a multilevel residential building with shops on the ground floor.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL):
A 24-hour energy equivalent level derived from a variety of single-noise events, with weighing factors of five and ten dBA applied to tty evening (7:00 to 10:00 p.m.) and nighttime (10:0L pan. to 7:00 a.m.) periods, respectively, to allow for the greater sensitivity to noise during these hours.
dB:
Decibel: a unit used to express the relative intensity of a sound as it is heard by the human ear. The decibel measuring scale is logarithmic. Zero (0 dB) on the scale is the lowest sound level that a normal ear can detect under very quiet (laboratory) conditions and is referred to as the "threshold” of human hearing. On the logarithmic scale, ten decibels are ten times more intense. 20 decibels are 100 times more intense, and 30 decibels are 1,000 times more intense than one decibel.
dBA:
The “A-welghted” scale formeasuring sound in decibels: weights or reduces the effects of low and high frequencies in order to simulate human hearing.
Density:
The degree of crowding together of people or buildings. For housing, density is the number of permanent residential dwelling units per acre c land. All densities specified in the General Plan are expressed in maximum number of units per
GLOSSARY
.'oss developable acre. (See “Developable Acres, Gross”.) Density canbe controlled through zoning in the following ways: minimum lot-size requirements. floor area ratio, land use-intensity ratio, setback and yard requirements, minimum house-size requirements, ratios comparing number and types of housing units to land area, limits on units per acre, and other means. Maximum allowable density often serves as the major distinction between residential districts.
Density Bonus:
The allocation of development rights that allow a parcel to accommodate additional square footage or additional residential units beyond the maximum for which the parcel is zoned, usually in exchange for the provision or preservation of an amenity at the same site or at another location. (See “Transfer of Development Rights".) Density Transfer:
Away of retaining open space by increasing densities - usually in compact areas adjacent to existing urbanization and utilities - while leaving unchanged historic, sensitive, or hazardous areas.
{veiling Unit: A residence.
Elderly Housing:
Typically one- and two-bedroom apartments designed to meet the needs of persons 62 years of age and older, and restricted to occupancy by them. In Folsom, such units will be constructed in non-institutional settings, in proximity to community amenities and public transportation.
Freeway:
High-speed, high-capacity, limited-access transportation facility serving regional and countywide travel. Generally used for long trips .betweenmajorlandusegenerators. Majorstreets | cross at a different grade level. U.S. Highway 50 is the only such facility in Folsom.
I Goal:
,A general, overall, and ultimate purpose. I aim. or end toward which the City will direct effort.
■ Greenbelt:
A strip of land reserved for open space or parkland between two developed areas, often oviding pedestrian or bicycle connections be-
.<veen the developed areas.
Historic:
Associated with an important local, state, or national event, or representing an outstanding example of an architectural period.
Home Occupation:
A residence which is used by the occupant to conduct a business wholly within the residence. The business use is secondary to the use of the home as a residence.
Implementation:
Actions, procedures, programs, or techniques that carry out policies.
INCOMB LEVELS:
Very Low Income: 50 percent or less of the Sacramento County median household income.
Lower Income: 50 to 80 percent or less of the Sacramento County median household income.
Moderate Income: 80 to 120 percent or less of the Sacramento County median household Income.
Above Moderate Income: More than 120 percent of the Sacramento County median household income.
Industrial Park:
An industrial subdivision in which several establishments are located on a project site with common roads, unified building design, common open space areas, and landscaping. Landscaping:
Any ornamental plantings or fixtures, including trees, shrubs, grasses and other vegetation: planters, fences, walls, gatehouses, and similar structures in a common area or bordering a site: and rocks, boulders, woodchips. and other non-living earthen materials.
Ldn:
Day-night average sound level. The A-weighted average sound level for a given area measured in decibels (dB) during a 24-hour period with a ten dB weighting applied to nighttime sound levels. The Ldn is approximately numerically equal to the CNEL for most environmental settings.
GLOSSARY-2
Level oi Service:
A scale that measures the operating capacity hkoly robe encountered on a roadway or at the intersection of roadways, based on a volume-to-capccity ratio, with levels ranging from A to F, with a representing the lowest volume-to-capac-lty ratio and the highest level of service. (See “Vciume-to-Capaclty Ratio".)
Level of Service Ai Indicates a relatively free flow of traffic, with little or no limitation on vehicle movement or speed.* Usually denotes a volume-to-capacity ratio of 0.00 to c.so.
L e vel of Service B: Describes a steady flow traffic, with slight delays In vehicle move-
■ ?nt and speed, with a volume-to-capacity * t of 0.61 to 0.70.
. of Service C: Denotes steady, high-:e flow of traffic, with significant Hmi-s on movement and speed and a volt-capacity ratio of 0.71 to 0.80.
of Service D: The level where traffic ■ an unstable flow, in which there is
.. freedom of movement, with a volume-.paclty ratio of 0.81 to 0.90. Queues
iA- ’:op and short delays occur.
L avel of Service E: Traffic characterized by slew movement and momentary stoppages. This type of congestion is not uncommon at peak traffic hours, with a volume-to-capacity ratio of 0.91 to 1.00.
Level of Service F: Very congested traffic with frequent stoppages. Indicates forced flow or operation, with a volume-to-capacity ratio of 1.00+.
Local Street:
A road of limited length, often terminat-ir.h m a dead-end or cul-de-sac. serving a portion of a neighborhood.
Low income Household:
A household with an annual Income of no m o r ? : h an 80 percent of the Sacramento County ...a household Income by household size, as co.craned by a survey of Incomes conducted by :h_ or by Sacramento County, or In the ao_-7’.:o of such a survey, based on the latest r .o A findings for the County as provided by th o AS. Department of Housing and Urban De-
v?;7 ament (HUD).
Mitigate:	(
To ameliorate, alleviate, or avoid to the extent reasonably feasible. According to CEQA, mitigations Include: a) avoiding an Impact by not taking a certain action or parts of an action: b) minimizing an Impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and Its Implementation; c) rectifying an Impact by repairing, rehabilitating. or restoring the environment affected: d) reducing or eliminating an Impact by preserving and maintaining operations during the life of the action: e) compensating for an impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments.
Moderate-Income Household:
A household with an annual income of between 80 and 120 percent of the Sacramento County median household Income by household size, as determined by a survey of Incomes conducted by the City or Sacramento County, or in the absence of such a survey, based on the latest available findings for the County as provided by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
Multiple Dwellings:
A structure composed of no more than four attached dwelling units which share any common building components. Including, but not limited to, foundations, roofing and structural systems. Such multiple dwelling units shall be of woodframe construction and not more than two stories and basement In height. Naturalized:
In reference to vegetation which is not native to Folsom but which has. through time, become associated with the native environment.
Neighborhood Commercial Center:
A convenience shopping center serving residents in the Immediate vicinity, typically 1,000 to 2,000 residents within a radius of one-half mile.
Neighborhood:
An area with a distinct Identity owing to natural or artificial boundaries, the character of land uses In that area, and transportation patterns. A neighborhood may or may not have precise boundaries.
Noise:	(_
Noise is often defined simply as unwanted sound, and thus is a subjective reaction to
GLOSSARY-3

characteristics of a physical phenomenon. Researchers formany years have grappled with the problem of translating objective measurements of sound into directly correlatable measures of public reaction to noise. The descriptors of community noise in current use are the results of these efforts, and represent simplified, practical measurement tools to gauge community response.
Noise Attenuation:
Reduction of the level of a noise source using a substance, material, or surface, such as earth berms and/or solid concrete walls.
Noise Contour:
A line connecting points of equal noise level as measured on the same scale. Noise levels greater than the 60 Ldn contour (measured in dBA) require noise attenuation In residential development.
Open Space:
An area with few or no paved surfaces or buildings, which may be primarily in Its natural state or Improved for use as a park.
Open Space Acreage:
Although open space is an Integral part of the parks and recreation system. It must be clearly distinguished from park acreage. Open space acreage Is land or water which Is essentially unimproved and devoted to the preservation and conservation of scenic beauty and natural resources. Open space acreage will not be calculated or credited as park acreage. (See Open Space and Conservation Element) Parkways:
Designed as a natural linear park to connect schools, parks and other trail systems throughout the City. Parkways shall be preserved In their natural state with a network of trails for walking, cycling and horseback riding. Parkways will be classified as open space for the preservation of natural resources. Therefore, parkways will not be figured Into or credited as active park. The State Department of Fish and Game (DFG) Is assisting In the preservation of the Humbug Creek/Willow Creek Parkway as an ecological reserve. Standards and policies for this area have been developed, based upon past actions by the City Council and the DFG.
Passive Recreation Acreage:
Passive recreation acreage is defined as
land designed for low activity level. Passive recreation acreage includes, but is not limited to picnic barbecue areas, shaded turfed area, shaded pavilion areas, walking trails, and nature trails.
Planned Development:
A relatively large area in which the entire system of buildings, parks, schools, other public facilities, and roads are established by a master plan for that area.
Performance Standards:
Zoning regulations that admit uses based on a particular set of standards of operation rather than on the particular type of use. Performance standards may be established to limit noise, air pollution, emissions, odors, vibration, dust, dirt, glare, heat, fire hazards, wastes, traffic generation, and visual Impact of a use.
Performance Zoning:
The performance approach to zoning regulates development mainly on the basis of four variables: open space ratio. Impervious surface ratio, density, and floor area ratio. The first two standards apply to all land uses, whereas density is applicable only to residential uses. For non-residential uses, the floor area factor is utilized in place of density.
Policy:
A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions which implies clear commitment but is not mandatory. A general direction that the City will follow in order to meet Its goals and objectives by undertaking specific action programs.
Project:
A proposal which Involves physical changes to one or more parcels of land for which a plan showing the proposed changes has been prepared for all such parcels.
Regional Commercial Center:
A primarily retail district serving Folsom residents and residents outside the community, with one or more full-line department stores, specialty stores, and restaurants.
Residential Estate:
A home on a large parcel of land, usually one or more acres.
Riparian:
Referring to the wildlife associated with a river or stream.
GLOSSARY-4
Single Family Dwelling:
A freestanding unattached dwelling of woodframe construction not more than two stories and basement in height. Such a single family dwelling shall not share any common building components, including but not limited to. foundations. roofing and structural systems, with any other structure or dwelling.
Sound:
Sound is defined as any pressure variation in air that the human ear can detect. If the pressure variations occur frequently enough (at least 20 times per second). they can be heard and hence are called sound. The number of pressure variations per second is called the frequency of sound, and is expressed as cycles per second, now called Hertz (Hz) by international agreement. The speed of sound in air is approximately 770miles per hour, or 1.130 feet/second. Knowing the speed and frequency of a sound, one may calculate its wavelength, the physical distance in air from one compression of the atmosphere to the next. An understanding of wavelength is useful in evaluating the effectiveness of physical noise and control devices such as mufflers or barriers, which depend upon either absorbing or blocking sound waves to reduce sound levels. To measure sound directly in terms of pressure would require a very large and awkard range of numbers. To avoid this, the decibel scale was devised. The decibel scale uses the hearing threshold as a point of reference, defined as 0 dB. Other sound pressures are then compared to the reference pressure, and the logarithm is taken to keep the numbers in a practical range. Use of the decibel scale allows a million-fold Increase in pressure to be expressed as 120 dB.
Specific Plan:	(
A tool for detailed design and implementation of a defined portion of the area covered by a General Plan. A specific plan may include all detailed regulations, conditions, programs, and/ or proposed legislation which may be necessary or convenient for the systematic implementation of any General Plan Element(s) or a portion thereof.
Strip Commercial:
A commercial area characterized by multiple businesses located on a long, shallow lot to strart frontage. Buildings are typically set back from the street to allow for parking in
front.
Suburban:
A level of development in which buildings are mostly one or two stories and residential neighborhoods are dominated by single family homes and garden apartments.
Through-Traffic:
Denoting motor vehicles whose destination is beyond the immediate vicinity of the road the vehicle is on.
Urban:
In the context of development, describing projects which contain curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drains, underground sewer lines, paved roads, and other public Improvements.
Zero Lot Line:
A type of development in which one wall of a house coincides with one of the boundaries of the parcel on which it is located.
(
t

GLOSSARY-5
Single Family Dwelling:
A freestanding unattached dwelling of woodframe construction not more than two stories and basement in height. Such a single family dwelling shall not share any common building components, including but not limited to, foundations. roofing and structural systems, with any other structure or dwelling.
Sound:
Sound Is defined as any pressi-i-re variation In air that the human ear can detect. If the pressure variations occur frequently enough (at least 20 times per second), they can be heard and hence are called sound. The number of pres«yirp* variations per second is caned the frequency of sound, and is expressed as cycles per second, now called Hertz (Hz) by international agreement. The speed of soundale Is approximately 770miles per hour, or 1.130feet/second. Knowing the speed and frequency of a sound. one may calculate its wavelength, the physical distance in air from one compression of the atmosphere to the next. An understanding of wavelength is useful in evaluating the effectiveness of physical noise and control devices such as mufflers or barriers, which depend upon either absorbing or blocking sound waves to reduce sound levels. To measure sound directly in terms of pressure would require a very large and awkard range of numbers. To avoid thia, the decibel scale was devised. The decibel scale uses the hearing threshold as a point of reference, defined as 0 dB. Other sound pressures are then compared to the reference pressure, and the logarithm is taken to keep the numbers Ina practical range. Use of the decibel scale allows a million-fold increase in pressure to be expressed as 120 dB.
Specific Plan:
A tool for detailed design and implementation of a defined portion of the area covered by a General Plan, a specific plan may include all detailed regulations, conditions, programs, and/ or proposed legislation which may be necessary or convenient for the systematic implementation of any General Plan Elements) or a portion thereof.
Strip Commercial:
A commercial area characterized by multiple businesses located on a long, shallow lot to mayimiy.e street frontage. Buildings are typically set back from the street to allow for parking in front
Suburban:
A level of development in which buildings are mostly one or two stories and residential neighborhoods are dominated by single family homes and garden apartments.
Through-Traffic:
Denoting motor vehicles whose destination is beyond the immediate vicinity of the road the vehicle is on.
Urban:
In the context of development, describing projects which contain curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drains, underground sewer lines, paved toads, and other public improvements.
Zero Lot Line:
A type of development in which one wall of a house coincides with one of the boundaries of the parcel on which it is located.

GLOSSARY-3
																																									
Trails, Recreation and Safety Guide					A.																						X		X												
Landscape Maintenance & Planting Guide -																							X	X				X													
Historic Preservation Program																										X															
Household Hazardous Waste Information																																									X
Illegal Dumping, Haz. Mats*. Education																																									X
Household Hazardous Waste Program											'4,.																														X
Water Conservation Education Program																												X													
Bicycle and Pedestrian Guide																	X																								
																																									
Agency Coordination ••••••*																																									
Inter-agency Review and Comment					X																																				
Coordination with School District																X																									
SACOG					X																																				
Regional Control Stratgies																																									
Air A Haz. Materials Technical Advsry Brd																															X	X									X
Emergency Response Procedures																													X												X
																																									
Administration and Protect Review **																																									
Hazardous Materials Permits Review																																									X
Historic Preservation Program																										X															
Environmental Review Process	X	X	X																																						
																																									
Data Base and Special Studies																																									
General Plan Data Base Maintenance																														X											X
Open Space Preservation																									X																
Use ol Utility Easements																X																									
Scenic Corridor Study A Guideline Develop.																											X														
Water Resources Identification ATracklng																												X													
Sphere of Influence Study						X																																			
Bridge Study																	X																								
Hazardous Materials Transportation Prograrl	1																																								X
																																									
Enforcement and Complaints “**•••																																									
Spill Response																																									X
California Vehicle Code																														X											
																																									
Monltorlng““,“																																									
Local Control Strategies																															X	X									X
Water Conservation Program																												X													
Hazardous Materials Monitoring																																									X
Water Resources and Consumption																												X													
Hazardous Materials/Waste																																									X
																																									
Acquisition •••••••																																									
																																									
Capitol Improvement Program																																									
Capitol Improvement Program																	X																								