                                                 2
                     Economic Development
San Ramon is committed to developing a vibrant and healthy economy, providing appropriate
land uses for planned development, strengthening the fiscal and financial health of the City,
and working with the private sector to provide fundamental resources such as an adequate
supply of skilled workers and capital improvements to attract and maintain businesses.
2.1 SAN RAMON’S ECONOMIC BASE
THE BEGINNINGS
Beginning in the 1970s, Bishop Ranch Business Park was the engine for economic development
in San Ramon. Bishop Ranch not only established the City as an employment center, but also
helped determine San Ramon’s economic character. The presence of major firms, such as
Chevron and AT&T, and the attractive physical environment of Bishop Ranch stimulated further
business development in San Ramon. City‐ and region‐wide population increases also helped
fuel the growth of businesses serving local and subregional needs for retail, service, and public
uses.
San Ramon is a good location for business, and the City has benefited from business growth.
By affirming this positive relationship through sound economic planning, the City will
strengthen its ability to serve future residents.
YEAR 2014 EMPLOYMENT
Based on information extrapolated from the Association of Bay Area Governments’ (ABAG’s)
Projections 2013, and the U.S. Census Bureau 5 year American Community Survey data for
2012, the City of San Ramon estimates that the San Ramon Planning Area had
approximately 45,994 jobs as of January 1 2014, representing a 14.9‐percent increase over
San Ramon’s 2000 job total (40,140 jobs). Among the larger industry groups in the City are
financial and professional services (29 percent); health, educational and recreational services
(18 percent); and manufacturing, wholesale and transportation trades (13 percent).
CURRENT NON‐RESIDENTIAL LAND USE PATTERNS
In general, businesses in San Ramon are diverse in terms of both amount of occupied space
and number of employees. Companies in the Bishop Ranch Business Park range from
national corporate headquarters to small offices for companies with 10 or fewer employees.
As of January 1, 2014, San Ramon has an estimated 16.4 million square feet of non‐
residential floor area. Major business centers in the City include (1) the Bishop Ranch
Business Park; (2) the Crow Canyon Road area, which includes the earliest commercial
development in San Ramon; and (3) southern San Ramon. Other areas of the City (Bollinger
                                                  2‐1

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
Canyon, Dougherty Hills, Twin Creeks, the Westside) contain smaller amounts of non‐
residential floor area.
FUTURE EMPLOYMENT
Employment growth in San Ramon will allow the City’s economic base to expand in tandem
with its population. Employment growth anticipated under the General Plan 2035 would
consist of an employment mix that continues the City’s strong “office park” character, while
accommodating slightly higher proportions of population‐serving jobs in retail, services, and
other economic sectors. Planning Area employment is projected to increase to an estimated
57,667 jobs by 2035, a 25.4 % increase from 2014. Of the estimated 11,673 new jobs, the
majority of job growth is estimated to be in the retail and services sectors as well as
industries such as health services, information technology and public administration.
San Ramon’s Planning Area is expected to have 96,174 residents by 2035 which will
continue to fuel the expected employment growth by creating demand for additional retail,
services (business, professional, medical, educational and other), and public‐sector uses.
Continued diversity in employment sectors will expand job opportunities for local residents
and help to stabilize the local economy.
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH
Supporting economic development means making space available both for existing
businesses to expand and for new businesses to come to San Ramon. To ensure that growth
opportunities exists, the City developed the Economic Development Strategic Plan (EDSP) in
2005 which establishes the direction for San Ramon’s short‐ and long‐term economic
development and details how to attract new or added uses to the local economy. Specifically,
the EDSP guides future land use decisions with economic development implications, and
outlines strategies to enhance the City’s business retention, expansion, and attraction efforts.
The EDSP was last updated in Fiscal Year 2010‐11.
The EDSP is recognized as the primary tool for implementation of this Element and is
incorporated here by reference rather than inserting the entire Plan and its set of
Implementation Strategies. Through the EDSP and its periodic update, the City will encourage
attractive, affordable, and useable building space, an attractive business and residential
environment, and a desirable “quality of life.”
FUTURE NON‐RESIDENTIAL LAND NEEDS
The land use program of the General Plan 2035 reflects San Ramon’s historic economic
evolution. The program adjusts the City’s historic economic mix to take into account the types
of new jobs the region as a whole attracts, and provides for opportunities to accommodate
economically and physically suitable employment. By General Plan buildout, the City of San
Ramon estimates non‐residential square footage to increase approximately 5 million square
feet for a total of approximately 21.6 million square feet within the Plan Area based on
anticipated development.
The increases in non‐residential space would take place within project sites, including the
City Center project, Dougherty Valley Specific Plan, Crow Canyon Specific Plan (CCSP), and
the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan (NCRSP) areas. Future non‐residential development
                                                2‐2

                                    Economic Development
is anticipated to primarily occur on infill and designated mixed‐use properties such as those
within the CCSP and NCRSP areas where infill development can be supported based on the
existing land use and infrastructure pattern.
THE RETAIL SECTOR
San Ramon’s shopping areas offer a broad range of standard and value‐oriented retail goods
that serve the convenience retail needs of San Ramon residents, workers, and businesses. San
Ramon has market opportunities to maintain this strength while expanding its range of retail
offerings.
Retail expansion need not mean “more of the same”; instead, the City can supplement its
solid retail base to meet the demand for new and different shopping experiences. Existing
and future San Ramon residents and workers are likely to want local, style‐oriented shopping
opportunities, in a different kind of shopping environment from a regional mall‐type center.
Meeting this demand will require shopping areas that offer expanded merchandise types and
price ranges as well as more varied retail settings and amenities.
Making the retail experience more lively means not only offering an expanded range of
merchandise, but also providing a site design, amenities, and mix of uses that encourage
leisurely shopping trips, foot traffic, and browsing. Restaurants and cafes are also needed to
add a recreational or an experiential dimension to the shopping experience.
The Dougherty Valley Village Center, approved in 2003, is also a pedestrian‐oriented retail
area where vehicular and transit linkages converge. It will include retail and office space that
is adjacent to current civic uses such as the Dougherty Valley Community Center and Library,
Diablo Valley Community College – San Ramon Campus, and high‐density residential. The
retail experience here is expected to be a synergy of mixed‐uses with areas that provide for
small and large, seasonal, outdoor events such as jazz festivals.
The North Camino Ramon Specific Plan (NCRSP), approved in 2012, offers additional retail
opportunities to meet the needs of San Ramon’s residents and business community.
Complementary to the City Center Project, the NCRSP area provides opportunities for
neighborhood and regional retail and vertical and horizontal mixed‐use development in
proximity to new and existing jobs.
In 2007, the City approved the City Center project at Bollinger Canyon Road and Camino
Ramon. The City Center Project, as approved, was envisioned as pedestrian‐oriented lifestyle
center consisting of:
    •    Retail/Cinema 635,042 square feet
    •    Hotel – 169 rooms
    •    Retail/Office Flex (North of Bollinger Canyon Road) – 50,142 square feet
    •    Residential – 487 units
    •    BR1A – (south of Bollinger Canyon Road) – 681,769 square feet
    •    City Hall/Library 110,490 square feet
    •    Parking structures
                                                 2‐3

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
The project approvals came at the start of the economic downturn and there has been
uncertainty regarding the timing of the project moving forward as envisioned by the Development
Agreements. As such, the project remained on hold pending a better economic climate.
On October 8, 2013, the City of San Ramon entered into a Memorandum of Understanding
with Sunset Development, the City’s private sector partner on the City Center Project, to
design and construct a new City Hall. Under the terms of the MOU the location of the
proposed City Hall will move from the approved location in the City Center Project to a new
location at the southwest corner of Central Park. Sunset Development will retain ownership
and development rights for the former City Hall site (Parcel 1B) subject to the terms of the
MOU and Development Agreements.
On May 20, 2014, the City approved the plans for the design of the new City Hall and
construction began in September 2014. Additionally, on June 10, 2014 Sunset Development
presented a revised vision and development concept for phase one of the City Center Plaza
District. This first phase is comprised of the retail and theater portion of the previously
approved Project. Construction of phase one of the Project is anticipated to begin in 2015.
REDEVELOPMENT HISTORY AND DISSOLUTION
In 1986, the City designated its redevelopment project area, which consists of two subareas:
     •   Alcosta Boulevard. On the south side of Alcosta Boulevard mostly east of I‐680.
     •   Crow Canyon. On the north side of Crow Canyon Road east of I‐680 and on both sides
         of Crow Canyon Road west of I‐680.
The Alcosta redevelopment area—about 30 acres of residential development, an 11‐acre
shopping center, and a 6‐acre neighborhood park—was developed in 1999.
A redevelopment plan for the Crow Canyon area was adopted in 1991. In 2006, the City
adopted the Crow Canyon Specific Plan (CCSP) for a significant portion of the Crow Canyon
redevelopment area north of Crow Canyon Road along San Ramon Valley Boulevard. The
RDA and tax increment revenue was envisioned as one of the implementation strategies for
the Crow Canyon Specific Plan, thereby providing tools for the assemblage of properties and
funding for infrastructure and affordable housing.
In 2011, as part of the California Budget Act, the Legislature approved the dissolution of the
state’s 400 plus Redevelopment Agencies (RDAs). After a period of litigation, the RDAs
were officially dissolved as of February 1, 2012 including San Ramon’s RDA. In 2013, the
City Zoning Ordinance was amended to remove the Redevelopment Overlay Zones as a
reflection of the prior State action and the fact that they were no longer applicable to the
properties, including the CCSP area.
The loss of the RDA makes development contemplated by the CCSP more difficult because of
the loss of tools to aggregate land, fund infrastructure and subsidize housing and other
community improvements. Policy 4.7‐I‐2 calling for the implementation of the CCSP vision still
exists; however, has been expanded to acknowledge the loss of the RDA and recommends that
the City consider opportunities to evaluate the Specific Plan in the context of existing and future
needs.
                                                2‐4

                                     Economic Development
TRANSPORTATION AND CONNECTIVITY
San Ramon enjoys convenient freeway access from Interstate 680 via Crow Canyon Road,
Bollinger Canyon Road, and Alcosta Boulevard. Throughout the Bay Area and the San
Ramon Valley, the freeway system and Routes of Regional Significance have become
increasingly congested. Travel times in other parts of the Bay Area have also increased and
traffic congestion creates longer commutes for San Ramon residents and workers.
An effective transportation system is a key contributor to a healthy economy, providing for
access to the labor force, suppliers, and markets. Planning for transportation improvements
and connectivity to the region’s transportation system supports economic development in San
Ramon. One transit center is planned as part of the approved City Center project, and
another transit center is contemplated within the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan area. To
improve traffic circulation in the City’s employment centers, San Ramon in concert with the
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) and the Contra Costa Transportation
Authority (CCTA), embarked on a Project Study Report to determine the cost and feasibility
of constructing high‐occupancy vehicle (HOV) on‐ and off‐ramps along the I‐680 at Norris
Canyon Road. This project is one component of the planned I‐680 Carpool Lane Gap
Closure/Transit Corridor Improvement project as identified in the Contra Costa County voter‐
approved Measure J Transportation Improvement Expenditure Plan.
To facilitate bicycle and pedestrian crossings at two major arterial roadways and improve
vehicle travel times, San Ramon has completed an Iron Horse Trail Bicycle Pedestrian
Corridor Concept Plan. The Plan calls for the construction of bicycle/pedestrian
overcrossings on the Iron Horse Trail at Crow Canyon Road and at Bollinger Canyon Road.
In 2014, the City embarked on the Community Outreach/Preliminary Design phase of the
Bollinger Canyon Road overcrossing with a Transportation for Livable Communities (TLC)
grant in the amount of $200,700. Further discussions on San Ramon’s transportation goals
can be found in the Traffic and Circulation Element.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT FOR BUSINESSES
The City of San Ramon has an important role in encouraging economic development and
providing support for businesses. For example, by “streamlining” its design review, permitting,
and licensing processes, the City makes the approval process less complicated, costly, and
time‐consuming for businesses. In addition, through its General Plan, the City determines the
amount of space available for new business growth and sets guidelines for land use and
development intensity. The City is also responsible for maintaining streets and other
infrastructure, and overseeing workforce housing programs and housing development
incentives. City actions in these areas can help to create an environment that is attractive for
business investment.
GENERAL PLAN‐RELATED CAPITAL FACILITIES NEEDS
The City maintains a capital facilities plan that sets priorities for investing City funds in
improvements such as streets, traffic signals, and other public facilities. By designating areas
for new development (and redevelopment), the General Plan creates demands for capital
facilities that the City will need to address.
                                               2‐5

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
Existing and planned General Plan capital funding commitments include roadway expansions
along arterials and Routes of Regional Significance, construction of a new City Hall within
Central Park, and implementation City Center project including a planned Transit Center.
2.2 DISCUSSION OF TRENDS AND ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
CURRENT AND FUTURE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
The City’s fiscal condition is determined by its operating revenues, expenditures, and its
financial reserves. Revenue sources include taxes, fees, assessments, rent on City‐owned
facilities, interest on City investments, and transfers from federal and State agencies.
Expenditures include the costs of government operations, police protection, community
development, and parks and recreation services.
In 2008 and 2009, the economy experienced the negative impact of a global recession. In
response to any economic downturn, the City has a fiscal responsibility to implement strategic
moves to contain future costs until the economy fully recovers and the corresponding revenue
growth resumes.
Since that time, the City has worked to maintain services in light of fiscal constraints and the
City and local economy have slowly continued to recover. In 2014, State and local
unemployment is at the lowest levels in 5 years, but is still higher than pre‐recession levels.
The housing and retails sectors are continuing to strengthen and local revenue growth is
expected to continue over the next several fiscal years.
While the economic recession represented a significant challenge over the past 5 years, it
does not detract from San Ramon’s long‐term economic strengths looking forward. San
Ramon residents are well‐educated and have high household incomes. The City’s property
values remain fairly stable, particularly when compared with outlying cities within Contra
Costa County. Through implementation of the Land Use Plan and Economic Development
Element, San Ramon’s long‐term economic outlook remains positive.
FINANCIAL AND FISCAL SUPPORT FOR ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
The most important contribution San Ramon will make to its future economic development is
to provide for development opportunities as described earlier in the chapter and in greater
detail in the chapter on land use.
Beyond this strategy, the City’s support for economic development can take a variety of forms,
some of which are suggested by the implementation policies presented below. The General Plan
includes measures to address potential future economic development growth opportunities,
emphasizes and reinforces features of San Ramon that contribute to the City’s image, and
preserves the characteristics that make San Ramon a desirable business location.
FISCAL ANALYSIS OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The land use changes called for in the General Plan will inevitably have fiscal implications for
San Ramon. As described above, the General Plan will allow a substantial increase in non‐
residential building space and, consequently, the number of jobs in the City by the year
2035.
                                               2‐6

                                  Economic Development
The increase in business activity will boost revenues collected by the City from property
taxes, sales and use taxes, hotel taxes, and other sources. Similarly, the expansion of the
population and the residential development that will house new residents will add to the City’s
revenues. At the same time, the operating costs of City programs and activities will rise, as
the City provides services to new as well as existing residential and non‐residential
development. New developments would be responsible for offsetting these operating costs
through contributions such as dedication of land or payment of development impact fees.
The fiscal implications of the Land Use Plan, referenced in the “General Plan 2020 “ was
originally analyzed in detail by Mundie and Associates in 2001 in a separate technical
background report to the General Plan 2020. The General Plan fiscal analysis indicates that
the fiscal impact of the Land Use Plan is positive. This finding, of course, relies on the
premise that future conditions will bear out the assumptions incorporated into the fiscal
analysis. A discussion of this point is presented at the conclusion of the 2001 fiscal report.
The 2030 and 2035 General Plan updates rely on this baseline fiscal analysis and require
that future project level analysis be conducted depending on the nature of future land use
actions. Current General Plan Policy 2.3‐I‐1 requires that the City evaluate the ability of
new development to pay for its infrastructure, its share of public and community facilities, and
the incremental operating costs it imposes as part of the development review process.
In 2005, the City prepared the San Ramon Economic Development Strategic Plan: Economic
Trends and Opportunities report. The extensive report provides an overview of economic
conditions in San Ramon, examining demographics and household data, employment figures,
taxable sales trends, and quality of life factors that impact local economic development. This
report identified the City’s economic strengthens and weaknesses that ultimately formulated
the goals and implementation strategies of the EDSP. The EDSP was updated in 2011 to
address changes in demographics, trends for the residential labor force, real estate market,
and jobs and business, along with clean technology potential, and education and business
development resources.
With the development and update of specific plans, the fiscal impacts of each plan will be
analyzed to determine the City’s economic benefit from these land use documents.
                                                2‐7

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
2.3 GUIDING AND IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
GUIDING POLICY
2.3‐G‐1   Foster a climate in which businesses can prosper.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
2.3‐I‐1 Implement the goals and strategies of the Economic Development Strategic Plan
        (EDSP) as adopted in 2005 and updated in 2011.
        The EDSP, written in 2005 and updated in 2011 will continue to need periodic
        refinement to evaluate and enhance its goals and implementation strategies.
2.3‐I‐2 Work with regional Economic Development Organizations to foster the economic
        health of the City and surrounding region.
        The City is integrally connected to the rest of the Tri‐Valley cities. Many issues
        facing the region affect all communities in it and can be solved only through
        regional dialogue and cooperation.
2.3‐I‐3 Maintain the Economic Development Advisory Committee to advise the City Council
        and staff regarding economic development, redevelopment, and employment
        issues.
        The economic life of the City is never static but ever‐changing. It is important to
        have citizen‐formulated input available to city government on a regular basis.
2.3‐I‐4 Work with the business community to periodically evaluate City services and
        receive improvement suggestions.
        To retain existing businesses and attract new ones, the City needs to “feel the
        pulse” of the business community. Establishing a regular program to ensure
        dialogue between the community and the City is essential to ensuring that the City’s
        policies encourage and stimulate commercial vitality.
2.3‐I‐5 Provide expedited permit review processing for development proposals meeting City
        goals.
2.3‐I‐6 Encourage housing for San Ramon’s resident workforce to improve the match
        between local employment and local workers.
        The social fabric of the City is strengthened when citizens are able to work near
        their homes so that the time otherwise spent commuting can be used for beneficial
        activities within the community. Encouraging housing that will permit a broad range
        of workers, particularly providers of essential services, to reside within the City
        enhances the desirability of the City as a business location.
                                             2‐8

                                 Economic Development
2.3‐I‐7  Work with private sector entities to identify and implement technologically advanced
         infrastructure improvements to enable the City to remain competitive with other
         localities.
         To maintain its deserved reputation as the home of “cutting edge technologies,” the
         City must be prepared to offer the infrastructure necessary to support such
         businesses. Ongoing communication with the private sector is needed to keep the
         City apprised of the technological needs of businesses—both existing and new. This
         information will enable the City to undertake advance planning to ensure its
         competitive position.
2.3‐I‐8 Promote San Ramon as a location for business.
         Coordinate a City effort to “sell” San Ramon as a business location offering assets
         that include an educated workforce; competitive development sites; and an active,
         business‐friendly government with low business license fees.
2.3‐I‐9 Develop a comprehensive Business Development Strategy that includes access to
         tools and resources needed by new and existing businesses to grow in San Ramon
         as part of the EDSP update.
         The business development strategies were incorporated into the 2011 EDSP and City
         staff and the Economic Development Advisory Committee continue to work on
         implementation.
GUIDING POLICY
2.3‐G‐2    Provide adequate land use designations to accommodate planned development,
           with business and commercial areas complementing residential and public
           development in location/access, mix of uses, attractiveness, and environmental
           quality.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
2.3‐I‐10 Continue to refine development standards that allow for better utilization of sites
         already developed for employment uses (e.g., through height and/or floor area
         ratio increases in combination with structured parking).
2.3‐I‐11 Work toward redevelopment and revitalization in the Crow Canyon area through
         implementation of the Crow Canyon Specific Plan to address the City’s future needs
         for residential and non‐residential development.
2.3‐I‐12 Promote and encourage public transit, carpool and vanpool opportunities into San
         Ramon’s business areas including Bishop Ranch, Crow Canyon business area, and
         the San Ramon Valley Boulevard business area.
2.3‐I‐13 Encourage and facilitate non‐motorized means of transportation to business areas.
2.3‐I‐14 Encourage retail development in mixed‐use areas to accommodate local and
         regional demand.
                                              2‐9

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
         By encouraging new types of retail and mixed‐use development, the City both
         broadens and diversifies its tax base and increases the vibrancy of these areas.
2.3‐I‐15 Implement the approved City Center project into a cultural, recreational, and vibrant
         mixed‐use lifestyle center.
         The City Center project includes social, economic, and demographic dimensions,
         recognizing the pivotal need for a “central place” that will serve as a vital, vibrant
         gathering place for the full range of ages and social groups in the City.
         The needs of both residents and businesses (and their employees) will be best met
         in and around the City Center, which combines nearby civic, recreational, and
         commercial activities operating at a level of intensity that invites visitation and
         participation and communicates excitement. The Center will draw users and visitors
         throughout the day and week, in part through revenue‐generating businesses that
         will both contribute to the diversity of uses and provide economic support.
2.3‐I‐16 Use development standards to minimize adverse visual effects of transportation
         infrastructure.
         Planning for new development should address the visual aspects of circulation,
         parking, and loading facilities, using siting, design, landscaping, and (where
         appropriate) screening to assure that these functional elements do not detract from
         the physical attractiveness of new development.
2.3‐I‐17 Pursue alternative funding sources to secure and maintain open space and park
         facilities in San Ramon.
         The City’s natural environment and recreational opportunities are part of its set of
         “capital assets” vital to retaining existing, and attracting new businesses to the
         community. The City—consistent with prudent fiscal management—should seek
         ways, including obtaining government funding when reasonable, to ensure that
         significant open space and parks are available for existing and future residents.
2.3‐I‐18 Implement the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan (NCRSP) to create a fiscally
         balanced, transit‐oriented mixed‐use area that provides for neighborhood and
         regional retail opportunities lacking in San Ramon and vertical and horizontal
         mixed‐use development in proximity to new and existing jobs.
         The NCRSP area will complement the approved City Center Project while providing
         additional retail and housing opportunities close to public transit to meet the needs
         of San Ramon residents.
2.3‐I‐19 Encourage businesses to promote the use of commute alternatives among their
         employees by implementing the City’s Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
         programs.
                                               2‐10

                                    Economic Development
GUIDING POLICY
2.3‐G‐3    Ensure the fiscal and financial health of the City.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
2.3‐I‐20 Evaluate the ability of new development to pay for its infrastructure, its share of
         public and community facilities, and the incremental operating costs it imposes.
         Existing City development review practices assure that new development provides
         for the capital facilities needed to serve it. Ongoing maintenance of those facilities—
         generally via infrastructure landscaping and lighting districts—is also typically
         provided for. While the defraying of such costs by new development would normally
         be expected, some projects may contribute to the community in ways that
         compensate for a negative fiscal impact.
2.3‐I‐21 Seek to maintain an operating reserve consistent with the City Council’s reserve
         policy to assure that sufficient financial resources will be available in the event of
         sudden economic dislocations or general economic slowdowns.
         Demands on the City’s resources can come from a variety of sources, routine and
         emergency, ongoing and one‐time. Responses to funding requests should be
         anchored in a clear understanding of the purposes that City spending is intended to
         serve and is disciplined by prudent financial management. In 2004, the City
         Council adopted a General Fund Reserve Policy providing a target for maintaining
         an operating reserve of not less than 50 percent of projected operating expenses
         for the following fiscal year to contribute to the City’s fiscal health and discipline.
2.3‐I‐22 Encourage diverse and complementary economic growth within the City, particularly
         in the retail sector.
         Per capita revenues from store‐based sales could be stronger than they are. Retail
         development is an economic asset in several ways, contributing jobs and income as
         well as public revenues. A vibrant retail area confers a sense of place that strengthens
         community image and encourages residents to shop, dine, and pursue leisure
         activities locally.
2.3‐I‐23 Assure adequate revenue sources to finance City capital facilities and program
         initiatives.
         Examples of initiatives potentially requiring capital outlays are open space acquisition,
         development of the City Center public facilities, and provision of other kinds of
         community infrastructure. Provision of assisted housing may also involve capital costs.
         Ongoing costs of administering newly established programs and/or providing services
         in conjunction with expanded activity (expansion of City‐maintained public open
         space) will require increased operating costs and, potentially, augmentation of existing
         sources of operating revenues. Enlargement of the City’s responsibilities, whether in
         the capital or operating realm, should occur only when decision makers are satisfied
         that a range of adequate financing options is available.
                                                2‐11

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
2.3‐I‐24 Assure that ongoing budgets provide for adequate maintenance of the City’s capital
         facilities, and establish fees commensurate with services rendered (e.g., application
         processing fees, planning, building and safety and engineering) to recover costs of
         these services.
GUIDING POLICY
2.3‐G‐4     Work with the private sector to assure an adequate supply of skilled workers and
            capital improvements needed to attract and maintain business in San Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
2.3‐I‐25 Encourage local educational institutions to establish education and continuing
         education programs to meet the existing and foreseeable needs of local employers.
         Use network of contacts with local businesses (see Implementing Policy 2.3‐I‐3) to
         identify the types of industries and occupations most in demand and/or least
         available in the local workforce. Work with local campuses of Diablo Valley College
         and other higher education universities to identify local educational resources
         applicable to labor force needs of emerging industries (e.g., telecom, optics, other)
         in relevant occupational specialties. Support regional efforts such as through the
         Tri‐Valley Business Council to disseminate information on education and training
         programs to enhance workforce availability and “fit.”
2.3‐I‐26 Support location of a four‐year college within the Tri‐Valley.
         A four‐year degree‐granting college in the Tri‐Valley expands the range of educational
         resources available locally. The presence of a college within the area is a factor in
         attracting and retaining employees. Other benefits to business relate to availability of
         academic and technical training, internships and similar joint business/education
         programs, and research in subject areas with local business applications.
2.3‐I‐27 Continue to support the success and development of Diablo Valley College (DVC)
         in San Ramon.
         DVC’s San Ramon Campus, located in the Dougherty Valley subarea, opened in
         2006 and is currently 64,000 square feet with expansion plans for an additional
         60,000 square feet and a 30,000‐square‐foot joint‐use library.
2.3‐I‐28 Maintain the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
         Change can be expected in the overall regional and national economies as well as
         in the way California organizes and implements local government financing and
         fiscal structure. San Ramon’s capital facilities financing and programming should
         continue to be structured in a way that allows decision makers flexibility, so that
         choices regarding how to defray the costs of a capital or operating expenditure
         reflect financing and fiscal conditions at the time a particular project or program
         goes forward.
                                             2‐12

                                                       3
                             Gro   owth Manaageme                           ent
San Ramon will face severa          al planning challenges over the neext 20 yearss, most of w         which
centeer on the fa     act that the smart grow  wth mandate of Measuree G, including urban growth
bound daries and open space preservatio         on, must connfront the reeality of fore  ecasts for sstrong
population and em      mployment growth
                                   g       in the
                                                e City to 203 35.
The purpose
     p            of th
                      his Growth Management
                                  M              Element (GM   ME) is to esttablish the go
                                                                                         oals, policiess, and
    ementation prrograms that are intended
imple                                            d to managee and mitigatee the impactts of future g  growth
and developmentt within San         n Ramon. ThisT      elemennt is also inntended to comply with      h the
requirrements of th   he Measure J Growth Ma    anagement P  Program (GM   MP).
Growwth managem      ment has alw  ways been a concern in San Ramonn with the C         City’s first Geeneral
Plan in 1986 discussing the need to pla         an new deveelopment in aaccord with the availability of
publicc facilities an nd infrastructu
                                    ure. This earrly growth sttrategy has eevolved into a comprehen    nsive,
long‐range plan that includ        des performance standards as weell as capital improvement,
development mitig     gation, and fiinancing proggrams. In ressponse to Measure G, ap    pproved by vvoters
in 19999, it include  es an Urban Growth Bou    undary (UGB  B), urban mixxed‐use centters, and an open
space e action plan.
San Ramon’s growth mana            agement policies and iinitiatives are also con        nsistent with h the
requirements of Contra Cossta’s Transpo          ortation Salees Tax Exppenditure Pla     an (Measurre J),
approoved by Co        ontra Costa a voters in 2004, andd as amennded by the Contra C                  Costa
Transsportation Au    uthority (CCT TA). Measurre J requiress Contra Cossta cities to:
    •    Adopt and    d implement a Transporttation Demannd Managem         ment (TDM) ordinance.
    •    Adopt a five‐year
                       f           apital improvvement proggram that lissts projects, their costs,, and
                                  ca
         funding mechanisms.
                     m
    •    Ensure that new development “pays its own way” through th                      he adoption and
         implementation of mitigation fees.
    •    Address housing
                      h            ons at the local, regionall, and countyy level.
                               optio
    •    Participate   e in an ongooing coopera ative, multi‐juurisdictional planning proocess.
    •    Adopt an Urban Limit Line, referre     ed to herein as an Urbann Growth Bo     oundary (UG  GB).
    •    Adopt a Growth
                     G        Manag gement Elem ment.
Meassure J (200        04) is a 25‐year
                                   2         exteension of thhe previouss Measure C Contra C           Costa
Transsportation Im   mprovement and Growth Managemeent Program approved b               by voters in 1988
and expired
     e           in Ma arch 2009. On April 1, 2009,
                                                2        Measuure J GMP rrequirementss took effect..
                                                       3‐1

                                  San Ramon General Plan 2035
Measure J includes a ½‐percent transportation and retail transactions and use tax intended to
address existing major regional transportation problems. The Growth Management Program
(GMP) component is intended to assure that future residential, business, and commercial
growth pays for the facilities required to meet the demands resulting from that growth.
Compliance with the GMP is linked to receipt of Local Street Maintenance and Improvement
Funds and Transportation for Livable Community funds from the CCTA.
While Measure J eliminates the previous Measure C requirements for local performance
standards and level‐of‐service standards for non‐regional routes, San Ramon has chosen to
continue these standards in this Element. In fact, San Ramon’s GME not only incorporates
Measure J requirements, but also augments many of these standards with more stringent
controls based on the desire of the City and its residents to preserve and enhance the quality
of life in San Ramon.
3.1 GROWTH STRATEGY
In San Ramon, a growth strategy means that City officials and staff work with residents and
the development community to accommodate economic and population growth without
diminishing the quality of public services, facilities, and lifestyle that are enjoyed by those who
live here. San Ramon must plan to provide services for development considered desirable
and beneficial to the City. Growth Management policies and performance standards will be
used as tools to manage all development within San Ramon and protect and enhance open
space and environmental resources.
By establishing a UGB, growth will be limited to areas of infill and land that is contiguous to
developed areas within the City (refer to the Land Use Element for further information).
Development projects must comply with all City goals, policies, and adopted performance
standards. Development review procedures are used to document that each of the City’s
performance standards will be met and detail how required public facility improvements will
be financed. No new development will occur unless these requirements are met.
Development within unincorporated areas must be pre‐zoned and have an executed property
tax transfer agreement in place before annexation occurs.
GUIDING POLICY
3.1‐G‐1 Manage the City’s growth in a way that balances existing and planned transportation
            facilities, protection of open space and ridgelines, provision of diverse housing options,
            and the preservation of high quality community facilities and services.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
3.1‐I‐1     Allow urban development only if traffic from that development can be
            accommodated within acceptable traffic levels of service.
            New development must mitigate its impacts on unacceptable intersection
            operations. In instances where a development project would cause an intersection
            operating at acceptable levels to degrade to unacceptable levels, the applicant shall
            be required to implement necessary improvements to restore operations to
                                                   3‐2

                                  Growth Management
        acceptable levels. In instances where a development project would contribute
        vehicle trips to an intersection already operating unacceptable levels, the applicant
        shall be required to provide its proportionate share for improvements to restore
        operations to acceptable levels.
3.1‐I‐2 Work with Contra Costa County and appropriate agencies to preserve, protect, and
        enhance open space and ridgelines within the City’s Planning Area, and to establish
        contiguous open space areas along the edges of San Ramon.
        The hillsides to the east and west of the City provide a strong open space
        framework and visual amenity. Preserving the integrity of these ridges will allow
        development to occur in flatter areas where public services are available.
3.1‐I‐3 Provide a variety of diverse housing options to accommodate the local employment
        base, including public service employees.
3.1‐I‐4 Allocate the number of new housing units according to the City’s ability to provide
        public services and housing needs through the use of adopted performance
        standards.
3.1‐I‐5 Use growth management policies to encourage the construction of workforce
        housing necessary to meet local housing needs.
3.1‐I‐6 Join with and encourage other jurisdictions to participate in regional transportation
        planning programs.
3.1‐I‐7 Allow urban development only within the City’s Urban Growth Boundary (see
        Implementing Policies 4.6‐I‐1 through 4.6‐I‐5) and only in accord with a plan for
        full urban services (police, fire, parks, water, sanitation, streets and storm drainage)
        to which all providers are committed.
        While the General Plan does not include policies regarding which agencies should
        be responsible for providing services in San Ramon, such questions shall be
        resolved prior to approvals. Areas lacking full services outside the UGB are
        unsuited for urban development, regardless of land use designation.
3.1‐I‐8 Continue to work with Contra Costa County and the developers of the Dougherty
        Valley Specific Plan area to ensure that the project meets all applicable growth
        management performance standards, as outlined in the Agreement to Settle
        Litigation Relating to the Dougherty Valley General Plan Amendment, Specific Plan
        and Environmental Impact Report (the Settlement Agreement).
                                               3‐3

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
3.2 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
San Ramon has adopted growth performance objectives and standards for the following
services:
    •    Community Centers
    •    Fire Protection Services
    •    Flood Control
    •    Parks
    •    Police
    •    Sanitation
    •    Schools
    •    Water
These standards represent the City’s commitment to provide community facilities and define
services to its residents.
COMMUNITY CENTERS
Facility Analysis
Community Centers include public facilities that serve the social, recreational, and indoor
athletic needs of the community. The City currently has three multi‐purpose community
centers: the San Ramon Community Center at Central Park (24,000 square feet), the San
Ramon Senior Center Park and Gardens facility on Alcosta Boulevard (15,000 square feet),
and the Dougherty Station Community Center (24,000 square feet with a future 10,000
square feet “annex” adjacent to the Dougherty Station Community Center on Bollinger
Canyon Road). In partnership with the San Ramon Valley Unified School District (SRVUSD),
the City also provides community gymnasiums at Pine Valley and Iron Horse Middle Schools
(38,640 square feet); community aquatic centers at California and Dougherty Valley High
Schools (San Ramon Olympic Pool and the Dougherty Valley Aquatic Center, combine for
5,000 square feet of community use space); and the Dougherty Valley Performing Arts
Center (joint‐use with the Dougherty Valley High School) with a 600 seat theater and 3,500
square feet rehearsal room totaling 20,000 square feet.
Performance Objective
Ensure that community centers provide sufficient space to conduct civic meetings,
recreational programs, indoor athletic programs, and social activities to meet the needs of
San Ramon’s citizens.
Performance Standard
At General Plan buildout, provide a minimum ratio of 1.2 square feet of community center
space per 1,000 residents.
                                             3‐4

                                     Growth Management
FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES
Facility Analysis
The San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District (SRVFPD) provides all risk emergency and
non‐emergency services to the City. Within their service area, the District currently staffs 14
companies from 10 fire stations. Four fire stations are located within the San Ramon Planning
Area. Figure 3‐1 illustrates the location of these fire stations.
Performance Objective
Maintain competent and efficient all risk emergency services including first responder medical
and ambulance elements, so as to minimize the risks to lives and property due to fire,
medical emergency and other hazards that may occur in San Ramon.
Performance Standard
Prior to project approval, require written verification from the District that a 5‐minute response
time (travel time) can be maintained for 90 percent of emergency calls in urban and
suburban areas and/or that there will be a fire station within 1.5 miles of all development.
FLOOD CONTROL
Facility Analysis
Figure 9‐2 in the Safety Element highlights areas in the Planning Area subject to the flood
control performance standard. These areas generally correspond to creek locations in the
Planning Area. The City of San Ramon has primary responsibility for maintaining the flood
control system within the City limits. In the unincorporated portions of the Planning Area, flood
control efforts involve both the Contra Costa County Department of Public Works and the County
Flood Control and Water Conservation District. Refer to the Safety Element for further
information.
Performance Objective
Ensure adequate flood control facilities that minimize risk to lives and property due to flood
hazards.
Performance Standard
Prior to project approval, applicants shall obtain written verification from the San Ramon
Engineering Services Department stating that the new development will provide adequate
storm drain facilities. Runoff from the development shall not increase the 100‐year peak flow
in the City’s flood control channels and shall be typically equal to pre‐development conditions.
PARKS
Facility Analysis
San Ramon’s existing parks and recreation facilities include three community parks, eight special
use parks and facilities (which include two aquatic centers and two community gymnasiums), 26
neighborhood parks (which include one pocket park), and 17 school parks (which include one
performing arts center). Altogether, the City has approximately 363.9 acres of existing parks,
which translates to a ratio of 5.75 acres of parkland per 1,000 residents.
                                                 3‐5

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
At General Plan 2035 buildout, the expected total parkland acreage will be more than 655.8
acres, with a parkland ratio exceeding 7.12 acres per 1,000 residents.
Performance Objective
Provide active and passive parks and recreation facilities within a reasonable walking
distance of all residents of San Ramon.
Performance Standard
At General Plan buildout, provide a ratio of 6.5 acres of public park per 1,000 residents, with
a goal to have park and recreation facilities within one‐half mile of all residences.
POLICE
Facility Analysis
With a total of 62 officers, the San Ramon Police Department maintains an approximate
service ratio of 0.8 officers per 1,000 residents. Dispatch services are provided through a
contract with the Contra Costa County Sheriff’s Office. Police responses are prioritized based
on the nature of the calls. The classification “emergency calls” are categorized as those
requiring an immediate emergency response. Examples would be life‐threatening situations
such as a major injury traffic accident, crime involving major injury, assisting San Ramon
Valley Fire Protection District on a major injury call, and felony crimes in progress. The
classification “all other calls” would be any other call for service and the response is dictated
based on the nature of the actual call.
Performance Objective
Maintain comprehensive police services and timely emergency response in all parts of San
Ramon.
Performance Standard
Prior to project approval, require written verification from the San Ramon Police Department
that a 3‐5 minute response time (travel time) for emergency calls and a 20‐minute response
for all other calls can be maintained 95 percent of the time.
SANITATION FACILITIES
Facility Analysis
The City is currently serviced by Central Contra Costa Sanitary District and Dublin San
Ramon Services District. Figure 3‐2 illustrates the service areas for these districts.
Performance Objective
Ensure that adequate and permanent sewer facilities can serve existing and future residents.
Performance Standard
Prior to project approval, require written verification from the approved service provider that
adequate sanitation facilities and services will be available to serve the project.
                                                3‐6





                                     Growth Management
SCHOOLS
Facility Analysis
The City of San Ramon is served by the San Ramon Valley Unified School District
(SRVUSD). This multi‐jurisdictional District currently operates eleven elementary schools
(grades K‐5), four middle schools (grades 6‐8), two high schools (grades 9‐12), and the
VENTURE independent study school (grades K‐12) within the City of San Ramon. Currently,
approximately 14,258 students attend schools in San Ramon.
Performance Standard
Require new development to provide necessary land, funding, and/or capital facilities for the
school system, as determined by the San Ramon Valley Unified School District and
applicable State law.
WATER
Facility Analysis
East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) is the primary drinking water service provider
within existing San Ramon City limits. Dougherty Valley (except Gale Ranch 1) will be
serviced by the Dublin San Ramon Services District (DSRSD). Figure 3‐2 illustrates the
service areas for these providers. Both providers review all local plans that affect their
respective service areas to ensure that adopted performance standards are maintained.
To supplement the demand of potable water, state law allows EBMUD to require the use of
recycled water for non‐domestic purposes when it is of adequate quality and quantity,
available at reasonable cost, not detrimental to public health, and not injurious to plant life,
fish or wildlife (EBMUD Policy 8.01). The City of San Ramon has a dual plumbing ordinance
(Municipal Code Division C4 Land Development) which requires new development areas that
will be served with recycled water to dual plumb in advance.
The uncertainty of EBMUD’s future water supply, and the fact that EBMUD opposes any
annexations that would extend its existing ultimate service boundary, suggests that both
water needs and service will remain crucial factors in the City’s growth.
Performance Objective
Ensure an adequate water capacity system to serve existing and future residents at economical
rates.
Performance Standard
Prior to project approval, require written verification from the approved service provider that
adequate water quality, quantity, and distribution will be available to serve the project.
POLICIES AND ACTIONS
To ensure that new development complies with the above performance standards, San Ramon
has initiated several actions and programs, which are described in the following policies.
                                               3‐11

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
GUIDING POLICY
3.2‐G‐1 Ensure the attainment of public facility and service standards through the City’s
        development review process, Capital Improvement Program (CIP), and a variety of
        funding mechanisms to maintain existing facilities and help fund expansion.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
3.2‐I‐1 Adopt “Findings of Consistency” that ensure new projects will comply with the City’s
        performance standards through its development review process.
        New projects will be approved only after findings are made that: (a) the Fire
        Protection Services, Flood Control, Police, Sanitation, Schools, and Waters
        performance standards will be maintained following project occupancy; (b) project‐
        specific mitigation measures will ensure that the City’s performance standards will
        be maintained; (c) planned capital projects will ensure that the City’s performance
        standards will be maintained; and/or (d) the Community Centers, Libraries, and
        Parks performance standards can be met by General Plan buildout.
3.2‐I‐2 Utilize the Capital Improvement Program to track and monitor the construction and
        implementation of the City’s infrastructure improvements and ensure funding
        sources.
        The City’s CIP is a five‐year calendar of public improvements, prepared annually,
        that sets forth each capital project, identifies start dates, and states the amount of
        annual expenditure as well as the method of financing. New development will not
        be approved unless projects identified in the CIP are provided concurrent with, or
        will be available upon, completion of development.
3.2‐I‐3 Require new development to fund public facilities and infrastructure that is deemed
        necessary to mitigate the impact of that new development.
         San Ramon implements the concept that new development pays its own way using
         primarily two mechanisms. First, the approval of a proposed project is in part based
         upon the developer’s ability to fund improvements that will directly mitigate the
         impact of that new development. Second, future homeowners may be charged
         ongoing assessment fees, which may be established by a Landscape and Lighting
         District, or other funding mechanisms, to pay the additional costs of maintaining
         facilities and services associated with the new development. The appropriate level
         of assessment is calculated on a specific project basis to fund the negative fiscal
         impact which results when revenue generated by the new development is less than
         the cost of providing services to the project. Another alternative available to
         developers is a Community Facilities District (CFD) which may be formed to levy a
         special tax to fund the cost of certain additional facilities and services required by
         the new development but not funded by revenue generated from the development.
3.2‐I‐4 Levy local, sub‐regional, and regional mitigation fees for public facilities and
        infrastructure improvements in proportion to a new development’s impact.
                                             3‐12

                                      Growth Management
           In addition to direct project costs, the City of San Ramon requires developers to pay
           citywide, sub‐regional, and regional fees for a variety of services and infrastructure,
           based upon the concept that future residents will directly benefit from the
           improvements. The fees paid are used to provide parks, libraries, traffic circulation
           improvements, transit service, creek studies and drainage mitigation improvements,
           noise attenuation, child care, and street landscaping.
3.2‐I‐5    Use other funding mechanisms to augment developer and/or mitigation fees, when
           appropriate.
           In certain situations, it may benefit the City to advance funds, prior to developer
           funding and/or project completion. Additional financing options available to the City
           include but are not limited to, reimbursement agreements, credit for City fees, debt
           financing, and assessment districts. None of these mechanisms precludes the
           developer’s responsibility to pay the cost or mitigate the impact of their proposed
           development.
3.2‐I‐6 Measure J Transportation Improvement Funds may be used for any eligible
           transportation purpose, however, Measure J funds cannot replace private developer
           funding for transportation projects and infrastructure that are needed to mitigate the
           impacts their development creates.
           Eligible uses are specified by the Contra Costa Transportation Authority Expenditure
           Plan and include most transportation projects, programs, and planning purposes.
3.3 TRAFFIC STANDARDS
Traffic conditions on local streets and regional transportation facilities are a major factor of
the quality of life for San Ramon residents. The City has actively promoted the maintenance
of desirable levels of traffic service through its General Plan and other policies and programs.
Traffic Levels of Service (LOS), expressed as letter grades A‐F, measure volume‐to‐capacity
ratios to estimate the delay experienced by drivers at intersections. Differences in Levels of
Service indicate variations in a number of factors that affect driving conditions, including
speed, travel time, and freedom to maneuver. Levels of Service can be used as an indicator
of the success of congestion relief measures. These measures may include land use
changes, traffic engineering projects or demand management strategies.
San Ramon has established traffic circulation standards, expressed as acceptable Levels of
Service for all City street intersections. These standards form the basis for the City’s
circulation and land use policies.
                                                  3‐13

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
GUIDING POLICY
3.3‐G‐1 Maintain acceptable traffic Level‐of‐Service on City streets and roadways through
        implementation of Transportation Demand Management (TDM), Growth
        Management, the Capital Improvement Program, and traffic engineering operational
        measures.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
3.3‐I‐1 Strive to maintain traffic LOS C or better as the standard at all intersections with a
        maximum LOS D during a.m. and p.m. peak periods.
3.3‐I‐2 Accept LOS D during a.m. and p.m. peak periods with the possibility of
        intersections at or closely approaching the limits of LOS D (Volume/Capacity
        < 0.90), only on arterial routes bordered by non‐residential development where
        improvements to meet the City’s standard would be prohibitively costly or disruptive.
        The City shall design roadway improvements and evaluate development proposals
        based on the above traffic standards, and as identified in traffic impact studies.
3.3‐I‐3 Require traffic impact studies for all proposed new development projected to generate
        50 or more net new peak hour vehicle trips or as requested by the City Traffic
        Engineer.
3.3‐I‐4 Proposed development expected to generate 50 or more peak hour vehicle trips will
        not be approved, unless it can be shown that its impact can be mitigated and the
        City’s traffic and circulation standards can be maintained. The City also will not
        approve any proposed development expected to generate over 100 peak hour
        vehicle trips, unless “Findings of Consistency” can be made.
        Such Findings will be based on the project’s ability to maintain City traffic and
        circulation standards, in conjunction with anticipated City‐initiated capital
        improvements.
3.3‐I‐5 Identify and implement circulation improvements on the basis of detailed traffic
        studies.
        Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, intersection approach lane
        expansion, related channelization improvements, and traffic signal installations.
3.3‐I‐6 Support regional and local neighborhood transit options to reduce the use of the
        automobile and maintain acceptable traffic levels of service.
        Transit options include expansion of existing Central Contra Costa Transit Authority
        (CCCTA) bus routes and local neighborhood‐level bus service with small multi‐
        passenger vehicles for both school and non‐school use. These alternatives, in
        conjunction with TDM measures, will assist in maintaining acceptable levels of
        service in San Ramon as well as the greater Tri‐Valley Region.
                                               3‐14

                                      Growth Management
3.3‐I‐7 Develop and implement, Findings of Special Circumstances for any intersection on
            Non‐Regional Routes that does not meet the City’s traffic and circulation standards.
            San Ramon shall adopt Findings of Special Circumstances for any Non‐Regional
            Route intersection that exceeds the City’s level of service standards. There is
            currently no intersection that exceeds the adopted standards. If this situation
            changes, such Findings will permit San Ramon to establish alternative standards
            and programs to reduce congestion.
3.4 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) refers to measures designed to reduce auto
traffic in order to improve air quality and reduce traffic congestion. These measures include
public transit, telecommuting, compressed work weeks, carpooling, vanpooling, walking,
bicycling, and incentives to increase the use of these alternatives. TDM has become
increasingly important in maintaining acceptable traffic levels of service in the Tri‐Valley and
elsewhere in the Bay Area.
The City recognizes the need to reduce the use of single‐occupant vehicles to achieve levels of
service and regional air quality improvements. To meet these objectives, San Ramon will
maintain its TDM Program to reflect regional air quality and congestion management standards.
San Ramon participates in the 511 Contra Costa program. 511 Contra Costa is a countywide
program aimed at reducing the number of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) by providing technical assistance, incentives and information
to motorists driving to, through, and within Contra Costa. Many of the 511 Contra Costa program
elements have been developed to fulfill TDM requirements that are described in each of the sub‐
regional Action Plans included as part of the Countywide GMP. These elements not only fulfill
the TDM requirements of the biennial conditions of compliance checklist, but also provide
quantifiable GHG emissions reductions that can be included in Municipal and Community
Climate Action Plans.
GUIDING POLICY
3.4‐G‐1 Utilize Transportation Demand Management (TDM) strategies as an integral
            component of the City’s transportation program to reduce total vehicle trips on San
            Ramon roadways and reduce the corresponding vehicle emissions that promote
            regional air quality improvements.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
3.4‐I‐1     Continue to implement the City’s TDM Program to reduce trip generation.
            The most congested areas are in the Crow Canyon and Bishop Ranch subareas,
            where employment is most concentrated. The City’s TDM Program encourages major
            employment sites to attain vehicle ridership goals consistent with Bay Area Air Quality
            Management District (BAAQMD) and Measure J goals and incorporates a regular
            monitoring program (biennial employer surveys/driveway counts) to assess their
            progress.
                                                 3‐15

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
3.4‐I‐2 Work with 511 Contra Costa, other jurisdictions and agencies to coordinate the
        City’s TDM Program with regional TDM programs and activities.
        Regional coordination plays an important role in TDM. San Ramon combines its
        resources with other jurisdictions and agencies, such as the Southwest Area
        Transportation Committee and the Tri‐Valley Transportation Council, to promote
        TDM goals and objectives by providing TDM promotional information at locally
        sponsored events, such as marketing handbooks and training classes. In addition,
        annual regional and statewide events such as Bike to Work Day, Spare the Air, and
        Don’t Light Tonight require coordinated promotional efforts by local jurisdictions to
        ensure their success.
3.4‐I‐3 Cooperate with regional and local service providers and other jurisdictions to
        promote local and regional public transit service.
        San Ramon is currently served by one public transit provider: CCCTA. Fixed routes
        and express buses are operated between the San Ramon Transit Center,
        Dougherty Valley, the Bishop Ranch Business Park, and BART. When higher
        employment and residential densities are reached, public transit will play a larger
        role in transportation in the area, particularly for commute trips within San Ramon
        and to and from neighboring cities in the Tri‐Valley. The City also works in concert
        with large employers, school sites, colleges, and multi‐tenant buildings in San
        Ramon to promote public transit service.
3.4‐I‐4 Support local feeder transit service to and from current and future regional transit lines.
3.4‐I‐5 Preserve options for future transit use when designing improvements for roadways.
        When recommending or requiring new major roadways or modifications to existing
        major roadways, the City will ensure that public transit options are considered, and
        accommodated where appropriate, to allow for optimal public transit route planning.
3.4‐I‐6 Locate future transit uses, such as light rail or BART, in the I‐680 right‐of‐way.
        San Ramon, Danville, and Contra Costa County have adopted a memorandum of
        understanding that designates the I‐680 right‐of‐way as the preferred alignment for
        future rail transit service through the San Ramon Valley for the purpose of serving
        major employment centers. The Measure J Transportation Expenditure Plan
        allocates funding for the I‐680 Carpool Lane Gap Closure/Transit Corridor
        Improvements including proposed HOV on/off ramps at Norris Canyon Road,
        auxiliary lanes, and increased express bus service for the San Ramon Valley.
3.4‐I‐7 Improve and expand the bicycle routing system in San Ramon.
        Currently, almost a quarter of the residents who work in San Ramon live within five
        miles of their offices. A comprehensive bicycle lane system would allow them the
        option of using bicycles rather than cars to commute to work.
                                              3‐16

                                     Growth Management
3.5 REGIONAL COOPERATION
Traffic congestion is not limited to San Ramon’s boundaries. Traffic congestion is experienced
at the local and regional level and issues regarding traffic circulation and congestion within
are addressed at both local and regional levels. Traditionally, regulating policies and
mitigation measures have been designed and implemented solely at the local level. However,
if workable solutions are to be formulated and implemented, a more regional view and
approach must prevail. It is the City of San Ramon’s practice to actively cooperate with
neighboring jurisdictions to reduce transportation congestion by participating in region‐wide
transportation planning efforts, as exemplified by the Southwest Area Transportation
Committee (SWAT) and the Tri‐Valley Transportation Council (TVTC), and by encouraging
public input through the San Ramon Transportation Advisory Committee and the San Ramon
Transportation Demand Management Advisory Committee.
Measure J requires the preparation of Action Plans, the purpose of which is the development
of measures and programs to mitigate regional traffic impacts. These plans are intended to
focus on Routes of Regional Significance, characterized as facilities that:
    •    Are state highways, freeways or freeway interchanges,
    •    Carry a significant amount of traffic originating or destined out of San Ramon (Crow
         Canyon Road, Bollinger Canyon Road, etc.),
    •    Pass through three or more jurisdictions (e.g., San Ramon Valley Boulevard),
    •    Connect to Alameda County jurisdictions (Village Parkway, Dougherty Road, etc.),
         and/or
    •    Serve a major regional employment or activity center.
In 2014, the TVTC, in updating its Action Plan, identified that the Iron Horse Trail as meeting
the criteria of Routes of Regional Significance because of its importance from a regional
perspective, providing regional mobility and connecting multiple jurisdictions. As such, the
Iron Horse Trail is now classified as a Route of Regional Significance which is not typical for
a multimodal trail, however, will allows for additional grant opportunities for corridor
improvements and emphasizes local multimodal resources and objectives in the text of TVTC
Action Plan.
Figure 3‐3 illustrates the Routes of Regional Significance in the San Ramon Planning Area.
San Ramon will actively cooperate with other local jurisdictions, the regional transportation
committees, and the CCTA to develop and implement programs that effectively reduce
congestion on the regional transportation network.
GUIDING POLICY
3.5‐G‐1 Participate in regional cooperative and multi‐jurisdictional transportation planning for
           the maintenance of regional mobility and air quality standards as required by the
           Measure J Growth Management Program and the Contra Costa Congestion
           Management Plan (CMP).
                                                3‐17

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
3.5‐I‐1   Continue to develop and implement Action Plans for Routes of Regional Significance,
          in cooperation with the Southwest Area Transportation Committee (SWAT), the
          Contra Costa Transportation Authority (CCTA), and the Tri‐Valley Transportation
          Council (TVTC).
3.5‐I‐2 Continue to implement the Tri‐Valley Transportation Action Plan through
          participation in the Tri‐Valley Transportation Council (TVTC).
3.5‐I‐3 Participate in programs to mitigate regional traffic congestion, including
          implementation of regional and sub‐regional traffic impact fees on new
          development.
3.5‐I‐4 Emphasize regional transportation demand management and trip reduction
          strategies as alternatives to increased roadway capacity.
3.5‐I‐5 Continue to address the impacts of land use decisions on regional and local
          transportation facilities by applying the Contra Costa Transportation Authority
          (CCTA) travel demand model and technical procedures during project analysis.
          Additionally, help maintain CCTA’s travel demand modeling system by providing
          information on proposed improvements to the transportation system and future
          developments and long‐range plans within San Ramon.
3.5‐I‐6   Participate in the Contra Costa Transportation Authority conflict resolution process
          as needed to resolve disputes related to the development and implementation of
          Action Plans and other Growth Management Program.
3.6 JOB AND HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Balancing job and housing opportunities is an important issue at both the local and regional
level. The right mix of housing units with jobs can help reduce traffic congestion, improve air
quality, and secure an adequate labor supply for businesses in San Ramon. Though the
job/housing ratio has improved from 1.51 to 1.26 since 2000, there are still more people
commuting from other cities to jobs in San Ramon than there are local residents traveling to
local businesses. This indicates a need to continue improving the balance of jobs and
housing within the City of San Ramon, and by buildout of this General Plan to the year 2035,
the jobs/housing ratio is estimated to be 1.22 (see Land Use Element Section 4.5 Table 4‐9
for further discussion).When the City incorporated in 1983, much of its area had already
been developed or pre‐zoned for office and residential uses.
                                               3‐18



                                     Growth Management
Today, the area within the San Ramon city limits is mostly developed and the challenge to
the City is to provide a broader range of residential options within a limited land area to bring
job and housing opportunities in closer equilibrium. A broad range of housing issues is
discussed further in the Housing Element.
GUIDING POLICY
3.6‐G‐1 Promote the opportunity to both work and live in San Ramon through
           implementation of the Housing Element.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
3.6‐I‐1    Develop and implement housing programs that emphasize the availability of
           housing for people who work in local jobs.
           One of the primary objectives of the City’s Housing Element is to increase
           opportunities for households at all income levels to live near where they work,
           particularly public sector employees. This will not only help reduce regional traffic
           congestion, but also help retain a healthy economic base for the City.
3.6‐I‐2 Evaluate the impact of proposed General Plan Amendments on the availability of
           job and housing opportunities.
           Despite the City’s limited availability of developable acreage, land use changes offer
           the chance to re‐examine areas that have the potential for housing and economic
           development as well as to achieve a reduction in commute trips and average
           commute length.
3.6‐I‐3    Prepare a biennial report on the implementation of actions outlined in the Housing
           Element, for submittal to Contra Costa Transportation Authority as part of the biennial
           Growth Management Program Compliance Checklist. The report will demonstrate
           reasonable progress by illustrating how San Ramon has adequately planned to meet
           the existing and projected housing needs through the adoption of land use plans and
           regulatory systems that provide opportunities for, and do not unduly constrain, housing
           development.
           This required report will be incorporated into the City’s General Plan Annual Report,
           which is submitted annually to the State Department of Housing and Community
           Development to demonstrate Housing Element compliance.
3.6‐I‐4 As part of the development review process, support the accommodation of public
           transit, bicycle, and pedestrian access for new development.
                                                  3‐21


                                                 Land Use
                                                     4
                                          Land Use
The City of San Ramon is committed to an orderly land use development pattern that
emphasizes the needs of the community and balances land use, housing needs, economics,
transportation, environmental preservation safety, and quality of life goals. This element of the
General Plan contains a background discussion of the evolution of land uses in the City’s
nine planning subareas. Central to the Land Use Element is the General Plan Land Use
Diagram and land use classification system. This organizational framework provides the
foundation by which the guiding and implementing policies will shape land use and
development decisions to maintain a strong community identity and character for the next 20
years.
4.1 EVOLUTION OF THE CITY
In the early 1800s, land in present‐day San Ramon was part of the Mission San Jose, and
was used primarily for cattle and sheep grazing. American settlers came to the area in the
1850s and during the next two decades, ranchers west of San Ramon Valley Boulevard built
the homes that now are the only visible evidence of San Ramon’s early years. With the arrival
of the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks in 1891, San Ramon became the permanent name of
the prosperous village at the end of the branch line. Little changed in the San Ramon Valley
between 1890 and 1950. In 1958, the Contra Costa County General Plan largely determined
the community’s future form when it designated 464 acres as “controlled manufacturing.”
These acres ultimately became the Bishop Ranch Business Park.
Growth in the 1960s was facilitated by the extension of Interstate 580 through the Livermore
Valley and I‐680 from Walnut Creek to I‐580. In the 1970s, the arrival of Beckman
Instruments, Toyota, Chevron, and Pacific Bell at Bishop Ranch transformed the I‐680
corridor into the high‐prestige alternative location to San Francisco and Oakland that it is
today. Approximately 9 million square feet of office space now exists in Bishop Ranch1 with
an additional 17.8 million square located in the Tri‐Valley area2. During the 1980s and
1990s, residential construction continued in tandem with office construction, along with the
addition of new shopping centers throughout the City. Today San Ramon offers a full
complement of jobs, housing, transit options and community services and facilities.
Since 2000, San Ramon has continued to grow at a healthy pace. The population for the
City San Ramon jurisdictional boundary has increased by 41 percent, which is well above the
1
  Bishop Ranch Website: http://www.bishopranch.com/bishop_ranch/history.shtml.
2
  NCRSP Focused Market Study, KMA 2009.
                                                      4‐1

                                     San Ramon General Plan 2030
countywide averages of 13.5 percent. However, the corresponding job growth rate has been
flat representing a 0.1 percent decrease since 2000. The countywide average for job growth
has increased by approximately 1.5 percent over the same period.3 These trends indicate that
the majority of growth since 2000 has related to housing and population resulting from
annexations of Dougherty Valley development. As development has extended to the City
limits, San Ramon accommodated further growth by annexing new areas, such as Henry and
Thomas Ranches in the Westside, Faria Preserve in the Northwest and Windemere and
portions of Gale Ranch in Dougherty Valley. Eventually, when the remaining unincorporated
portions of Dougherty Valley are developed, they too will be annexed and added to the list of
new areas within the City.
With little vacant land remaining for new development within the City limits, San Ramon has
two basic philosophies to accommodate future growth. The first is through the continued
annexation of adjacent unincorporated areas within the Urban Growth Boundary (UBG) into
the City to accommodate any future housing needs, support the regional employment base,
and meet the demand for municipal services. The second philosophy is to focus new growth
inward through the intensification of land use density by encouraging infill and redevelopment
projects within the existing urban areas defined by the UGB. The previous General Plan
2020 embraced this smart growth philosophy through the creation of mixed‐use districts to
accommodate both commercial and residential uses as well as a continuing commitment to
regional programs such as the ABAG FOCUS Program. The Focus program is a regional
development and conservation strategy that promotes a more compact land use pattern for
the Bay Area. Through the FOCUS program, regional agencies will support local
governments’ commitment to development of complete, livable communities in areas served
by transit by working to direct existing and future incentives to Priority Development Areas
and Priority Conservation Areas. Since the FOCUS Program’s inception, Priority Development
Area (PDA) status has been established for the City Center project area, and the North
Camino Ramon Specific Plan area has received a “Potential PDA” designation pending
completion of the specific plan effort.
4.2 PLANNING SUBAREAS IN SAN RAMON
San Ramon is divided into nine planning subareas, as shown in Figure 4‐1. Although all
subareas include a variety of land uses, each is generally dominated by one use type that
defines its own identity. The following includes a brief description of each subarea and a look
at how land use is distributed across these subareas.
3
  Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), 2009.
                                                    4‐2



                                                       Land Use
                                       Table 4‐1: Planning Subareas by Size
                                                                                                    Proportion of
           Planning Subarea1                         Acres                Square Miles             Planning Area2
  Bishop Ranch                                        643                      1.00                     2.8%
  Bollinger Canyon                                  2,962                      4.63                    12.7%
  Crow Canyon                                         625                      0.98                     2.7%
  Dougherty Hills                                   1,677                      2.62                     7.2%
  Dougherty Valley                                  6,488                     10.14                   27.8%
  Southern San Ramon                                2,170                      3.39                     9.3%
  Tassajara Valley                                  3,759                      5.87                    16.1%
  Twin Creeks                                       1,486                      2.32                     6.4%
  Westside                                          3,487                      5.45                    15.0%
  Total                                           23,297                     36.40                   100.0%
  1
    The General Plan planning areas include land in subareas that is outside the city limit and UGB, but would likely
    have a direct impact on the ultimate City development at General Plan Buildout.
  2
    Due to independent rounding, detail may not sum to total.
BISHOP RANCH
The Bishop Ranch subarea has established San Ramon a major employment center of the
San Francisco Bay Area. The subarea consists primarily of Office uses with a retail and
commercial services component and totals approximately 9 million square feet of floor space.
This area accounts for roughly 50 percent of the non‐residential floor space in the San
Ramon Planning Area and provides an estimated 30,000 jobs4. Since 1995, more than 2.8
million square feet of space has been added in the Bishop Ranch subarea including Bishop
Ranch 1 (728,000 square feet) Bishop Ranch 3 (965,808 square feet) Bishop Ranch 15
(750,400 square feet) and the Shops at Bishop Ranch (346,000 square feet).
The Central Park, San Ramon Community Center, Iron Horse Middle School, and the San
Ramon Public Library have been added to the Bishop Ranch subarea since the City was
incorporated in July 1983. In 2007, the City approved entitlement for the construction of the
City Center Mixed Use Project at the intersection of Bollinger Canyon Road and Camino
Ramon, adjacent to the Iron Horse Trail, Central Park, and Community Center.
4
  Bishop Ranch Website: http://www.bishopranch.com/bishop_ranch/history.shtml.
                                                          4‐5

                                      San Ramon General Plan 2030
The City Center project reflects the City’s desire for a downtown and was supported under the
previous General Plan 2020, Zoning Ordinance, and Economic Development Strategic Plan.
The approved project consists of 2,076,884 square feet of pedestrian/bicycle friendly,
mixed‐use, transit‐oriented development. The major components include residential (487
units); a lifestyle retail center with an arts cinema; restaurants (635,042 square feet); a
premium hotel (169 rooms); three Bishop Ranch office buildings5 (590,665 square feet);
and a new city hall with council chamber, library, with a regional transit center (110,500
square feet).
NORTH CAMINO RAMON SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
In 2008, the City initiated preliminary planning and feasibility studies for the development of
the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan. The North Camino Ramon Specific Plan (NCRSP)
area consists of approximately 295 acres located in both the Bishop Ranch and Crow
Canyon Subareas (see Figure 4‐1).
The NCRSP will create a long‐range plan that embodies the smart growth principles for a
live‐work, transit‐oriented, pedestrian‐ and bicycle‐friendly neighborhood with a sense of
identity, and that will meet the future needs of San Ramon residents. The vision of this
Mixed‐Use Plan is for a blend of retail, commercial services, and housing that can provide
stimulus for economic development to address the community’s unmet commercial and retail
needs while balancing quality of life for San Ramon residents. The Specific Plan will
encourage redevelopment of the Plan Area toward a coordinated vision over time through
individual land use changes based on property owner goals and market forces. The Specific
Plan does not dislocate any existing businesses; rather, the Plan responds to future property
redevelopment opportunities through market‐driven forces and other development incentives.
The Specific Plan allows property owners to determine when is the right time to consider
changes or a redevelopment proposal. The Specific Plan will support these future changes by
providing land use flexibility, encouraging innovative design, and providing certainty about the
future planning process and vision for this area.
In late 2008, as part of the Association of Bay Area Governments’ regional planning initiative
called “FOCUS,” the project area received a “Potential Priority Development Area”
designation in advance of the Specific Plan development.
BOLLINGER CANYON
The Bollinger Canyon subarea follows both sides of Bollinger Canyon Road north from Crow
Canyon Road and terminates about 4.5 miles to the northwest, within Las Trampas Regional
Wilderness boundaries. The Bollinger Canyon Subarea is primarily outside City limits;
however, it is within the City’s Sphere of Influence (SOI). Bollinger Canyon Road is paralleled
on both sides by steep slopes and high ridges along its length. Bollinger Canyon is notable
for its rugged natural beauty as well as its geologic instability.
5
  Square footages adjusted based on the City Center Settlement Agreement.
                                                        4‐6

                                             Land Use
On November 28, 2006, the City of San Ramon approved the Northwest Specific Plan
(NWSP), which establishes land use goals and policies for approximately 354 acres located
immediately northwest of the City limits and within the Bollinger Canyon subarea. The NWSP
consists of two primary areas The Faria Preserve Community and The Chang/Panetta
properties. The Faria Preserve Community is approximately 290 acres (Neighborhoods A to
D) and is located east of Bollinger Canyon Road. The land use plan consists of a mix of
residential and community facilities consisting of 786 residential units, a community park, a
house of worship site, and a site for an educational facility. The Chang/Panetta properties
represent the balance of NWSP at approximately 64 acres (Neighborhood E), are located
west of Bollinger Canyon Road, and are anticipated to consist of up to 44 larger residential
properties.
At present, there are approximately 114 residential units in this subarea. The Merrill Gardens
Residential Care Facility for the Elderly located within the City limits accounts for 81 units (99
beds total). The remaining areas of Bollinger Canyon Subarea outside the NWSP are rural in
character and subject to Rural Conservation designation. There are approximately 33
additional units, almost all of which are on parcels of an acre or more and many of which
have equestrian facilities. These properties are located in unincorporated County, but within
the City’s Planning Area.
In 2016, the voter‐sponsored “Faria Preserve Development Reduction, Open Space
Protection, and Workforce Housing Endowment Initiative” (“Initiative”) was adopted to allow a
reduction in the overall density and maximum number of dwelling units in the Faria Preserve
from 740 to 618 by reducing the maximum number of dwelling units within Neighborhood V
of the NWSP from 302 to a maximum of 180 (with a maximum density of 18 units per acre).
This reduction in residential development density would be accomplished by changing the
housing type within Neighborhood V from higher density rental apartment units to lower
density, market‐rate, age‐targeted, for‐sale units. The option for that reduction in density is
available at the developer’s election so long as the developer contributes into a fund
established by the City for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in San Ramon.
CROW CANYON
The Crow Canyon subarea extends along both sides of Interstate 680 and along Crow
Canyon Road easterly from Bollinger Canyon Road to Alcosta Boulevard and northward to
the City limits. The earliest commercial development in San Ramon is located in this area.
Since incorporation, a variety of new retail and office developments have been completed,
and this subarea now includes three major retail centers Home Depot Center, Diablo Plaza
and Courtyard Center as well as several office buildings. At present, there are roughly 4.9
million square feet of nonresidential uses in this area, 1.37 million square feet of which has
been added since 1995, including Home Depot (1995), Saf Keep Storage (1999), Extended
Stay Hotel (2000), Fostoria Self Storage (2001) Sierra Suites Hotel (2002) and several
smaller commercial buildings.
Portions of this subarea are characterized by a variety of commercial uses and diverse
architectural styles. Many of the buildings are in need of upgrade and are considered
underutilized by the City. In 1986, the City created the Downtown Specific Plan within this
subarea, which was an early effort to create a downtown for the City, which ultimately led to
                                                4‐7

                                       San Ramon General Plan 2030
the vision of the current City Center along Bollinger Canyon Road. In addition, in 1986, City
designated the majority of this subarea as a redevelopment project area to create financial
incentives for existing businesses, facilitate new development, and reinvigorate the local
economy. In 1991, the City adopted the Conservation and Enhancement Program for the
Crow Canyon Redevelopment Area, whose strategy is to conserve and reinforce existing
uses, encourage infill development, and enhance the area’s assets.
In 2006, the City adopted the Crow Canyon Specific Plan as a tool to build on previous
enhancement efforts and create a new vision for the 128‐acre office and service commercial
area. The Crow Canyon Specific Plan vision is to create a new pedestrian‐oriented, mixed‐
use community with concentrated commercial and residential uses, while maintaining viable
light industrial and service commercial uses wishing to remain.
Residential developments contribute to the economic revitalization of the area and are making
the Crow Canyon subarea a place to live as well as work. As of 2008, approximately 1,850
residential units have been constructed in the subarea. There are currently approximately
1,885 additional units programmed in the Crow Canyon Subarea through buildout of the Crow
Canyon Specific Plan and identified housing opportunity sites within the Housing Element.
DOUGHERTY HILLS
The Dougherty Hills subarea extends from the Crow Canyon Road/Dougherty Road area to
the southern boundary of the Canyon Lakes subdivision. The primary land use in this subarea
is residential with 4,915 homes. The largest residential community within the subarea is
Canyon Lakes, which was constructed during the 1980s under the jurisdiction of Contra
Costa County. Canyon Lakes includes residential neighborhoods, a golf course open to the
public, a small retail shopping area and health club. The Dougherty Hills area offers diverse
housing choices, with large homes on quarter‐acre lots at Royal Ridge, Deer Ridge, and
West Branch to luxury condominiums such as Sienna Hills, Copper Ridge and East Ridge
developments. The Dougherty Hills subarea is essentially built out with minimal potential for
infill development.
DOUGHERTY VALLEY
The Dougherty Valley subarea extends from the southern border of the Dougherty Hills
subarea, east to the Tassajara Valley Subarea, West to approximately Alcosta Blvd. and
south to the Alameda County line.
The Dougherty Valley Specific Plan project area is envisioned primarily as residential
neighborhoods organized around schools, parks, civic, public facilities, and natural features
and consists of Gale Ranch (2,740 acres), Windemere Ranch (2,360 acres), and the U.S.
Army Camp Parks (910 acres).6 In 1992, Contra Costa County approved a specific plan that
would allow the development of 11,000 residential units clustered throughout Dougherty
Valley east of the San Ramon City limits. Approval of this development by Contra Costa
6
  While there are no immediate plans to decommission Camp Parks, it is possible that this land will become available
  in the future.
                                                      4‐8

                                             Land Use
County created concerns regarding traffic impacts on neighboring cities such as San Ramon,
Danville, Dublin, and Walnut Creek. In response, the City of San Ramon and Town of
Danville in a coordinated effort filed suit against Contra Costa County over the proposed
Dougherty Valley Development impacts. In 1994, San Ramon and Danville settled the lawsuit
with Contra Costa County through a multi‐party settlement agreement (Settlement
Agreement) subject to specific terms. The Settlement Agreement allowed for an initial
development of up to 8,500 residential units in the Dougherty Valley, and provided for a
maximum of 11,000 residential units based on further traffic analysis and acceptable level of
service on local roadways. The Settlement Agreement itself established a methodology for
monitoring traffic and correcting problems if traffic level of service objectives are not met
during buildout of the project. In addition, the Settlement Agreement contained provisions for
the Dougherty Valley developments to be annexed into the City of San Ramon as each phase
is complete
South of the Dougherty Valley Specific Plan developments,              the subarea contains an
additional 710 residential units not contained within the Specific     Plan area. During the mid
1990s Bent Creek (452 units plus 1 unit in 2006), Old Ranch            Estates (189 units, 1994)
subdivisions were constructed and in 2008 Old Ranch Summit             (54 units, plus 14 second
units) was completed.
SOUTHERN SAN RAMON
Residential development began in the Southern San Ramon subarea during the mid‐1960s.
During the 1970s and the early 1980s, residential neighborhoods were constructed northward
from the County line area to Montevideo Drive. Today, with approximately 7,374 dwelling
units, Southern San Ramon is characteristic of a suburban community of primarily single‐
family homes on parcels of 6,500 to 10,000 square feet that feature mature landscaping.
Several projects have been constructed since 1995, including Easthampton (124 units, in
1996), Ponderosa Village (117 Units, 1996), Country Faire (40 units in 2001) and Villa San
Ramon (40 additional units in 2003). Non‐residential development since 1995, including
Country Club Village, All Aboard Mini‐Storage, and the Country Faire commercial center
resulting in a net total of approximately 186,000 square feet.
Recreational facilities in the subarea include Athan Downs and Boone Acres parks, San
Ramon Golf Club, the Alcosta Senior and Community Center, Park and Gardens, aquatics
and tennis facilities at California High School, five joint‐use playgrounds at Pine Valley Middle
School, and four local elementary schools. The Iron Horse Trail provides Southern San
Ramon residents with bicycle and pedestrian access to the Bishop Ranch Business Park as
well as to the proposed City Center and North Camino Ramon Specific Plan areas.
TWIN CREEKS
Development in the Twin Creeks subarea began in 1969 and spread southward from Crow
Canyon Road. Starting in the late 1970s, new homes have been built in successive stages
moving south and southwest of Norris Canyon Road. For the most part, the Twin Creeks
subarea is fully developed.
                                                4‐9

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2030
Residential neighborhoods in the Twin Creeks subarea are well established and attractive, yet
diverse with respect to type of housing, densities, and lot sizes. There are approximately
3,200 dwelling units, of which 77 percent are detached single‐family homes on lots ranging
from 5,000 to 10,000 square feet. The remaining 23 percent is comprised of townhouses,
condominiums, and apartments. Two new neighborhood parks have been programmed for
this subarea. Memorial Park (Alta Mesa) was constructed in 2002 and San Catanio Creek
Park (the Woodlot) has a master plan scheduled for future development. Since 1995, the
only residential activity within the Twin Creeks subarea was the Thomas Ranch project (140
single‐family homes, 2000). With respect to commercial development, Twin Creeks subarea
has approximately 38,800 square feet neighborhood serving commercial space associated
with Applebee’s restaurant, Bollinger Crossing, and Homestead Village projects.
WESTSIDE
The Westside subarea encompasses 3,300 acres of largely unincorporated open hillsides
bounded by Norris Canyon Road on the north and San Ramon Valley Boulevard to the east,
and by the Contra Costa/Alameda County line to the south and the west. This subarea
slopes upward to the west in a series of hills and ridges to the highest ridgeline at the County
line. This ridgeline frames the western side of the City.
In 1989, the City adopted a specific plan for the Westside, which was updated in 1997. The
Westside Specific Plan encompasses three discrete areas: 1)The area immediately adjacent
to San Ramon Valley Boulevard; 2) The area south of Norris Canyon Road; and 3) the
remaining open space.
The area along San Ramon Valley Boulevard is designated primarily for residential
development, with a neighborhood shopping center (Gateway Centre) at the corner of
Alcosta Boulevard and San Ramon Valley Boulevard. In all, 1325 units are anticipated in the
Westside Specific Plan. Approximately 857 units have been constructed in the Westside
including approximately 258 of the 371 large lot homes approved by Contra Costa County in
Norris Canyon Estates (a portion of the Wiedemann Ranch property south of Norris Canyon
Road). An additional 224 residential units associated with the Valley Vista Senior Housing,
Church on the Hill and the buildout of Norris Canyon Estates are approved, underway, or
programmed. The balance of land in the Westside Specific Plan Area consists of open space
lands with recreational and fire trails connecting the open space and the existing developed
areas.
TASSAJARA VALLEY
The Tassajara Valley Planning Subarea is located in an unincorporated part of south central
Contra Costa County, southeast of the Town of Danville and is the easternmost planning
subarea of the City of San Ramon. This subarea comprises approximately 3,759 acres
located outside the City’s Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) and SOI. Much of the land in the
Valley is in agricultural use, such as spring pasture and livestock grazing, with a few
orchards, small horse ranches, and two to five‐acre ranchettes. Residential development
consists of approximately 210 rural residential units, most of which are clustered along
Camino Tassajara and side roads. The majority of the land area is in private ownership, and
over the years, there have been several development projects proposed.
                                              4‐10

                                                   Land Use
In 1997, the Tassajara Valley Property Owners Association (TVPOA), representing 18
landowners controlling about 2,140 acres, made a major development proposal for the Valley,
calling for creation of a mixed‐use community encompassing 4,490 acres. At buildout, the
development would have included 5,950 dwelling units, 300,000 square feet of
commercial/office space and 2,645 acres for parks and open space.7 The processing of the
project ceased when Contra Costa County declared its intent to update its own General Plan
and evaluate whether the Tassajara Valley should be inside or outside the County’s Urban
Limit Line (ULL). In July 2000, the County approved a ULL that excluded the majority of the
Tassajara Valley from development until at least 2010.
In 2002, the County approved the Alamo Creek Project, which consisted of approximately
923 single‐family, townhomes and senior residential units on roughly 609 acres within the
County ULL. The voters approved Measure “L” in 2006, which subsequently extended the
County ULL horizon until the year 2026, with opportunities for periodic reviews beginning in
2011 and a mandatory review in 2016 to demonstrate countywide land supply necessary to
satisfy the jobs housing balance for the next 20 years (in accordance with Measure L).
Since the Tassajara Valley is not currently within the City’s SOI, the County is the approval
authority for project applications within the subarea. In 2005, the County received a
development proposal for a large cemetery project, and in 2009, there was an additional
proposal for a mixed‐use project including Agricultural/Rural Residential uses (New Farm).
Pursuant to General Plan 2020 Policy 4.6‐I‐3 and in an effort to provide San Ramon greater
certainty regarding the future planning process in the Tassajara Valley, the City of San
Ramon placed a UGB amendment on the ballot for voter consideration. The amendment
sought to add approximately 1,626 acres into the City’s UGB in the Tassajara Valley as well
as an additional 603 acres on the westside of the City, and to provide the City the ability to
minimize future impact to San Ramon facilities and services. In November 2010, the San
Ramon residents voted to maintain the UGB in its current configuration and rejected the
proposed UGB modifications. While still part of the City’s Planning Area, the Tassajara Valley
remains outside the City’s UGB and SOI and under the jurisdiction of the County for land use
decisions.
4.3 DISTRIBUTION OF EXISTING USES
The land use pattern in San Ramon is reflective of the City’s history as a local‐ and region‐
serving suburban office center with surrounding residential neighborhoods and supporting
businesses and services. The City’s commercial focus has traditionally been the suburban‐
scaled, campus‐style office developments of Bishop Ranch, anchored to the north and south
by the commercial services and retail activities at the I‐680 interchanges with Crow Canyon
Road and Bollinger Canyon Road.
Residential development in San Ramon is generally suburban with a loop‐style network of
curving streets and cul‐de‐sacs. Higher density residential neighborhoods are generally
located close to commercial uses along arterial streets. As a result, San Ramon is largely
7
  Contra Costa County. Draft Environmental Impact Report for the Tassajara Project. March 1997.
                                                      4‐11

                                          San Ramon General Plan 2030
comprised of auto‐oriented single‐use areas. Consistent with the previous General Plan
2020 policies, many of the existing commercial centers have been designated mixed use,
thus creating the potential for live work opportunities and higher residential densities.
Through implementation of the previous General Plan 2020, the land use profile of the City
has continued to evolve and be refined. Since 2003, the City has annexed 3,656 acres of
land. Of the approximately 11,503 acres within the existing City Limits, Residential
designations accounts for approximately 46 percent of the land area, while commercial
services mixed use, and public semipublic combine for approximately 13% of the land area.
Parks and Recreation and Open Space account for approximately 41% of the total land area
within the City. Table 4‐2 provides a breakdown of the land use types within the City limits
based on General Plan designations and their relative acres.
                                   Table 4‐2: Land Use Designations (City Limits)
            Land Use Designation                            Total Acreage2                 Percent Land Area
  Residential                                                 5026.11                             45.90%
  Commercial                                                    544.35                              4.97%
  Mixed Use1                                                    448.35                              4.10%
  Park & Recreation                                             946.63                              8.65%
  Open Space                                                   3542.27                            32.35%
  Public/Semipublic                                             441.46                              4.03%
  Total All Classifications2                                 10,949.17                          100.00%
  1
     Includes light industrial to mixed use as part of the NCRSP.
  2
     Total acres for land uses does not include roadways. Planning areas not within the City limits have not been
     included.
  Source: City of San Ramon.
Employment centers such as Bishop Ranch Business Park and other commercial district in
the City account for about 10%, while Parks and open space (41%) and residential
classifications (46%) account for the vast majority total land area in the City. This dense
commercial office core coupled with the residential and open space densities has been the
determining factors in the development of the historic land use pattern and defining San
Ramon’s urban form to date.
                                                            4‐12

                                             Land Use
4.4 GENERAL PLAN LAND USE DIAGRAM AND CLASSIFICATIONS
GENERAL PLAN LAND USE FRAMEWORK
General Plan Diagram
The General Plan 2030 land use framework is illustrated in the General Plan Diagram
(Figure 4‐2)—and is a graphic representation of the City’s future vision and policies. The
General Plan Land Use Diagram (Diagram) designates, in general terms, the proposed
location, distribution, and extent of land uses through anticipated General Plan buildout in the
year 2030. The land use classifications, shown as color/graphic patterns, letter designations,
or labels on the Diagram, specify a range for housing density and building intensity for each
type of designated land use. These density/intensity standards allow circulation and public
facility needs to be determined. They also reflect the environmental carrying‐capacity
limitations established by other elements of the General Plan.
The Diagram is to be used and interpreted only in conjunction with the narrative text, policies,
and other figures contained in the General Plan. The legend of the General Plan Land Use
Diagram abbreviates the land use classifications described below, which represent an
adopted part of the General Plan.
The General Plan is not parcel‐specific, and uses on sites less than one acre in size are
generally not depicted on the Diagram. The interpretation of consistency with the General
Plan on sites less than one acre in size will be done through the General Plan/Zoning
Ordinance consistency matrix (see Table 4‐4.)
Land Use Framework Guiding Principles
The General Plan Land Use Diagram embodies several land use ideas and principles. These
include:
        Urban Growth Boundary. The General Plan delineates an Urban Growth Boundary
         (UGB), in direct response to Measure G, approved in 1999, to preserve open space
         and discourage urban sprawl. The UGB was not changed as a result of the 2010
         voter review and may be subject to additional review again in 2015 pursuant to Policy
         4.6‐I‐3 should future revisions be proposed.
        Compact Urban Form. All urban growth is located within the UGB and urban densities
         are increased to achieve growth targets while ensuring efficient provision of services.
         These smart growth principles are part of the fundamental philosophy of the General
         Plan 2030, which has been further reinforced by the City’s pursuit of Priority
         Development Areas (PDAs) under the ABAG FOCUS program. By design, PDAs
         require the inclusion of smart growth principles promoting compact growth patterns,
         pedestrian oriented development with transit connections. The PDA program serves
         as a tool to focus resources and the existing General Plan smart growth policies to
         specific planning areas such as the City Center PDA and North Camino Ramon
         Specific Plan Potential PDA area.
                                               4‐13

                                  San Ramon General Plan 2030
        Mixed Use Centers. Existing retail shopping centers are designated mixed use to
         provide opportunities for office, service, and housing development in these key
         locations.
        Hillside, Ridgeline, and Natural Features Protection. New urban and rural residential
         designations mandate hillside, ridgeline, and natural features protection and require a
         high degree of open space preservation. Habitat protection programs and Clustered
         Development are mechanisms for protecting these resources. In addition, in 2008 the
         City obtained Priority Conservation Area (PCA) designation for the “Big Canyon” area
         located within the City’s Westside as part of the ABAG FOCUS program. The PCA
         provides opportunities to obtain grant funding to assist in the preserve of this area.
        Workforce Housing. While the General Plan provides for a full range of housing types,
         affordability remains a major concern that is addressed by higher density residential
         and mixed‐use designations that will yield smaller, more affordable units.
        Specific Plan Areas. Given the progressive policies and long‐range vision for smart
         growth expressed by Measure G (1999) and contained in the previous General Plan
         2020, there is an increased emphasis on the specific plan process as a land use
         planning tool. The General Plan 2030 acknowledges existing specific plans (Figure
         4‐3) as well as potential plans such as the Eastside Specific Plan (Tassajara Valley)
         and the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan as an effective way to focus study on
         how best to implement General Plan policies in light of the range of land use issues
         specific to these areas. The General Plan 2030 policies provide specific direction for
         the preparation and maintenance of these detailed land use plans.
Urban Growth Boundary (UGB)
Adoption of a Voter approved Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) reflects one of the most
significant aspects of the previous General Plan 2020 adopted in 2002 and is a guiding
principle that has been carried forward in the General Plan 2030. The UGB concept
responds specifically to Measure G (1999), which also states that smart growth should be
pursued within the UGB to discourage urban sprawl and preserve open space.
The primary purpose of the UGB is to limit the extent to which urban development and
services are provided and to serve as a tool to protect scenic and natural resources, preserve
open space, encourage infill development, and encourage the efficient development of
municipal services such as sewer and water for a specific period of time. Land beyond the
UGB is intended to remain rural in nature until such time as the UGB is reevaluated to
assess the City’s future needs for housing and employment. The previous voter approved
General Plan 2020 included policies that requires periodic UGB assessment and any future
expansion of the UGB larger than 25 acres is subject to voter review. General Plan 2030
Policy 4.6‐I‐1 continues to allow minor adjustment of the UGB up to 25 acres with a 4/5th
vote by the City Council and is more restrictive than the County ULL provisions approved
under Measure “L.”
                                                4‐14



                                                      Land Use
DENSITY/INTENSITY STANDARDS
The General Plan establishes density/intensity standards for each land use classification. In
the residential designations, residential density is expressed as housing units per net acre,
exclusive of public streets, other rights‐of‐way, drainage easements other non‐exclusive
easements, and other unbuildable lands.
To promote dedication of permanent open space on Rural Conservation and Hillside
Residential sites; an increase in density for clustered development on suitable sites may be
provided in direct proportion to the amount of permanent open space provided by a
development. Permanent open space dedication may include undevelopable lands as those
identified in Resource Management Map (Figure 8‐3), including lands subject to hillside
(slopes over 20 percent) and creek and ridgeline development restrictions.
Density of development is calculated from only the remaining acres of the buildable land for a
project site after the open space dedication has been factored out. As the open space
dedication percentage increases, the buildable land may decrease; however, the density on
the remaining land increases. Table 4‐3 shows the potential average residential density for
the remaining buildable areas in relation to percent of permanently preserved open space in
the Rural Conservation and Hillside Residential Designations.
   Table 4‐3: Open Space/Density Provisions for Rural Conservation and Hillside Residential Land Use
      Percent of Site       For Rural Conservation (RC)Land Use               For Hillside Residential (HR) Land
       Permanently                         Designations                                 Use Designation
    Preserved as Open
      Space (Gross)                    Maximum Density1                                Maximum Density1
  Up to 49.9 percent        1 unit per 5 acres                              1 unit per net 5 acres
                            (0.2 units per net acre)                        (0.2 units per net acre2)
  50 to 59.9 percent        0.25 units per net acre2                        1 unit per 2.5 net acre2
  60 to 69.9 percent        0.3 units per net acre2                         1 unit per 1.25 net acre2
  70 to 79.9 percent        0.35 units per net acre2                        1 unit per net 0.5 acre2
  80 percent or more        0.4 units per net acre2                         (Above 70 percent)
  1
    Density may be lower, based on the hillside, creek, and ridgeline development restrictions
  2
    Clustered Development required for 4 or more units
  Gross open space dedication includes all land considered unbuildable plus any additional buildable area dedicated
  as open space in exchange for additional density excluding roadways and similar project‐specific elements.
                                                          4‐17

                                  San Ramon General Plan 2030
For non‐residential uses, density is expressed as a maximum permitted Floor Area Ratio
(FAR). The FAR is the net floor area for all structures on a lot/site to gross area of that
lot/site. FAR is a broad measure of building bulk that controls both visual prominence and
traffic generation. It can be clearly translated to a limit on building bulk in the Zoning
Ordinance and is independent of the use occupying the building. No averaging of FAR is
permitted such that the maximum FAR would be exceeded for a project as a whole. The
Zoning Ordinance provides specific exceptions to the FAR limitations for uses with low
employment densities, and provides for bonuses in FAR in return for the provision of
amenities for public benefit, such as workforce housing units or public amenities. In addition
to density/intensity standards, some land use classifications also stipulate allowable building
types, such as single‐family residential.
The density/intensity standards do not imply that development projects will be approved at
the maximum density or intensity specified for each use. Zoning regulations consistent with
General Plan policies and/or site conditions may reduce development potential within the
stated ranges based on specific project site conditions.
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
The classifications in this section are meant to be broad enough to give the City flexibility in
implementing City policy, but clear enough to provide sufficient direction to carry out the
General Plan. The City’s Zoning Ordinance contains more detailed provisions and standards.
More than one zoning district may be consistent with a single General Plan land use
classification (see the General Plan/Zoning Ordinance consistency matrix in Table 4‐4).
Residential
Seven residential land use classifications are established to provide for development of a full
range of housing types (Mixed Use and Planned Development classifications permitting
residential uses is described later in this section). Densities are stated as the number of
housing units per net acre of developable land. Development is required within the density
range (both maximum and minimum) as stipulated. Hillside, creek, and ridgeline development
restrictions established in the Zoning Ordinance (Resource Management Chapter) may limit
attainment of maximum densities.
Second units permitted by local regulation and State‐mandated density bonuses for provision
of workforce housing are in addition to densities otherwise permitted.
Assumed average densities listed are used to calculate probable housing unit and population
holding capacity. Neither the averages nor the totals constitute General Plan policy.
        Rural Conservation. This designation provides for rural single‐family residential
         development of up to 1 unit per 5 acres of buildable land in un‐serviced areas with
         clustered development encouraged to permit suitable development sites of less than
         20 percent slope and to achieve an open space preservation target of 90 percent.
         Density increases of up to 1 unit per 2.5 acres of buildable land may be permitted
         with mandatory clustered development and open space dedication of over 80% of the
         gross area. A summary of the density ranges for the Rural Conservation designation
                                              4‐18

                                          Land Use
      has been provided in Table 4‐3 above. The Resource Management Chapter of the
      Zoning Ordinance may set additional requirements, for those properties identified in
      Figure 8‐3 of the Open Space and Conservation Element. A habitat protection plan
      may be required where sensitive species or habitat could be affected.
     Hillside Residential. This designation provides for a base density of up to 1 unit per 5
      acres of buildable land for single‐family residential development in serviced areas.
      Developments of four or more units must utilize clustered development techniques on
      suitable development sites with slopes of less than 20 percent. Density increases of
      up to 2 units per acre of buildable land in utility served areas may be permitted to
      achieve an open space preservation target of 70 percent. A summary of the Hillside
      Residential designation density ranges has been provided in Table 4‐3 above. The
      Resource Management Chapter of the Zoning Ordinance may set additional
      requirements for those properties identified in Figure 8‐3 of the Open Space and
      Conservation Element. A habitat protection plan may be required where sensitive
      species or habitat could be affected.
     Single Family Residential‐Low Density. Single‐family residential development at
      densities of between 0.2‐3 units per acre. Typical lot sizes range from 10,000 to
      15,000 square feet. This designation reflects existing low‐density neighborhoods,
      such as Twin Creeks Hills and Royal Ridge.
     Single Family Residential‐Low Medium Density. Single‐family residential development
      at densities of between 3‐6 units per acre with a maximum lot size of 10,000 square
      feet. The Oaks in the Westside is an example of this designation.
     Single Family‐Medium Density. Single‐family residential development at densities of
      between 6‐14 units per acre with typical lot sizes of approximately 3,500 square feet
      and including detached units, zero lot line units, garden patio homes, and townhomes.
      New residential development in Country Faire is typical of this designation.
     Multiple Family‐High Density. Multiple‐family residential development at densities of
      between 14‐30 units per acre. Such development should reflect high quality design
      with integrated open space and recreational and/or cultural amenities, and
      opportunities for workforce housing. Structure parking would be necessary at the
      higher end of the range. Promontory View in the Crow Canyon Redevelopment area is
      an example of this designation.
     Multiple Family‐Very High Density. This new designation provides for the highest
      density multiple‐family residential development at densities of between 30‐50 units
      per acre. Such development units should reflect high quality design with integrated
      open space and recreational and/or cultural amenities, and opportunities for
      workforce housing. Structure parking would be necessary.
Non‐Residential
Nine non‐residential land use classifications are established to provide for development of
employment and other uses in San Ramon. The development intensity of these land uses is
                                             4‐19

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2030
expressed as a FAR as stipulated. Development standards established in the Zoning
Ordinance may limit attainment of maximum FAR.
      Office. Business, professional, and public offices at intensities of up to 0.45 FAR,
       including retail uses and restaurants in mixed‐use buildings and supporting
       commercial services at appropriate locations.
      Retail Shopping. Includes sites for retail shopping and services at intensities of up to
       0.35 FAR, including restaurants, commercial recreation facilities, and personal,
       business and financial services.
      Thoroughfare Commercial. Travel‐oriented commercial uses at intensities of up to
       0.50 FAR, including hotels, motels, service stations, restaurants, etc., located on
       major arterial streets and intersections.
      Mixed Use. Integrated mix of non‐residential uses—retail, service, office—and
       residential uses at intensities of up to 0.70 FAR. Such development should reflect
       high quality design with integrated open space and recreational and/or cultural
       amenities, and opportunities for workforce housing. Structure parking may be
       necessary. Additional FAR may be allowed for projects that provide more than the
       required 25 percent of total units as workforce housing.
      Golf Courses. Golf courses and accessory facilities and uses at intensities of up to
       0.10 FAR.
      Commercial Recreation. Sports and fitness clubs, horse stables, and amusement
       parks at intensities of up to 0.35 FAR.
      Public and Semipublic. Schools, hospitals and related medical offices, religious
       institutions, utilities, and quasi‐public uses at intensities of up to 0.35 FAR.
      Parks. Public and private recreation sites and facilities at intensities of up to 0.10
       FAR.
      Open Space. Land protected from development and primarily held in its natural
       vegetative state, with some land privately owned and used for agricultural purposes.
       The maximum FAR for non‐residential structures is 0.10, and the residential density is
       limited to 1 unit per 20 acres, which may be reduced with Clustered Development and
       creek and ridgeline protection standards may apply.
San Ramon will implement many General Plan policies through the City’s Zoning Ordinance
and specific plans. Zoning must be consistent with the General Plan if the City’s land use,
housing, and open space policies are to be realized. A fundamental link between the General
Plan and zoning is land use/zoning consistency. Table 4‐4 shows how zoning districts in
San Ramon are consistent with the land use designations of this General Plan.
                                                 4‐20

                                                    Land Use
                Table 4‐4: Consistency Between the General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance
          General Plan Land Use Designations                            Consistent Base Zoning Districts
 Residential
 Rural Conservation                                           RC
 Hillside Residential                                         HR
 Single Family‐Low Density                                    RE‐A, RE‐B, RS‐12, RS‐10
 Single Family‐Low Medium Density                             RS‐10, RS‐7, RS‐6
 Single Family‐Medium Density                                 RS‐6, RS‐D
 Multiple Family‐High Density                                 RM, RMH
 Multiple Family‐Very High Density                            RH, RVH
 Office, Commercial, Industrial
 Office                                                       OL, OA, M‐1, M‐2
 Retail Shopping                                              CC
 Thoroughfare Commercial                                      CT
 Mixed Use
 Mixed Use                                                    CC, MU, CCMU
 Community Facilities/Open Space
 Commercial Recreation                                        CR, P
 Golf Course                                                  GC
 Public and Semipublic                                        PS, CR, M‐1, M‐2, all remaining districts if under
                                                              2 acres
 Parks                                                        P, all remaining districts if under 2 acres
 Open Space                                                   OS‐1, OS‐2, AG, RC
 Note:
 A specific plan can also implement any of the General Plan land use designations.
4.5 GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT
BUILDOUT
Full development under the General Plan is referred to as “buildout.” It should be noted that
when buildout will actually occur is not specified or anticipated by the Plan, and designation
                                                        4‐21

                                         San Ramon General Plan 2030
of a site for a certain use does not necessarily mean that the site will be built/redeveloped
with the designated use in the next 20 years, the horizon of the Plan. Buildout development
levels of the General Plan, assume average densities and intensities for the various land use
classifications identified in the General Plan Land Use Diagram.
Residential
As of 2009, approximately 24,781 residential units currently exist in the San Ramon Planning
Area, with approximately another 6,127 approved, underway, or programmed. The majority of
these units are associated with the buildout of Northwest Specific Plan, Crow Canyon Specific
Plan, and Dougherty Valley Specific Plan. The General Plan will result in a projected 9,559
additional units for an estimated General Plan 2030 buildout total of 34,340 residential units.
Table 4‐5 shows the estimated current and projected residential units for the San Ramon
Planning Area.
                      Table 4‐5: Buildout Residential Units in San Ramon Planning Area
    Estimated Current Residential             Additional Residential Units       Estimated Buildout of Residential
              Units 2009                     Under General Plan Buildout                   Units 2030
                24,781                                    9559                               34,340
  Estimate of Planning Area residential units extrapolated from ABAG Projections 2009 and California Department of
  Finance Jurisdictional projections 01‐01‐2009.
Non‐Residential
As of 2009, approximately 16,436,441 million square feet of non‐residential floor area
currently exist in the San Ramon Planning Area, which includes retail, commercial, office,
light industrial, and public space. Approximately another 5 million square feet of space is
approved, underway, or programmed with City Center project, buildout of the approved
Specific Plans and the additional square footage contemplated as part of the North Camino
Ramon Specific Plan. In total, General Plan buildout in 2030 is estimated to result in
approximately 21,494,041 million square feet of non‐residential floor area in the San Ramon
Planning Area. Table 4‐6 shows the estimated current and projected non‐residential square
footage for the San Ramon Planning Area.
                                                           4‐22

                                                      Land Use
                Table 4‐6: Buildout Non‐Residential Square Feet in San Ramon Planning Area
                                             Additional Non‐Residential
       Estimated Current Non‐                 Square feet General Plan            Estimated Buildout of Non‐
    Residential Square feet 2009                       Buildout                 Residential Square feet 2030
               16,436,441                             5,057,600                           21,494,041
  Estimate of Planning Area Non‐residential square footage based on GP 2020 background data and project specific
  projections from the City of San Ramon.
BUILDOUT POPULATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Approximately 90 percent of the buildout population and employment either already exists or
will occur with approved or programmed development.
Population
At buildout, San Ramon Planning Area will accommodate a population of approximately
92,031, an increase of about 39 percent over the current estimated population of
approximately 66,413 people. The majority of these new residents—16,420 or about 63
percent—will result from the development of housing units already approved, underway, or
programmed. The additional population accommodated by this General Plan is about 9,198
residents. This reflects an estimated annual growth rate of about 1.64 percent over the next
20 years, which is much less than the estimated 4.32 percent annual growth rate
experienced by the City over the past 9 years since 2000. Table 4‐7 shows the estimated
current and projected populations for the San Ramon Planning Area.
                           Table 4‐7: Buildout Population in San Ramon Planning Area
    Estimated Current Population             Additional Population Under        Estimated Buildout Population
                  2009                         General Plan Buildout                          2030
                 66,413                                 25,618                               92,031
  Estimate of Planning Area population extrapolated from ABAG Projections 2009 and California Department of
  Finance Jurisdictional Projections 01‐01‐2009. Based on an average household size of 2.68 persons.
Employment
San Ramon Plan Area will accommodate approximately 58,769 jobs at buildout, for an
increase of about 47 percent over the current estimated employment of 40,112. The
additional employment accommodated by this General Plan is about 18,657 jobs. This
reflects an overall annual job growth rate of about 1.93 percent over the next 20 years. This
                                                         4‐23

                                      San Ramon General Plan 2030
projected job growth is anticipated to be far more active than the flat to negative growth in
jobs experienced in the 2000’s culminating in the economic downturn in 2007‐2008. A
significant part of this new growth is anticipated by the completion of the City Center project
and implementation of the future North Camino Ramon Specific Plan. The General Plan
2030 Economic Element provides addition information of existing and future employment
trends specific to the City. Table 4‐8 shows the current estimated and projected employment
for San Ramon.
                        Table 4‐8: Buildout Employment in San Ramon Planning Area
                   Estimated Employment              Additional Jobs Under             Estimated total Buildout
                            2009                     General Plan Buildout              Employment (2030)
  Total                    40,112                           18,657                           58,769
  Estimate of Planning Area employment extrapolated from ABAG Jurisdictional Projections 2009.
Jobs/Housing Balance
A city’s jobs/housing ratio (jobs to employed residents) would be 1:1 if the number of jobs in
the city equaled the number of employed residents. In theory, such a balance would eliminate
the need for commuting and signifies a balanced community. A ratio greater than 1.0
indicates a net in‐commute (jobs rich); less than 1.0 indicates a net out‐commute (housing
rich). As shown in Table 4‐9, the current jobs/housing ratio in San Ramon is 1.24, which
means that the number of jobs in the City exceeds the number of employed residents by
about 24 percent. The addition of significantly more residential units (employed residents) as
compared to the relatively flat growth rate in jobs has resulted in a reduction in the
jobs/housing ratio of approximately 27 percent since 2000 and continued progress towards
a balanced community.
                        Table 4‐9: San Ramon Planning Area Jobs – Housing Balance
                                            (Employment–Employed Residence)
                          Estimated                   Estimated Employed              Estimated Jobs/Housing
                      Jobs/Employment                  Residents/Housing                       Ratio
    2000                    40,030                            26,561                            1.51
    2008                     40,112                          32,438                             1.24
    2030                    58,769                           55,765                             1.05
  Estimate of Planning Area employment and employed residents extrapolated from ABAG Jurisdictional Projections
  2009.
                                                        4‐24

                                            Land Use
Buildout under the General Plan is expected to add proportionately more population than
jobs. As a result, the jobs/housing balance is expected to fall to 1.05 resulting in only a 5
percent differential from a 1:1 balanced ratio. It should be noted that it is important to work
toward jobs/housing balance not just on a jurisdictional level, but also on a regional or
corridor level. From a regional perspective, the jobs/housing balance along the I‐680
corridor from Danville to Pleasanton is projected to be virtually 1:1 in 2030, based on ABAG
2009 jobs and employed residents projections.
4.6 LAND USE POLICIES
GUIDING POLICY
4.6‐G‐1 Foster a pattern of development that enhances the existing character of the City,
           and encourages land use concepts that contribute to the design of the community.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
Urban Growth Boundaries
4.6‐I‐1    Establish an Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) to the year 2030, as shown on the
           General Plan Diagram that limits the extent of urban development and services
           within the San Ramon Planning Area. Amendments to the Urban Growth Boundary
           greater than 25 acres require City voter approval.
           As called for by Measure G (1999), the UGB represents a defined edge of urban
           development in San Ramon, beyond which development would be expected remain
           rural in nature and without urban services for the Plan horizon. This policy is not
           intended to limit extension of services to existing rural uses, nor deny existing rural
           property owners the option of requesting annexation. The minor adjustment of the
           UGB up to 25 acres is more restrictive than the County ULL provisions approved
           under Measure “L” subject to certain restrictions and requires a 4/5th vote by the
           City Council .
4.6‐I‐2 Petition the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) to extend the City’s
           Sphere of Influence (SOI) if the County’s Urban Limit Line (ULL) is amended.
4.6‐I‐3 Assess the City’s future needs for housing and employment along with any
           development proposals and if changes are necessary, provide an opportunity for
           voter review of the Urban Growth Boundary in the year 2015.
           The review of the UGB in 2015 is intended to provide an opportunity to review the
           effectiveness of the UGB in maintaining the necessary housing and employment
           balance for the planning horizon. The review is intended to predate the Contra
           Costa County Urban Limit Line (ULL) review in 2016 such that any approved
           revision can be accommodated as part of the regular review process though the
           County. An UGB update would be by means of a City voter review to consider the
           maintenance or amendment of the UGB (over 25 acres pursuant to policy 4.6‐I‐1)
           or related policies.
                                               4‐25

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2030
4.6‐I‐4 Allow for minor technical adjustments to the Urban Growth Boundary, to be
        approved by the City Council with a four‐fifths vote, to accommodate contiguous
        development on developable sites not to exceed 25 acres, only where:
           No prior adjustment has been approved and the contiguous development is not
            part of a larger project;
           Hillside, creek, and ridgeline standards of the Resource Management Chapter of
            the Zoning Ordinance will be met.
        For purposes of this policy, contiguous development must abut existing or
        approved development, be separated only by a public right‐of‐way, or be within
        1,000 feet of the City limits existing at the time the adjustment is being
        considered.
4.6‐I‐5 Encourage the amendment of the Sphere of Influence and/or annexation of land to
        the City prior to filing a development application.
        To be coordinated with Policy 3.1‐I‐7 in the Growth Management Element.
Rural Conservation Development
4.6‐I‐6 Ensure that any residential development in the Rural Conservation designation
        mitigates impacts to natural features, sensitive habitat, and agricultural resources as
        required by local Ordinance or habitat protection plan.
4.6‐I‐7 As part of the development review process, create a habitat protection plan to
        mitigate any potential impacts caused by proposed development that could
        potentially affect sensitive habitat areas, sensitive species habitats, migratory
        patterns, and riparian corridors identified in the General Plan,
        A habitat protection plan is designed to provide habitat protection for endangered
        species and sensitive habitats in the planning area, particularly in Bollinger Canyon,
        Westside and Eastside Specific Plan Areas. A habitat protection plan would include
        the identification of habitats within a rural development area and preparation of a
        program to mitigate the impacts of development on them. It may have to include
        species‐specific measures where specified habitat would be affected. Loss of
        potentially sensitive habitat would have to be mitigated, and adaptive management,
        as the term is used in habitat conservation planning, would be required as a
        balance to development impacts. In addition, conservation plans could be shared
        between related projects or other projects within close proximity. Participation in a
        structured Natural Communities Conservation Plan (NCCP) should be considered
        and evaluated based on the scale of any proposed development in relation to
        potential impact to sensitive species and ecosystems.
        The requirements for mitigation, monitoring and reporting within the habitat
        protection plan area would be the responsibility of the property owners directly
        benefiting from the adoption of the protection plan and associated development.
                                              4‐26

                                            Land Use
         The Open Space Task Force, may also be called upon by the City Council to assist
         in developing habitat protection plans for any new developments.
4.6‐I‐8 Continue to pursue interagency coordination with the County to:
             Require that development applications for projects within the City’s Sphere of
              Influence conform to the hillside, creek, and ridgeline standards of the Resource
              Management Chapter of the Zoning Ordinance, where applicable; and
             Notify the City regarding County development applications within the City’s
              Sphere of Influence, and
             Allow the City up to 180 days or until environmental review is completed,
              whichever occurs later, to negotiate the protection of land outside the City limits
              designated as priority open space.
         This policy is intended to create a mechanism to provide input and reduce the
         potential adverse impacts that may result from development that occurs outside
         the City limits and potentially protect the ridgelines, hillsides, and creeks that
         form the backdrop for the City.
Residential Development
4.6‐I‐9 Require residential development to employ creative site design and architectural
         quality that blends with the characteristics of each specific location and its
         surroundings, while incorporating 360‐degree design principles.
         The City encourages high quality residential development that is harmonious with
         the proximate neighborhood through its specific plans and the review process,
         which includes an evaluation by the Architectural Review Board and approval by the
         Planning Commission. The City’s Architectural Review Guidelines are reviewed
         periodically to ensure that they continue to encourage creative design and
         consistency with the City vision.
4.6‐I‐10 Provide a wide range of housing opportunities for current and future residents.
         The City offers developers incentives, such as density bonuses, which encourage a
         broad spectrum of housing types to meet the needs of the entire community,
         including people who work in San Ramon, but cannot afford to live here.
4.6‐I‐11 Provide high quality public facilities, services, and other amenities within close
         proximity to residents.
         The City requires contributions from residential developers to provide for community
         facilities and programs relating to recreation, education, child care, culture,
         transportation, and safety.
4.6‐I‐12 Ensure that all residential development provide adequate parking.
                                               4‐27

                                  San Ramon General Plan 2030
          The adequacy of parking provided in new development, particularly in high‐density
          residential projects, has always been a concern in San Ramon. The Parking
          Ordinance should be reviewed to ensure that developments are required to provide
          sufficient onsite parking for projects. Alternatives parking proposals and shared
          parking concepts may be consider based parking studies considering the project
          specific parking standards and consistency with the Zoning Ordinance alternative
          parking provisions. The use of on‐street parking to meet residential parking
          requirements should be avoided.
Hillside Residential Development
4.6‐I‐13 Require Clustered Development for four or more units that will maximize
          preservation of visible open space and encourage preservation of open space by
          allowing density to increase based on the percentage of the gross area permanently
          preserved as open space.
          The discussion of Hillside Residential Designation in section 4.4 of this General
          Plan provides greater detail; of the density incentives in exchange for permanently
          preserved open space. Additional policies in the Open Space Element and
          requirements for a habitat protection plan may result in additional limitations on
          development.
4.6‐I‐14 Continue to develop and refine the residential hillside development standards that
          address:
              Location of hillside residential units, including maximum elevation limits based
               on water pressure zones and hillside viewshed analysis,
              Clustered Development provisions with limitations on cluster size to preserve
               open character,
              Building development and design in a clustered format, including standards for
               building height and massing,
              Bonus provisions for clustered development, including amount of bonus,
               alternate development forms, common recreational facilities, phasing, etc.,
              Requirements for deeding of natural areas as conservation lots with ownership
               and maintenance by homeowners’ association, non‐profit land trusts, or other
               City approved public agency.
Retail and Commercial Service Development
4.6‐I‐15 Maintain neighborhood and community shopping centers of sizes and at locations
          that provide convenience and minimize the need for longer/multiple automobile
          trips while providing a variety of goods and services while sustaining a strong retail
          base for the City.
          The overall economic development and economic needs of the City shall be
          considered in determining the number and location of such commercial projects.
                                                4‐28

                                           Land Use
4.6‐I‐16 Ensure that neighborhood retail centers and commercial service buildings are
         compatible with the surrounding neighborhood while incorporating 360‐degree
         design principles.
         All developers are required to present their proposals to the City’s Architectural
         Review Board. In conjunction with staff, Planning Commission and neighborhood
         reviews, the Board’s review helps ensure that retail development is consistent with
         the Architectural Review Guidelines, community’s values and compatible with
         surrounding properties.
4.6‐I‐17 Provide sufficient sites to meet the need for commercial services that can be
         supported by local residents, businesses, and workers.
4.6‐I‐18 Allow for a mix of complementary office uses and commercial service businesses in
         commercial service areas that is balanced and encourages economic vitality.
Mixed Use Development
4.6‐I‐19 Promote the revitalization and infill development in existing retail shopping centers,
         which are identified as mixed use centers on the General Plan Diagram, to provide
         opportunities for housing and other compatible non‐retail uses.
4.6‐I‐20 Continue to refine design standards for mixed use development that will result in a
         high quality pedestrian‐scaled environment, with one‐to‐four story buildings,
         integrated parking, streetfront windows and entries, and public and private open
         space or as provided under a separate Specific Plan process.
         Some mixed‐use designations may fall within specific plan areas that have
         specialized design or aesthetics goals for implementation. In those situations, the
         form, function, and land uses of the mixed‐use project should be tailored to
         implement the purpose and goals of the specific plan in a manner consistent with
         mixed uses designation.
4.6‐I‐21 Promote incentives that will provide for density and FAR bonuses for mixed‐use
         development that includes amenities for public benefit, such as workforce housing,
         pedestrian‐oriented facilities (outdoor seating, plazas, weather protection, transit
         waiting areas), historic preservation, cultural facilities, public art and water features,
         and open space preservation.
         Inclusionary housing requirements would apply.
Office Development
4.6‐I‐22 Allow for the revitalization and intensification of infill sites within the Bishop Ranch
         Business Park, consistent with FAR limitations.
                                              4‐29

                                San Ramon General Plan 2030
4.6‐I‐23 Permit a diverse mix of complementary uses within Bishop Ranch to better meet the
          daily needs of workers and to reduce the need to travel by automobile.
          Complementary uses shall be consistent with site zoning, compatible with the
          primary use and shall not adversely affect the traffic‐carrying capacity of adjacent
          streets.
          Complementary uses and services are defined as Accessory Uses and Accessory
          Retail, such as day care centers, food courts, dry cleaners, ATMs, etc. and are
          limited to the ground floor of existing and new buildings. In Bishop Ranch, it is the
          intent that these complementary uses would be internal and integrated into Bishop
          Ranch developments and that such uses would be accessory to the primary use.
Camp Parks
4.6‐I‐24 Ensure that development and land use activities in the Dougherty Valley and
          Tassajara Valley are compatible with Camp Parks.
4.7 SPECIFIC PLAN AREA POLICIES
The development of a specific plan is intended to reflect specific land use needs and
conditions of a geographic area and be a cooperative venture with area landowners, the City,
resource agencies, and local service providers to ensure that specific plan goal and
objectives are achieved. Specific plans are typically long‐term plans that are implemented
over many years (often 20 years or more). Current land uses and market trends may serve
as an impetus for specific plan development; however, as part of a long‐range planning
process, specific plans are typically intended to address the future needs of the community.
As such, a specific plan is able to provide focused guidance and achieve a coordinated vision
as individual properties propose changes over time.
Figure 4‐3 illustrates the specific plan areas in San Ramon. In addition to the existing
specific plans established under the previous General Plan 2020, the North Camino Ramon
Plan Area is the newest planning area in the City and has been included in the General Plan
2030 planning horizon. Land use designations within specific plan areas on the General Plan
Diagram are illustrative and the final land use plan for these areas incorporated into the
specific plan may deviate from the Diagram, provided it is faithful to representations of land
use relationships and meets the underlying criteria and standards of the specific plan policies.
Minor adjustments to Specific Plan boundaries may be made to protect resources or
accommodate infrastructure improvements or specific development configurations. These
boundary adjustments do not require a General Plan amendment when they have no impact
on the overall level of development established by the General Plan.
The City’s Planned Development (PD) District may be used in lieu of a specific plan where a
property is under single ownership or all owners consent to a PD Plan and an application for
PD zoning. If a Planned Development is proposed within a planned specific plan area, the
proposed development shall address any applicable specific plan policy goals.
                                               4‐30



                                           Land Use
GUIDING POLICY
4.7‐G‐1 Consider the use of Specific Plans, and other area plans to develop land use
         programs that reflect specific area conditions and land use needs.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
NORTHWEST SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
4.7‐I‐1  Ensure new development within the Plan Area is consistent with the adopted
         Northwest Specific Plan.
4.7‐I‐1A Ensure new development within Neighborhood V of the Plan Area is developed in
         accordance with the Faria Preserve Development Reduction, Open Space
         Protection, and Workforce Housing Endowment Initiative.
CROW CANYON SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
4.7‐I‐2 Ensure new development within the Plan Area is consistent with the adopted Crow
         Canyon Specific Plan.
EASTSIDE SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
4.7‐I‐3 A voter‐approved Urban Growth Boundary adjustment is required prior to the
         preparation of the Eastside Specific Plan. The plan shall include policies for open
         space and habitat protection.
NORTH CAMINO RAMON SPECIFIC PLAN
4.7‐I‐4  Prepare and implement a North Camino Ramon Specific Plan (NCRSP) as
         framework for infill development that is pedestrian/bicycle friendly, mixed use, and
         a transit oriented and based on the smart growth principles. The plan shall retain
         and provide opportunities for existing businesses, complement the City Center
         Project, and incorporate flexibility to encourage innovative designs. The Plan
         envisions an average Plan Area floor area ratio (FAR) of up to 0.7. Projects
         providing community benefit consistent with the Specific Plan will be able to obtain
         maximum FAR densities. Additional FAR increases based on workforce housing
         incentives may be considered. The major components in the plan area shall provide
         opportunities for mid to large floorplate retail, vertical and horizontal mixed‐use
         development including workforce housing, in proximity to new and existing jobs.
         This specific plan should include as a minimum the following elements:
            Land Use Program, including an interim use and transitional land use provisions
            Provide opportunities for the continuation of Service Commercial uses within the
             Plan Area.
            Open Space/Public Space Plan.
                                             4‐33

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2030
             Design Guidelines, which may include a Form Based Code approach that
              regulates size mass and standard design elements to streamline
              implementation.
             Implementation program, including cost of and responsibility for necessary
              capital and other improvements, financing measures, plan administration and
              enforcement, etc.
             Develop a workforce housing program affordable to a combination of extremely
              low, very low, low, or moderate‐income households.
             Consistency with the redevelopment plan in those overlapping plan areas
OTHER AREA PLANS
In addition to the identified Specific Plan areas, it is necessary to continue to evaluate
existing development for opportunities for redevelopment. Land use planning efforts for
subareas should be regularly evaluated for effectiveness and planning boundaries and if
necessary new planning efforts should be initiated to reflect land use and economic trends.
4.7‐I‐5 Continue to pursue the development and implementation of the City Center Project
          as a cohesive mix of civic, office compatible retail, and public space with an arts,
          entertainment, and lifestyle focus.
          Intended as a vital core for San Ramon, the City Center will be a people place first
          and includes public plazas art cinema, City Hall, Library, a hotel, retail
          establishments, restaurants, cafes, as well as a residential component.
4.7‐I‐6 Implement the City Center project to comply with the CCMU zoning designation and
          the intent of the City Center Settlement Agreement. The project and any future
          revisions will continue to be required to meet the sun access plane requirements
          adjacent to City parks.
4.7‐I‐7 Prior to new development consistent with the General Plan, amend the Westside
          Specific Plan as necessary to ensure consistency with the General Plan by
          establishing a 1,325‐unit limit on housing.
          All new development must conform to the policies of the Westside Specific Plan as
          they relate to land use, circulation, open space and conservation, community
          design, public services and utilities, hydrology, and safety.
4.8 COMMUNITY IMAGE
San Ramon is a contemporary city that is distinguished by attractive natural and physical
features. These features are the result of community values, decisions about development as
well as preservation of open space. Quality urban design is an important component of the
community image and an essential in creating the City image and sense of place. Quality
design preserves and enhances the City’s natural setting and coupled with programs for
public art, signage and landscaping contribute to a unique, pleasing, and desirable
environment for San Ramon residents.
                                                4‐34

                                              Land Use
For new development, the Art in Public Places Program is intended to promote the
acquisition, construction, installation, restoration, and maintenance of public art pieces in San
Ramon that will foster creativity, freedom of expression, cultural awareness, civic pride, and a
strong sense of community. Public Art is defined as original visual works of art, which are
accessible to the public. The artwork may be placed on private land within public view or
access, or in public places such as City property, the exterior of any City owned facility,
public areas, lobbies, or public assembly areas. This incremental approach to adding public
art adds to uniqueness of the City and enhances the community image.
In a larger context the hillsides on both the east and west, silhouette the City and bestow a
panoramic sense of openness to the people living in the valley. The San Ramon community
has invested substantial resources to establish a special place whose identity strengthens
and enhances its visual image. There are distinctive amenities that define San Ramon, such
as Central Park and the Community Center, its varied residential neighborhoods, and Bishop
Ranch Business Park.
One of the challenges facing San Ramon is to continue building a strong, positive image that
reflects the vision of its people and the quality of its environment. Such an image can be
enhanced by defining and visually emphasizing the City’s gateways, preserving its scenic
views of surrounding hills, and encouraging well‐designed, innovative architecture and
landscape.
GUIDING POLICY
4.8‐G‐1 Maintain and enhance San Ramon’s identity.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
4.8‐I‐1    Continue to develop and refine community design documents such as the San
           Ramon Beautification Plan, the Creek Corridor Plan, Street Beautification Plan,
           Street Beautification Guidelines, Architectural Review guidelines and other guidance
           documents to provide comprehensive design guidelines for beautification, of
           streetscapes creek corridors, City signs, public art, and community entries in San
           Ramon.
4.8‐I‐2 Ensure that the design, location, and size of new development blends with the
           environment and a site’s natural features.
           The design and location of new buildings can either enhance or detract from the
           surrounding environment. Buildings should be positioned so that trees, creekside
           vegetation, scenic views, and other natural resources are preserved.
4.8‐I‐3 Continue to refine citywide lighting standards to ensure appropriate illumination
           levels for residential, commercial, and industrial land uses, and that lighting is of a
           consistent character and quality while reducing light pollution.
           Parking lot lighting standards in the City’s Zoning Ordinance can help protect
           residential neighborhoods from glare by shielding and filtering light sources along
                                                 4‐35

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2030
        with maximum illumination levels to reduce unnecessary illumination on adjacent
        properties and conserve energy.
4.8‐I‐4 Ensure that parking facilities adequately address the community image, aesthetics
        and functional needs of the City.
        Depending on size, residential, commercial, and office development often must
        provide parking spaces to accommodate the needs of their residents and users.
        The City shall encourage architectural integration of parking structures into
        developments, landscape, and architectural screening and the construction of
        underground parking wherever feasible to minimize impervious surfaces at ground
        level.
4.8‐I‐5 Encourage the linkage and integration of new development with existing
        neighborhoods by means of Complete Streets networks, open space areas, parks,
        and pathways as a means of enhancing pedestrian and bicycle connections.
        Assembly Bill 1358 (AB 1358), the California Complete Streets Act, requires the
        General Plan to contain provisions for a balanced, multimodal transportation
        network that meets the needs of all users. Complete Streets concepts are intended
        to provide safe and convenient travel for all user groups in a manner that is suitable
        and based on local conditions. Additional discussion and policies related to
        Complete Streets concepts can be found in Section 5.3 of the Traffic and
        Circulation Element.
4.8‐I‐6 Seek to assure maximum public access to the Iron Horse Trail through land
        acquisition, licensing agreements with Contra Costa County, and incentives for
        dedication and improvement of land for trailhead parks and walkways.
4.8‐I‐7 Require new commercial and office development to provide plazas, courtyards,
        seating areas and other similar outdoor passive recreation areas.
4.8‐I‐8 Use the development review process to ensure that new development minimizes
        impacts and preserves and/or enhances significant views of the natural landscape.
        The City’s most prominent visual resources are the hills to the west and Mt. Diablo
        and its foothills. Other natural visual amenities include San Ramon Creek within the
        Crow Canyon subarea, San Catanio Creek along Norris Canyon Road, and the
        Dougherty Hills ridgeline. Views of the natural landscape can be emphasized and
        preserved through the design and placement of streets, buildings, and outdoor
        spaces. Open Space Policy 8.4‐I‐13 provides for the development of viewshed
        criteria that will inform the design review process.
4.8‐I‐9 Continue to implement landscaping guidelines for public roadways that improve
        their visual character.
        The City’s “Beautification Plan” and “Streetscape Beautification Guidelines” outline
        landscaping concepts for many of the arterials, gateways, and key intersections.
                                               4‐36

                                            Land Use
         Implementation of these concepts will result in a distinct, unified image for San
         Ramon that reflects the indigenous and historic character of the San Ramon Valley.
         Landscaping standards should be reviewed regularly to ensure that there is no
         conflict with pedestrian safety and access, vehicle visibility at intersections, and fire
         hazard control as landscaping matures. Safety issues related to site lines and
         security are addressed in the Zoning Ordinance.
4.8‐I‐10 Continue to implement gateway treatments for City entries that help residents and
         visitors know they have arrived in San Ramon.
         The “Streetscape Beautification Guidelines” provide landscaping designs for both
         major entries at the freeway interchanges and secondary entries where streets
         enter San Ramon from its neighbors, Danville and Dublin. Implementation of these
         entry designs will make positive and meaningful visual statements about San
         Ramon.
4.8‐I‐11 Require new office and commercial development to provide outdoor art that is
         clearly visible to the public or contribute to a citywide public art program though the
         development of an in lieu fee program.
         Outdoor art, such as sculptures and fountains, can reflect the social and cultural
         history of San Ramon, which in turn can contribute to a stronger sense of place.
4.8‐I‐12 Encourage attractive, drought‐tolerant landscaping on private property that is
         suitable for San Ramon’s climate.
         Although San Ramon is located in an area of mild temperatures and average
         rainfall, drought‐like conditions have prevailed in the past for years at a time. The
         City has established guidelines to promote water‐conserving landscapes by limiting
         turf area and requiring drought tolerant shrubbery. The City also supports legislation
         for the development and use of dual water systems for reclaiming water for
         irrigation purposes.
4.8‐I‐13 Require appropriate landscape treatment for public rights‐of‐way in all new
         residential, office, and commercial development.
         Street trees and landscaping help unify neighborhoods and give them identity. They
         also reduce the impact of uninterrupted street pavement and provide shade for
         pedestrians.
4.8‐I‐14 Ensure that businesses provide signs that are attractive and consistent with
         neighboring commercial uses, minimize visual clutter from roadways and other
         public areas, and, where possible, cannot be seen from residential neighborhoods.
         San Ramon requires developers to submit a “Master Sign Program” for most
         commercial and multi‐family residential projects to ensure that signs are compatible
         with the above‐stated goals. The City also provides design guidelines and locational
                                               4‐37

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2030
         criteria for a variety of on‐ and offsite signs, all of which are subject to Architectural
         Review Board and/or Planning Commission review and approval.
4.8‐I‐15 Maintain attractive and distinctive street identification signs for all areas of the City.
         Specially designed signs identifying all streets in San Ramon will provide a unifying
         and visually appealing element throughout the City. When a design is developed,
         existing signs will be replaced on an as‐needed basis.
4.8‐I‐16 Continue to refine urban design standards in the Zoning Ordinance as needed for
         large‐scale office development to promote smart growth principles while minimizing
         negative impacts on adjacent properties.
4.8‐I‐17 Modify the City Zoning Ordinance to include sun access plane requirements and
         provide provisions for encroachments into the sun access plane to allow
         architectural flexibility.
         Sun access plane encroachments may be done by allowing, for example, a 15‐foot
         vertical projection above the sun access plane for up to 25 percent of the length of
         the lot line opposite a City park. The Iron Horse Trail corridor is not subject to sun
         access plane standards.
4.8‐I‐18 As part of development proposals, encourage public access to creeks as scenic
         visual and passive recreational amenities in a manner consistent with need of
         applicable resource agencies to provide creek and habitat protection.
         South San Ramon, Watson Canyon, Oak, Norris, San Catanio, and San Ramon
         Creeks provide open space amenities within an urbanized setting. While large
         portions of these creeks are culverts or are tightly constrained between private
         development, opportunities potentially exist to provide pedestrian access to these
         amenities via walkways and bridges, and visual access via scenic corridors and
         building setbacks. It is the City’s goal to ensure that creekside settings remain
         accessible and open for everyone, as they provide visual relief and opportunities for
         outdoor recreation. The City will work closely with regulatory agencies to achieve
         this goal.
4.8‐I‐19 Continue to provide park and recreational amenities that combine well‐designed
         buildings, recreational equipment and playing fields, and complementary
         landscaping at key locations throughout the City.
         San Ramon residents take pride in their parks, which offer activities from children’s
         play areas at all the facilities, to adult classes at the Community Center. San
         Ramon’s parks are designed to blend with adjacent neighborhoods, capture
         significant views of the hillsides, and soften the urban environment.
4.8‐I‐20 Require all walls and fences to be designed to minimize visual monotony.
                                               4‐38

                                              Land Use
           Walls shall be designed to provide an attractive streetscape with varied building
           orientations, landscaping and berm materials, and any other techniques that will
           provide visual relief.
4.9 ADMINISTRATION OF LAND USE REGULATIONS
Any landowner should have an opportunity to demonstrate that the new General Plan policies
and implementing zoning regulations results in the denial of all economically beneficial use of
their land. If it were found that there is, in fact, a denial of all economically beneficial use, as
the term is defined in applicable State and federal law, then the City would be required to
modify the land use regulations as they apply to that property to allow for an economically
beneficial use.
4.9‐I‐1    Establish provisions for making beneficial use determinations and providing
           administrative relief from Plan policies and zoning regulations that have the
           potential for deprivation of property rights.
                                                 4‐39


                                                   5
                        Traffic and Circulation
The Traffic and Circulation Element is intended to provide guidance and specific actions to
ensure the continued safe and efficient operation of San Ramon’s circulation system. The
Element is based on a fundamental philosophy that traffic conditions in the City can be
managed through a comprehensive program of transportation planning, land use planning,
and growth management strategies.
State Law recognizes that circulation and land use are closely related and requires that policies
in this Element and the Land Use Element be tied together. Careful integration of the City’s
traffic and circulation policies with its land use policies will ensure that there is sufficient roadway
capacity to accommodate existing traffic and traffic anticipated by future development. The City
is committed to designing a system of regional routes, local roads, public transit, and bicycle and
pedestrian pathways that will enhance the community and minimize impacts to the environment.
On September 30, 2008, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed Assembly Bill 1358 (AB
1358), the California Complete Streets Act. The Act states: “In order to fulfill the commitment
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, make the most efficient use of urban land and
transportation infrastructure, and improve public health by encouraging physical activity,
transportation planners must find innovative ways to reduce vehicle‐miles‐traveled and to
shift from short trips in the automobile to biking, walking and use of public transit”.
In response to AB 1358, the General Plan Traffic and Circulation Element must contain
provisions and plan for a balanced, multimodal transportation network that meets the needs
of all users of the streets, roads, and highways for safe and convenient travel in a manner
that is suitable and based on local conditions.
“Complete Streets” design concepts are not new to the City of San Ramon, as the City has
been designing and constructing its transportation network with all users in mind. To be in
compliance with AB 1358, the City has incorporated Complete Streets concepts into every
component of the Traffic and Circulation Element.
San Ramon’s Transportation Systems Management Program incorporates five core strategies:
     1. Transportation programs are based on traffic circulation system needs and land use
         planning.
     2. The City’s traffic circulation planning efforts are integrated with those of adjoining cities
         and counties in a cooperative, regional planning effort.
     3. State of the art traffic engineering techniques and principles are used to bring planned
         improvements to reality.
                                                   5‐1

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
     4. Transportation demand management (TDM) strategies are employed to reduce
         dependence on single‐occupant vehicles for commute travel.
     5. All transportation modes are considered in all phases of design and construction within
         the City to create a circulation network that is safe, efficient, and convenient for all user
         groups.
Through the development and implementation of all these strategies the City’s commitment to
a balanced, efficient circulation system can be achieved.
5.1 CIRCULATION AND LAND USE
The circulation network provides the linkage between different land uses and facilitates
access to home, shopping, jobs, schools and recreation. With an efficient transportation
system, people in San Ramon can enjoy the advantages of living in a smaller community and
have access to neighboring metropolitan areas. Figure 5‐1 shows the circulation network.
While this network is planned to provide sufficient capacity to accommodate the growth
envisioned in the General Plan, the City must plan not only for roadway capacity
improvements, but also for all available transportation demand management (TDM) methods
to manage traffic flow in the City. New roadway construction and street widening projects are
expensive, can have impacts to the environment, and tend to promote single‐occupant auto
travel. Alternatives to widening major roadways are discussed throughout this Element. They
include Transportation Demand Management (TDM) strategies, more efficient operation of
existing roads, Complete Streets, and improvements to the bus, bicycle, and pedestrian
circulation systems. More importantly, this Element, as well as the Land Use and Growth
Management Elements, contain policies to reduce vehicle‐miles‐traveled (VMT) and allows
development to occur only if it meets the City’s infrastructure requirements and acceptable
traffic Level‐of‐Service (LOS) standards.
Traffic Level of Service (LOS is an objective measure of operating conditions at roadway
intersections. The term “Level of Service” refers to the traffic conditions that confront drivers
when they are using the roadway system. San Ramon has adopted policies to ensure that
acceptable levels of traffic service are maintained on City streets as development occurs. In
an urban setting, roadway capacity is dictated by intersection operations. Peak‐period traffic
(or commute hour traffic) is evaluated by comparing projected traffic volumes to intersection
capacities. The ratio of traffic volume to traffic capacity (“volume/capacity” ratios) can be
used to describe the quality of traffic flow through an intersection. Traffic operations are
classified by Levels of Service (LOS) A through F with corresponding volume/capacity ratios,
as shown in Table 5‐1.
                                                 5‐2



                                              Traffic and Circulation
                                          Table 5‐1: Level of Service Standards
                                                                  Volume/Capacity
     Level of Service
           (LOS)                    Ratios (V/C)                                   Description
               A                       < 0.60           Traffic is typically free flowing; very little delay.
               B                     0.61‐0.70          Only slight delays; the majority of vehicles do not stop.
                                                        Acceptable delays; if an intersection is signalized, a few
              C                      0.71‐0.80
                                                        drivers may have to wait through one signal cycle.
                                                        Delays are substantial during short periods, but
              D                      0.81‐0.90
                                                        excessive backups do not occur.
               E                       0.91‐1.0         Delays can exceed one or more signal cycles.
                                                        Excessive delays; back ups from other locations restrict
               F                        > 1.0
                                                        or prevent movement.
  Note:
  As part of the development review process, developers are required to prepare traffic studies. If traffic from a
  proposed project results in unacceptable impacts to the City’s circulation system, the developer is required to include
  mitigation measures which will maintain acceptable levels of service.
  Source: CCTA Technical Procedures Manual.
SENATE BILL 7431
Senate Bill 743 (Steinberg, 2013) made several changes to the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) for projects located in areas served by transit (i.e., transit‐oriented
development or TOD). Those changes direct the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research
to develop a new approach for analyzing the transportation impacts under CEQA. SB 743
also creates a new exemption for certain projects that are consistent with a Specific Plan and
eliminates the need to evaluate aesthetic and parking impacts of a project, in some
circumstances. The exemption applies if a project meets all of the following criteria:
      •    It is a residential, employment center, or mixed use project;
      •    It is located within a transit priority area;
      •    The project is consistent with a specific plan for which an environmental impact report
           was certified; and
      •    It is consistent with an adopted sustainable communities strategy or alternative
           planning strategy.
1
  (Source: California Office of Planning and Research website)
                                                             5‐5

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
The exemption cannot be applied if the project would cause new or worse significant impacts
compared to what was analyzed in the environmental impact report for the specific plan. In
addition to the new exemption for projects that are consistent with specific plans, SB 743
also changes the way that transportation impacts are analyzed under CEQA. Once the CEQA
Guidelines are amended to address the new transportation methodologies, auto delay and
level of service will no longer trigger an impact finding under CEQA. While LOS and delay
based standards are being revised for CEQA analysis, local jurisdictions still have the ability
to utilize LOS standards to assess local goals and objectives for roadway operations and
quality of life measures. Until the new transportation methodologies are adopted by the State,
the impact to locally adopted LOS standards based on Congestion Management Plans will be
unclear. Additionally, depending on the nature of these future methodologies and standards,
local transportation policy revisions may also be required in the future.
GUIDING POLICY
5.1‐G‐1 Maintain acceptable levels of service and ensure that future development and the
           circulation system are in balance.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.1‐I‐1    Strive to maintain traffic LOS C or better as the standard at all intersections with a
           maximum LOS D during a.m. and p.m. peak periods.
           The a.m. peak period is typically defined as the commute time from 7 a.m. to 9
           a.m. and the p.m. peak period is typically the commute time from 4 p.m. to 6 p.m.
           The Growth Management Element further discusses the specific conditions under
           which LOS D will be accepted.
5.1‐I‐2    Require traffic impact studies for all proposed new development projected to
           generate 50 or more net new peak hour vehicle trips or as requested by the City
           Traffic Engineer.
5.1‐I‐3    Identify and implement circulation improvements based on required traffic studies.
5.1‐I‐4    Implement uniform design standards for City arterials, collectors, and local streets.
5.1‐I‐5    Monitor key intersection levels of service (LOS) on an annual basis and document
           the results.
5.1‐I‐6    Implement the following transportation programs: Transportation Demand Management
           Program (TDM) Program, Street Smarts Traffic Safety Program, Residential Traffic
           Calming Program, Safe Routes to School Program, TRAFFIX Program, and the
           Engineering Services Department’s Traffic Engineering component.
           The potential effects of traffic calming measures on emergency response are an
           important consideration in the development of any traffic‐calming program. Traffic
           calming should not significantly hinder emergency response or adversely affect the
           ability of emergency service providers to achieve their respective performance
           standards.
                                                5‐6

                                    Traffic and Circulation
5.1‐I‐7     Implement a School Traffic Calming Program to address access and safety issues
            on streets adjacent to schools in San Ramon.
5.2 REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
Regional transportation planning coordination is a major focus of the City’s transportation
management philosophy. In 1988, Contra Costa County voters approved Measure C, the
Contra Costa County Transportation Improvement and Growth Management Initiative.
Measure C established countywide standards for traffic levels of service and circulation
improvements, as well as a comprehensive growth management program that includes a
requirement for cooperative multi‐jurisdictional transportation planning. In 2004, Contra Costa
County voters approved Measure J, a 25‐year extension of the half‐cent local transportation
sales tax program. The projects and programs contained in the Measure J Transportation
Sales Tax Expenditure Plan are for the continued maintenance, improvement and operation
of local streets, roads, and highways and the construction, improvement and operation of
public transit systems. Consistent with past practices, the Measure J Expenditure Plan
includes a Growth Management Program (GMP) component. The goal of the GMP is to
preserve and enhance the quality of life and promote a healthy, strong economy to benefit
the people and areas of Contra Costa through a cooperative, multi‐jurisdictional process for
managing growth, while maintaining local authority over land use decisions. The following is a
summary of key local Measure J programs and projects.
MEASURE J TRAFFIC CONGESTION RELIEF AGENCY—TRAFFIX
One category of Measure J provides funding for a program entitled, “Safe Transportation for
Children” and includes the inauguration of a San Ramon Valley School Traffic Congestion
Relief Program or other projects in the San Ramon Valley that reduce school‐related
congestion. The TRAFFIX program will target the areas in the San Ramon Valley with the
highest level of congestion. The TRAFFIX program is intended to reduce traffic congestion
caused by parents driving their children to and from school through some of the San Ramon
Valley’s most congested intersections. To accomplish this, transit service is available to
transport students, who live near or must travel through these most congested intersections in
the San Ramon Valley, thus providing an alternative to individual car travel and improving
traffic flow on local roadways.
MEASURE J CARPOOL LANE GAP CLOSURE/I‐680 TRANSIT ENHANCEMENTS
The project will extend bus/carpool lanes on southbound I‐680 from North Main Street to
Livorna Road and northbound from North Main Street to north of SR 242.
NORRIS CANYON HIGH OCCUPANCY VEHICLE (HOV) ON‐ AND OFF‐RAMPS
Among the other projects included in the Measure J Transportation Expenditure Plan is the
construction of High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) On‐ and Off‐ramps at Norris Canyon. The
project will improve the regional transit network and enhance access for express bus service,
carpools, and vanpools. It will also provide much needed linkage to existing HOV lanes and
improve safety by reducing the amount of weaving by high occupancy vehicles entering or
exiting the freeway system.
                                                5‐7

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
San Ramon has actively participated in the development of sub‐regional multi‐jurisdictional
planning efforts including the Southwest Area Transportation Committee (SWAT) and the Tri‐
Valley Transportation Council (TVTC) and the Tri‐Valley Community Resources Group. Many
of the policies in Section 5.2 are also referenced in the Growth Management Element, which
discusses Measure J requirements in detail.
GUIDING POLICY
5.2‐G‐1 Actively participate in local and regional transportation planning.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.2‐I‐1    Continue to develop and implement Action Plans for Routes of Regional
           Significance, in cooperation with the Southwest Area Transportation Committee
           (SWAT), the Contra Costa Transportation Authority (CCTA), and the Tri‐Valley
           Transportation Council (TVTC).
5.2‐I‐2 Continue to implement the Tri‐Valley Transportation Action Plan through
           participation in the Tri‐Valley Transportation Council (TVTC).
5.2‐I‐3    Participate in programs to mitigate regional traffic congestion including the following
           project when necessary based on monitoring and program goals:
           •    Alcosta Boulevard/I‐680 Northbound Off‐Ramp: Widen the off‐ramp to provide
                one left turn lane, one shared left/through/right turn lane, and one right turn lane.
5.2‐I‐4    Support goals and policies of the Contra Costa Congestion Management Plan (CMP).
5.2‐I‐5 Emphasize regional transportation demand management and trip reduction
           strategies as alternatives to improvements to existing facilities and the construction
           of new facilities.
5.2‐I‐6    Identify the impacts of land use decisions on regional as well as local transportation
           facilities.
5.2‐I‐7 Support regional air quality and greenhouse gas reduction objectives through
           effective management of the City’s transportation system.
5.3 COMPLETE STREETS
“Complete Streets” are defined as streets that serve everyone—pedestrians, bicyclists, transit
riders, and drivers—and they take into account the needs of people with disabilities, older
people, and children. “Complete Streets” design concepts can improve safety though the
consideration of all user groups, improve people’s health by promoting an active lifestyle and
encouraging travelers to walk or ride bicycles instead of driving, and allow for all modes of
travel to be used to reach key destinations in a community and region safely and efficiently.
By using “Complete Streets” design concepts, the City can construct and continue to improve
a network of streets that are accessible to all local transportation modes and all users groups
while maintaining roadway capacity and level of service required by the General Plan.
                                                   5‐8

                                     Traffic and Circulation
Implementation of Complete Streets concepts can result in improved mobility for people who
cannot or do not drive and can result in less reliance on automobiles. A reduction in
automobile use would result in a reduction in local VMT along with a corresponding reduction
in transportation‐related greenhouse gas emissions created by the burning of fossil fuels.
GUIDING POLICY
5.3‐G‐1 Encourage transportation facilities that consider the users’ safety and allow for all
           modes of travel based on local conditions and needs of the community.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.3‐I‐1    Develop Complete Streets Guidelines that establish local review and assessment
           criteria and encourage development of a multimodal transportation network to meet
           community needs.
           The Complete Streets Guidelines shall include a range of design tools and
           considerations intended to assist in the design of new transportation improvements
           and the redesign of the existing transportation network. The Complete Street
           Guidelines are not intended to be “one size fits all” standards, but rather provide a
           framework for assessing the multimodal needs of the community in the context of a
           specific transportation or roadway project. The Complete Streets Guidelines may be
           a stand‐alone guidance document or incorporated into existing streetscape
           guidelines or roadway development standards.
5.3‐I‐2 Implement Complete Streets principles, as appropriate, for new roadway design and
           significant roadway rehabilitation.
           Complete Streets principles are identified in the Complete Streets Guidelines.
           Specific application of the Complete Streets principles is to be based on the specific
           needs and context of the project being considered.
5.3‐I‐3 Coordinate the implementation of Complete Streets concepts, as appropriate, with
           ongoing transportation and congestion relief programs such as the TDM Program,
           Street Smarts Traffic Safety Program, Residential Traffic Calming Program, Safe
           Routes to School Program and TRAFFIX Program.
5.3‐I‐4 Encourage Complete Streets concepts as a vehicle‐miles‐traveled and greenhouse
           gas reduction strategy.
5.4 ARTERIAL ROADWAYS
The City’s circulation system is based on a functional classification of arterial, collector, and
local streets. The system of classifying roadways is intended to provide adequate through‐
travel capacity on major routes while limiting through‐traffic in residential neighborhoods. The
function of arterial roadways is to accommodate higher traffic volumes and intercity
circulation, while balancing the needs of all users through Complete Streets concepts. Arterial
roadways are generally characterized as having two to four lanes of traffic in each direction
separated by a center median (see Figure 5‐2). These streets are used to travel to activity
                                               5‐9

                                    San Ramon General Plan 2035
centers, freeways, and other arterials. These streets also serve adjacent residential and
commercial land uses via arterial and collector connections.
General Plan 2035, Implementing Policy 5.4‐I‐3 requires the City to construct capacity and
roadway improvements necessary to serve growth generated by potential General Plan buildout.
The City continues to implement the City’s Five‐Year Capital Improvement Program, which
includes the status and details for necessary capacity improvements to arterial roadways.
                                          Figure 5‐2: Typical Major Arterial
* This cross section represents a typical layout of a major arterial, but the exact dimensions may be modified at the
  discretion of the City Engineer.
GUIDING POLICY
5.4‐G‐1 Design arterial roadways to efficiently move inter‐city traffic, thereby minimizing
             through‐traffic in residential areas of the City.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.4‐I‐1      Ensure that adequate north‐south and east‐west arterial capacity is provided to
             accommodate future travel demand and, where appropriate, implement Complete
             Streets concepts pursuant to Policy 5.3‐G‐1.
5.4‐I‐2 Implement the City’s five‐year Capital Improvement Plan.
5.4‐I‐3 Construct capacity and roadway improvements necessary to serve growth
             generated by development under the General Plan.
             •     Crow Canyon Road: Widen to six lanes from Alcosta Boulevard to Danville Town
                   limits. Preserve right‐of‐way for widening to four lanes from Bollinger Canyon
                   Road to Alameda County line.
             •     Dougherty Road: Support construction to six lanes from Crow Canyon Road to
                   Alameda County line. (Completed 2009)
                                                           5‐10

                                    Traffic and Circulation
           •   Bollinger Canyon Road: Widen to eight lanes from I‐680 to Alcosta Boulevard.
               (Northbound Off‐ramp improvements completed in 2012)
           •   Camino Tassajara: Support widening to four lanes from Danville Town limits to
               Windemere Parkway. Support widening to six lanes from Windemere Parkway to
               Alameda County line.
           •   While outside the City’s Jurisdiction, future Camino Tassajara improvements are
               specified in the Dougherty Valley Settlement Agreement (May 11, 1994) and Tri‐
               Valley Transportation Plan and Action Plan.
           •   Alcosta Boulevard: Install signals and associated lane improvements at the Old
               Ranch Road and Vera Cruz Drive intersections.
5.4‐I‐4 Maximize the carrying capacity of arterial roadways by controlling the number of
           intersections and minimize residential and commercial driveway access, on‐street
           parking and requiring sufficient off‐street parking to meet the needs of each
           proposed project.
           The intent of this policy is to minimize conflicts from intersections, driveways, and
           parking along arterial roadways.
5.4‐I‐5    Require traffic impact mitigation fees on new residential and commercial
           development to ensure that transportation improvements are constructed before the
           increased traffic causes conditions to deteriorate.
5.4‐I‐6    Make optimal use of federal, state, and other funding sources to complete circulation
           system improvements.
5.4‐I‐7 Minimize congestion on arterials by fully implementing the policies in the Complete
           Streets, Transportation Demand Management and Public Transit sections of the
           Circulation Element.
5.4‐I‐8 Encourage regional freight movement on freeways and other appropriate routes;
           evaluate and implement vehicle weight limits as appropriate on arterial, collector
           and local roadways to mitigate truck traffic impacts in the community.
5.4‐I‐9    Specify routes for transporting hazardous materials that minimize the risk to people
           and property.
           These routes should not pass through residential areas or other sensitive areas.
           Specific time periods for transport should be established to reduce the impact and
           accident risk during peak travel periods.
5.5 COLLECTOR AND LOCAL ROADWAYS
Collector roadways are used to travel within and between neighborhoods. Collector roadways
are characterized as having 1‐2 lanes of traffic in each direction and typically do not have a
center median (See Figure 5‐3). These roadways collect traffic from local streets and route it
to arterials. Local roadways are used to travel within neighborhoods and are designed to
discourage through‐traffic in residential areas. The City sets traffic volume goals to limit traffic
                                                5‐11

                                     San Ramon General Plan 2035
volumes to acceptable levels on these roadways, as they often have the capacity to carry far
more traffic than is tolerable to people living along them.
General Plan 2035, Implementing Policy 5.5‐I‐4 requires the City to construct the capacity
improvements necessary to serve growth generated by potential General Plan buildout. The City
continues to implement the City’s Five‐Year Capital Improvement Program, which includes the
status and details for necessary capacity improvements to collector and local roadways.
                                      Figure 5‐3: Typical Collector Roadway
** This cross section represents a typical layout of a local collector roadway, but the exact dimensions may be
   modified at the discretion of the City Engineer.
GUIDING POLICY
5.5‐G‐1 Design collector and local roadways to improve circulation and to connect
            residential and commercial areas of the City while incorporating Complete Streets
            concepts pursuant to Policy 5.3‐I‐2 where appropriate.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.5‐I‐1     Implement residential traffic calming measures, as warranted, and police enforcement
            to mitigate speeding and other traffic impacts in residential areas of the City.
            Proposed residential traffic calming measures are reviewed by the Transportation
            Advisory Committee (TAC) for specific recommendations. The TAC acts as a
                                                           5‐12

                                 Traffic and Circulation
        clearinghouse for transportation issues affecting the City of San Ramon and refers
        (with recommendations) those items requiring action before the City Council.
5.5‐I‐2 Continue to implement traffic‐control measures and design features that support
        attainment of the City’s goal of less than 3,000 vehicles per day on collector
        roadways.
        The City’s goal is to limit traffic volumes on collector roadways to less than 3,000
        vehicles per day. Because of the dual function that collectors serve, both property
        access and mobility, the goal may not be achievable in some cases. The City seeks
        to balance the needs for preservation of residential character and for adequate
        mobility, for each collector roadway.
5.5‐I‐3 Continue to implement traffic‐control measures, residential traffic calming, and
        design features that support attainment of the City’s goal of less than 500 vehicles
        per day on local roadways.
        The City’s goal is to limit traffic volumes on local roadways to less than 500
        vehicles per day. Because many local streets connect to several other streets
        serving a variety of uses, the goal may not be achievable in some cases. The City
        seeks to minimize the impact of higher volumes on local streets, and minimize
        inappropriate travel on these streets, through implementation of the Residential
        Traffic Calming program and appropriate roadway design features in new
        development areas.
5.5‐I‐4 Construct improvements to collector roadways as follows:
        •   Twin Creeks Drive: Extend and construct as a four‐lane street from Crow Canyon
            Road to Old Crow Canyon Road.
        •   Alcosta Boulevard Extension: Extend Alcosta Boulevard north from Crow Canyon
            Road to Fostoria Parkway as a four‐lane street. Widen and construct Fostoria
            Parkway as a four‐lane roadway from Camino Ramon east to Alcosta Boulevard
            extension. (These streets are partially within the Danville Town limits, and these
            projects would require the support and participation of the Town of Danville.)
        •   Camino Ramon: Install a signal and associated lane improvements at the Fostoria
            Way intersection. Reconfigure the westbound and eastbound approaches at the
            Bishop Drive intersection and alter signal phasing.
        The City’s Five‐Year Capital Improvement Program includes the status and details
        for necessary capacity improvements to collector and local roadways.
5.5‐I‐5 Mitigate appropriately traffic that impacts collector streets as a result of new
        residential and commercial development.
                                              5‐13

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
5.5‐I‐6    Maintain controlled or permit‐only parking restrictions in residential areas adjacent
           to California High School. Permit‐only parking restrictions shall not apply to other
           residential areas or areas adjacent to public parks within the City of San Ramon
           except as specifically approved by the City Council based on unique circumstances
           and the Municipal Code criteria.
5.6 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC TRANSIT
The term “Transportation Demand Management” (TDM) refers to measures designed to
reduce automobile traffic in order to improve air quality and reduce traffic congestion. These
measures include public transit, telecommuting, compressed work weeks, carpooling,
vanpooling, walking, bicycling, and incentives to increase the use of these alternatives. TDM
has become increasingly important in maintaining acceptable traffic levels of service in the
Tri‐Valley and elsewhere in the Bay Area.
San Ramon has long recognized the need to reduce the use of single‐occupant vehicles to
achieve improved traffic levels of service and regional air quality. Since 1989, the City’s TDM
program has demonstrated the ability to maintain one of the lowest drive‐alone rates of all
Contra Costa County jurisdictions and has a high number of vanpools with a San Ramon
destination. The City’s TDM Program receives guidance from the Transportation Demand
Management Advisory Committee consisting of local business representatives and provides a
unique opportunity for the public and private sectors to work together toward the common
goal of reducing traffic congestion and improving air quality.
TDM program participation has been further promoted through the adoption of Senate Bill
1339 (Yee), signed by the Governor in fall 2012. SB 1339 authorizes the Bay Area Air
Quality Management District (Air District) and the Metropolitan Transportation Commission
(MTC) to jointly adopt a regional commute benefit program. The Bay Area Commuter
Benefits Program (Program) took effect on March 26, 2014. The Program is based on
Regulation 14, Rule 1, which was adopted by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District
(Air District) and the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) in response to Senate
Bill 1339 (codified in California Government Code section 65081).
The Program requires Bay Area employers (public, private, or nonprofit) in the San Francisco
Bay Area with 50 or more full‐time employees (i.e., employees who work 30 or more hours per
week) at all Bay Area Worksites combined to provide commuter benefits to their employees by
September 30, 2014. Employers subject to the Program are required to choose one of four
commuter benefit options and make the chosen commuter benefit available to their employees.
PUBLIC TRANSIT
San Ramon’s Transit Plan, adopted in 2005, articulates a vision for a comprehensive public
transit system with frequent, efficient, cost effective and convenient transit service for
residents, seniors, youth, and employees who live and work in San Ramon. Bus service in
San Ramon is currently provided by the Central Contra Costa Transit Authority (CCCTA).
The City has a transit facility located adjacent to the Bishop Ranch Business Park and future
plans call for the construction of an additional transit facility as part of the City Center Mixed
Use Project. The North Camino Ramon Specific Plan contemplates a new or relocated transit
center to geographically balance transit facility needs within the core of the City. These transit
                                                5‐14

                                     Traffic and Circulation
facilities provide regional connectivity to major transit facilities including BART as well as
adjoining cities in the Tri‐Valley area.
In addition, public transit service to the San Ramon Dougherty Valley was launched on
December 18, 2006. County Connection, Contra Costa County and the Dougherty Valley
developers entered into an agreement that will provide Dougherty Valley with transit service
for five years. Funding for the five‐year service plan is through a fee imposed on the
Dougherty Valley developers. Due to the 2008 recession, the construction of housing was
delayed. As a result, the collection of transit fees stalled. However, in 2011, the agreement
between County Connection and Contra Costa County was amended to extend beyond the
five‐year period. At that time, County Connection agreed to continue funding the Dougherty
Valley service Route 35. In return, Contra Costa County will refund County Connection the
transit fees upon collection and build‐out of Dougherty Valley.
Route 35 has been incorporated into the County Connection fixed route service. Route 35
operates on half hour frequencies during the peak house (from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 am and
then from 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.). During off peak hours, the service frequency is hourly.
Today, the route meets the County Connection performance standards for passenger per
revenue hour and will continue to operate so long as it meets performance standards, and
after the collection of the Dougherty Valley Transit Fee.
To respond to a petition submitted by residents of the Windemere Parkway corridor, County
Connection added a “loop” along Windemere Parkway to provide service along Windemere
corridor to East Branch Parkway. The service was added in 2009 and is in place today.
The City has worked closely with the CCCTA to fill the regional and local need for public transit
and will continue to advocate the need to maintain basic level of service for the City. Future
projections indicate the potential for serious traffic congestion in the I‐680 corridor in the future.
These projections are based on anticipated growth in the communities along the I‐680 corridor
and in neighboring regions such as the Silicon and Central Valleys. Smart Growth strategies,
more compact growth pattern anticipated by the ABAG FOCUS Program, and the Sustainable
Communities Strategies element of Senate Bill 375(Steinberg) are anticipated to reduce VMT.
However, regional public transit serving the I‐680 corridor will be necessary to maintain service
levels and would preclude the need for further freeway widening.
The Measure J Transportation Sales Tax Expenditure Plan includes a Capital Improvement
Project that will facilitate the usage of public transit, carpools and vanpools along the I‐680
corridor. The project “Interstate 680 carpool Lane Gap Closure/Transit Corridor Improvements”
will extend the existing bus/carpool lanes on southbound I‐680 from North Main Street to
Livorna Road and northbound from North Main Street to north of SR 242. It will also construct
bus/carpool on‐ and off‐ramps at Norris Canyon Road; and implement transit corridor
improvements that address congestion and/or increase population along the I‐680 corridor.
                                                 5‐15

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
GUIDING POLICY
5.6‐G‐1 Utilize Transportation Demand Management (TDM) strategies as an integral
        component of the City’s transportation program to reduce total vehicle trips on San
        Ramon roadways and reduce the corresponding vehicle emissions that promote
        regional air quality improvements.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.6‐I‐1 Cooperate with public agencies and other jurisdictions to promote local and regional
        public transit service in San Ramon as part of a multimodal and Complete Streets
        strategy.
5.6‐I‐2 Encourage and assist major employers and commercial complexes to reduce the
        number of single‐occupant vehicles by participating in the City’s TDM programs.
        The City’s TDM Program receives guidance from the Transportation Demand
        Management Advisory Committee consisting of local business representatives. TDM
        Advisory Committee makes recommendations to City staff, and the City Council on the
        delivery of TDM Policies, programs, activities and services. The Committee serves as
        liaison between the City and business community to develop and implement commute
        alternative programs for all employers and business complexes in the City.
5.6‐I‐3 Encourage additional local bus or other public transportation service providers to
        and from regional transit lines. Bus service or other public transportation services
        should be included under the Initial Level of Development as part of the Dougherty
        Valley area. The City shall consistently strive to improve the transit service to and
        from San Ramon including the annexed areas of Dougherty Valley.
5.6‐I‐4 Preserve options for future public transit and alternative transportation uses when
        designing improvements for roadways such as Bollinger Canyon Road Corridor
        within Dougherty Valley.
        Future right of way improvements shall be evaluated and include Complete Streets
        concepts pursuant to Policy 5.3‐I‐2.
5.6‐I‐5 Support future transit uses within the I‐680 corridor right‐of‐way.
5.6‐I‐6 Work with other jurisdictions and agencies to coordinate the City’s TDM programs with
        regional plans that are aimed at reducing traffic congestion and improving air quality.
5.6‐I‐7 Encourage new development to include a mix of uses and Complete Streets
        concepts that will allow people to walk and bike between destinations and reduce
        the amount of automobile vehicle‐miles‐traveled.
5.6‐I‐8 Support alternative public transportation programs and obtain funding for new TDM
        projects or programs.
                                             5‐16

                                  Traffic and Circulation
5.6‐I‐9 Encourage employers and commercial complexes to emphasize public transit
         services or private alternatives to the single‐occupant vehicle.
5.6‐I‐10 Work with transit providers to situate transit stops at convenient and safe locations.
5.6‐I‐11 Promote increased transit ridership through the use of Transportation Management
         Associations and other employer‐based transit programs, equip buses with bike
         racks, and make transit information readily accessible.
5.6‐I‐12 Coordinate with Caltrans and transit providers to identify and implement park and
         ride lots with convenient access to public transit.
5.6‐I‐13 Work with the San Ramon Valley Unified School District and other appropriate
         agencies and organizations to reduce vehicle trips through the provision of transit
         programs and promoting carpooling, bicycling, and walking.
5.6‐I‐14 Consider the construction of public parking facilities in the City Center, North
         Camino Ramon Specific Plan, or other commercial areas to serve projected parking
         demand, while carefully balancing the need for adequate parking against the desire
         to minimize traffic growth and create a pedestrian/bicycle friendly environment
         using Complete Streets design concepts.
5.6‐I‐15 Work with local transit providers to increase and expand weekend transit service.
5.6‐I‐16 Explore opportunities for the location or relocation of a transit center to North
         Camino Ramon Specific Plan Area to better geographically balance the public
         transit needs for the City.
GUIDING POLICY
5.6‐G‐2 Encourage trip reduction measures in an effort to reduce vehicle‐miles‐traveled,
         improve air quality, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.6‐I‐17 Encourage “Park Once” concepts as a vehicle‐miles‐traveled reduction strategy for
         mixed‐use, commercial, and public facilities through the integration of common design
         features and shared parking concepts including but not limited to Parking Benefit
         Districts.
         “Park Once” concepts relate primarily to mixed‐use developments and encourage
         centralized parking that allows users to park their cars in close proximity to several
         destinations. Vehicle‐miles‐traveled, trips on the roadway system, and air pollution are
         reduced by eliminating the need for several short trips between otherwise local
         destinations.
5.6‐I‐18 Encourage shared parking facilities and parking reductions for compatible land uses
         to minimize excessive parking to reduce inefficient use of land, unnecessary
                                               5‐17

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
            pavement and stormwater runoff, and encourage alternative transportation and
            reductions in vehicle‐miles‐traveled.
            Proposals for shared parking should be based on a parking study demonstrating the
            compatibility of land uses, including peak use analysis and recommended remedies
            to address future parking concerns should they arise.
5.6‐I‐19 Encourage infill and Transit‐Oriented Development (TOD) concepts as a vehicle‐
            miles‐traveled reduction strategy for existing and proposed development.
5.7 BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN ROUTES
Bicycling and walking are key elements of San Ramon’s circulation system and important
components of the “Complete Streets” concept. The City has an extensive network of
bikeways, sidewalks, and trails that enhance neighborhood accessibility and help to reduce
reliance on the automobiles, which meets key goals of the Complete Streets policies. The
City’s local bicycle and pedestrian network is a key component of the Countywide Bicycle and
Pedestrian Plan. In June 2009, the CCTA released a draft revision to the 2003 Countywide
Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan for public comment. The Draft Plan builds on local plans and,
once adopted, will create a countywide policy document for the management of bicycle and
pedestrian circulation. Figure 5‐4 identifies the location of the City’s existing and planned
bicycle routes, and Table 5‐2 categorizes these routes by “class.” Bicycle routes are grouped
into three different categories, all of which have standards for width, signage, and pavement
marking and are consistent with the County Bicycle Master Plan:
     •   Class I bikeway, also referred to as a bike path, is a paved, separate right‐of‐way that
         is physically separated from any street.
     •   Class II bikeway, or bike lane, is a one‐way, striped, and signed lane on a street.
     •   Class III bike routes share the road with vehicle traffic or pedestrians and are marked
         only by signs.
With the exception of the Iron Horse Trail, bike paths from Bent Creek to Old Ranch Park, the
“Cross‐Valley” trail in the PG&E right‐of‐way, and portions of Dougherty Valley multi‐use
system (Class I bike paths), all bikeways in San Ramon are Class II or III located on City
rights‐of‐way. The City, as part of its ongoing efforts to annex Dougherty Valley, has
accepted over 9 miles of new roadways throughout the Dougherty Valley, most of which
include Class II bikeways. It is the City’s goal to provide and maintain a comprehensive
bicycle and pedestrian system that connects all parts of the City.
In 2007, the City of San Ramon, in coordination with Contra Costa County, CCTA, Town of
Danville and East Bay Regional Park District, developed the San Ramon Valley Iron Horse
Trail Bicycle Pedestrian Corridor Concept Plan. The Plan studied the feasibility of constructing
bicycle/pedestrian overcrossing(s) along the Iron Horse Trail as an alternative to the at‐
grade crossings at Sycamore Valley, Crow Canyon and Bollinger Canyon Roads.
                                                 5‐18



                                      Traffic and Circulation
The primary goals in the implementation of these overcrossings would be to:
    •   Improve pedestrian and bicyclist safety
    •   Improve pedestrian and bicyclist access and circulation
    •   Facilitate alternative means of transportation
    •   Increase recreational opportunities
    •   Facilitate healthier lifestyles
    •   Cultivate appreciation of the natural world
The Corridor Concept Plan established the basic scope and feasibility and is the first step in
the process of evaluating and implementing pedestrian overcrossings at the proposed San
Ramon locations. To move these projects forward it will be necessary to secure additional
funding for development of improvement plans and ultimately construction of the projects.
GUIDING POLICY
5.7‐G‐1 Encourage bicycling and walking as alternatives to driving, consistent with Complete
          Streets concepts.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
5.7‐I‐1   Establish a network of on‐ and off‐street bicycle routes to encourage their use for
          commute, recreational, and other trips. Improve and expand bicycle routes for
          commuters in San Ramon.
5.7‐I‐2 Develop bicycle routes that provide access to regional employment centers,
          shopping centers, public facilities, transit centers, schools, and parks.
5.7‐I‐3 Continue to emphasize the Iron Horse Trail as a major north‐south route for non‐
          motorized transportation by improving connectivity and enhancing amenities for
          bicycles and pedestrians.
          The Iron Horse Trail provides access to Central Park, the Bishop Ranch Business
          Park, Montevideo Elementary School, Walt Disney Elementary School California
          High School, and residential neighborhoods. The trail will be linked to the City
          Center project and is anticipated to serve as an important corridor within the North
          Camino Ramon Specific Plan. The Iron Horse Trail Bicycle and Pedestrian Corridor
          Concept Plan includes overcrossing proposals to improve movement along the Iron
          Horse Trail and minimize delays and improve safety at major arterials.
          In 2014, the Iron Horse Trail was designated a Route of Regional Significance by
          Tri‐Valley Transportation Council (TVTC). While not typical that a multimodal trail
          would be designated as a RRS, the IHT meets the criteria as a transportation facility
          that is considered to be important from a regional perspective, providing regional
          mobility and connecting multiple jurisdictions. Additionally, the status as a RRS
          allows for additional grant opportunities for corridor improvements and emphasizes
          local multimodal resources and objectives in the text of TVTC Action Plan.
                                                 5‐21

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
5.7‐I‐4 Encourage future development along the trail corridor to provide connection points
         and amenities as appropriate.
         Amenities may include, but are not limited to, benches, landscaping, and signage.
5.7‐I‐5  Require bicycle parking, storage and other support facilities as part of any new
         office and retail developments and public facilities.
         Facilities may include, but are not limited to, racks, lockers, and changing facilities.
5.7‐I‐6  Continue to promote and implement through the development review process,
         continuous circulation facilities within Bishop Ranch Business Park, commercial
         districts, and residential neighborhoods to enhance connectivity and promote pedestrian
         and bicycle modes of transportation consistent with Complete Streets concepts.
5.7‐I‐7  Continue to implement accessibility standards for physically disabled persons within
         the public rights‐of‐way.
5.7‐I‐8 Adopt a local or regional Bicycle Master Plan that considers sources of statewide
         funding for bicycle programming.
         The Contra Costa Countywide Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan can be adopted locally and
         includes San Ramon bicycle and pedestrian resources. The City can rely on that Plan
         to pursue grant funding for bicycle, pedestrian, and transportation improvements.
5.7‐I‐9 Implement the San Ramon Valley Iron Horse Trail Corridor Concept Plan by refining
         the design alternatives and pursue funding through grants, public/private
         partnerships and other funding sources as appropriate.
         The Concept Plan contemplates improvements such as grade separations at
         Bollinger Canyon Road and Crow Canyon Road.
5.7‐I‐10 Require roadway improvement projects to minimize both temporary and permanent
         reductions in bicycle and pedestrian mobility and/or accessibility.
5.7‐I‐11 Work with neighboring jurisdictions to ensure that continuity in bicycle and
         pedestrian networks is provided at jurisdictional boundaries.
         This policy is intended to prevent the creation of gaps in bicycle and pedestrian
         networks that would be inconsistent with the Complete Streets concept.
5.7‐I‐12 Work with Caltrans and other appropriate agencies to improve bicycle and
         pedestrian mobility at freeway crossings.
5.7‐I‐13 Promote educational efforts about traffic laws and safe practices for all modes of
         transportation.
         This policy is intended to increase awareness of the California Vehicle Code
         requirements (e.g., yielding to pedestrians at crosswalks), potentially preventing
         conflicts between motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
                                               5‐22

                                        Traffic and Circulation
                                Table 5‐2: Bicycle Routes by Classification
                            Location                                Existing  Proposed
Albion Road (between Watermill Road and Windemere                    Class II Class III
Parkway)
Alcosta Boulevard (between Crow Canyon Road and                      Class II
Veracruz Drive)
Alcosta Boulevard (between Veracruz Drive and San Ramon             Class III
Valley Boulevard)
Bishop Drive (between Norris Canyon Road and Sunset                  Class II
Drive)
Bollinger Canyon Road (between Ascension Drive and Crow             Class III
Canyon Road)
Bollinger Canyon Road (between San Ramon Valley                      Class II
Boulevard and Ascension Drive)
Bollinger Canyon Road (between Crow Canyon Road and                  Class II
Deerwood Drive)
Bollinger Canyon Road (north of Deerwood Drive)                               Class II
Bollinger Canyon Road (between Canyon Lakes Drive and              Class III
San Ramon Valley Boulevard)
Bollinger Canyon Road (east of Canyon Lakes Drive)                   Class II
Broadmoor Drive (between Montevideo Drive and Alcosta               Class III
Boulevard)
Cross Valley Trail (between Tareyton Avenue and Alcosta                        Class I
Boulevard)
Cross Valley Trail (between Tareyton Avenue and Del Mar              Class I
Drive)
Cross Valley Trail (east of Del Mar Drive)                                     Class I
Crow Canyon Road (east of Alcosta Boulevard)                         Class II
Davona Drive                                                        Class III
Deerwood Road (between San Ramon Valley Boulevard and
                                                                     Class II
Deerwood Drive)
Deerwood Drive                                                                Class III
Dougherty Road (between Crow Canyon Road and Bollinger
                                                                     Class II
Canyon Road)
                                                   5‐23

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
                          Table 5‐2 (cont.): Bicycle Routes by Classification
                         Location                                 Existing    Proposed
Dougherty Road (between Bollinger Canyon Road north and                        Class II
south crossing)
Dougherty Road (south of Bollinger Canyon Road)                   Class II
East Branch Parkway (between Bollinger Canyon Road and            Class II
Windemere Parkway)
Faria Preserve Parkway (between Bollinger Canyon Road                          Class II
and San Ramon Valley Boulevard)
Fostoria Parkway (San Ramon Valley Boulevard to Crow              Class II
Canyon Place)
Fostoria Parkway (Crow Canyon Place to Iron Horse Trail)                      Class III
Harcourt Way (between Albion Way and Windemere
                                                                  Class III
Parkway)
Harcourt Way (between Windemere Parkway and Watermill
                                                                  Class II
Road)
Kimball Avenue                                                    Class III
Monarch Road (between Dougherty Road and Ivy Leaf
                                                                  Class II
Springs Road)
Montevideo Drive                                                  Class III
Norris Canyon Road (east of San Ramon Valley Boulevard)           Class II
Norris Canyon Road (between San Ramon Valley                      Class III
Boulevard and Bollinger Canyon Road)
Norris Canyon Road (between Bollinger Canyon Road and             Class II
western City limits)
Pine Valley Road                                                  Class III
Pine Valley Road (between Alcosta Boulevard and San               Class III
Ramon Valley Boulevard)
Pine Valley Road (between San Ramon Valley Boulevard              Class II
and Westside Drive)
San Ramon Valley Boulevard                                        Class II
Stagecoach Road                                                   Class II
Stoneleaf Road (between Bollinger Canyon Road and Ivy
                                                                  Class II
Leaf Springs Road)
                                                  5‐24

                                  Traffic and Circulation
                       Table 5‐2 (cont.): Bicycle Routes by Classification
                      Location                                 Existing    Proposed
Sunset Drive                                                   Class III
Village Parkway                                                Class II
Wedgewood Road (between Monarch Road and Stoneleaf
Road)                                                          Class II
Westside Drive                                                 Class II
Windemere Parkway (between Bollinger Canyon Road and
Camino Tassajara)                                              Class II
                                               5‐25


                                                 6
                       Parks and Recreation
San Ramon is committed to creating and maintaining a park system that meets the
recreational needs of its residents and contributes to the City’s positive image. The presence
of well‐designed parks and community facilities is essential to the health and well‐being of a
community. Parks and community facilities in San Ramon have improved and are striving to
achieve the ideal envisioned by the City and its residents.
6.1 PARKS AND COMMUNITY SERVICES MASTER PLAN
The primary guiding tool of parks and community facilities is the Parks and Community
Services Master Plan developed by the Parks and Community Service Commission. It is a
blueprint that guides park and community service development through 2017 and, in
conjunction with the General Plan, acts as a guidance tool to the City Council, the Planning
Commission, the Parks and Community Service Commission, and the public.
The City’s current standard for public parkland is 6.5 acres per 1,000 residents at General Plan
buildout. Of the total 6.5 acres per 1,000 residents, at General Plan buildout, a goal of 4.5
acres per 1,000 residents is for, neighborhood and school parks and 2.0 acres per 1,000
residents is for community parks and specialized recreation areas. This public parkland standard
is achievable under the General Plan 2035 if the City is successful in securing the proposed
public parkland.
Since incorporation, the City has successfully pursued an ambitious program of park
development. Neighborhood parks at school sites, expansions of San Ramon Central Park,
parks established in new subdivisions, and preservation of significant creek corridors have been
included in this program. Providing for parks and recreation services in San Ramon falls within
the jurisdiction of the City, as well as several local, regional, and state agencies, private
businesses, local homeowners’ associations, and numerous special interest organizations.
6.2 PARK CLASSIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS
The City provides its residents with several types of parks and facilities. Parks are defined as
parkland used for public recreational purposes. Parks in San Ramon are classified below.
    •   Neighborhood Park. A park or playground at least two acres in size, developed
        primarily to serve the recreational needs of citizens living within a half mile radius of
        the park. The City’s goal, at General Plan buildout, is to maintain 4.5 acres of,
        Neighborhood Parks, and School Parks per 1,000 residents.
    •   School Park. A neighborhood park developed, improved, and maintained on school
        grounds by the City. School parks are utilized jointly by students and by residents
        primarily within a half‐mile radius of the surrounding neighborhoods. The City’s goal at
                                                 6‐1

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
         General Plan buildout is to maintain 4.5 acres of, Neighborhood Parks, and School
         Parks per 1,000 residents.
    •    Community Park. A larger park or facility developed to meet the park and recreational
         needs of those living or working within a three‐mile radius of the park. Community parks
         vary from 10 to 60 acres. The City’s goal, at General Plan buildout, is to maintain 2.0
         acres of Community Parks and Specialized Recreation Areas per 1,000 residents.
    •    Regional Park. A park having a wide range of improvements not usually found in
         neighborhood and community parks and designed to meet the recreational needs of the
         entire regional population. A regional park must be over 200 acres in size, including
         both land and water bodies and should be within 30‐minute driving time from the
         residents it serves. Recreational facilities, confined to a Recreation Staging Area, must
         not occupy more than 30 percent of the park’s area, leaving 70 percent of the park’s
         area to remain in its natural state. Recreational facilities might include a golf course, a
         zoo, a nature area, and/or hiking or equestrian trails. Some of these facilities may be
         under lease to community groups.
    •    Specialized Recreation Area. A recreation area or facility devoted to a very specific
         activity or use such as Crow Canyon Gardens, Sports Park, Del Mar Dog Park, or
         Forest Home Farms. The City’s goal, at General Plan buildout, is to maintain 2.0
         acres of Community Parks and Specialized Recreation Areas per 1,000 residents.
    •    Public Spaces. A publicly owned recreation space, area, or facility, where appropriate
         in mixed‐use or multi‐family developments, developed to enhance the recreation or
         leisure interactive experience of residents or visitors for passive or active use. Public
         Spaces might include an interactive water element, public art, gardens, trails and
         paths, plazas, labyrinths, picnic areas, tot‐parks, pocket parks, basketball, bocce, or
         tennis courts, and it includes a balance of hardscape and landscaped areas. The City
         may allow for partial or full parkland dedication credit for these types of public spaces.
6.3 OTHER RECREATION AREAS AND FACILITIES
A variety of recreation areas and facilities in San Ramon are provided, through public and/or
private investments, that are not part of the City parkland standards. For example, the East
Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD) is the primary provider of regional park space and
activities in Contra Costa and Alameda Counties. EBRPD is responsible for recreational
development and maintenance of regional parks, preserves, and trails. In San Ramon, the
Iron Horse Trail, Bishop Ranch Open Space, Little Hills Ranch Recreation Area, Sycamore
Valley Regional Open Space, and Las Trampas Regional Wilderness are all EBRPD facilities.
The EBRPD is committed to coordinating jointly managed regional trails with local
communities such as San Ramon. Other trails proposed in the San Ramon Planning Area will
exist along the western edge, along Dougherty Road, in Tassajara Valley, the Northwest
Specific Plan, and Bollinger Canyon subarea. Both the City and EBRPD are committed to
providing trails, parks, and open space in San Ramon. The trail system is portrayed in the
General Plan 2035 Land Use Map in the Land Use Element.
Other areas, such as The Bridges Golf Club at 9000 S. Gale Ridge Road and Homeowner’s
Association owned and maintained facilities, provide additional recreational facilities to the
community but are not included in the City parkland standards.
                                                   6‐2

                                           Parks and Recreation
6.4 EXISTING AND UNDER CONSTRUCTION PARKLAND
Table 6‐1 provides an inventory of the existing parkland and parkland under construction
within the City, including Dougherty Valley. Based on the California Department of Finance
population estimate of 77,270 for San Ramon on January 1, 2014 and the existing parkland
listed in Table 6‐1, the current ratio of park acreage per 1,000 residents is 4.72. Table 6‐2
provides an inventory of undeveloped parkland within the City. Figure 6‐1 illustrates existing
parkland in San Ramon. A detailed inventory of park acreage is provided in Appendix 6‐A.
                         Table 6‐1: Existing Parkland and Parkland under Construction
                                 Park Type                                    Acres             Total
   Community Parks
   Existing (4)                                                               100.44
   Under Construction (1)                                                        8.21
   Community Parks Subtotal                                                                        108.65
                          1
   Neighborhood Parks
   Existing (28)                                                               113.98
   Under Construction (1)                                                        2.32
   Neighborhood Parks Subtotal                                                                     116.30
   Specialized Recreation Areas
   Existing (13)                                                                74.45
   Under Construction (2)                                                        9.65
   Specialized Recreation Areas Subtotal                                                            84.10
   School Parks
       Existing (17)                                                             75.68
       Under Construction (1)                                                     2.61
   School Parks Subtotal                                                                           78.29
   Public Spaces
       Existing (None)                                                            0.00
       Under Construction (None)                                                  0.00
   Public Spaces Subtotal                                                                           0.00
   Total Existing                                                              364.55
   Total Under Construction                                                     22.79
   Total Existing and Under Construction                                                          387.34
 Note:
 1
    Includes pocket parks
 Source: City of San Ramon Planning & Community Development Department and Parks & Community Services
 Department
                                                       6‐3

                                  San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                      Table 6‐2: Undeveloped Parkland
                               Park Type                                      Acres             Total
  Specialized Recreation Areas
     Henry Ranch Park                                                          14.00
     San Catanio (Wood Lot)                                                     4.60
  Specialized Recreation Areas Subtotal                                                           18.60
  Total Undeveloped Parkland                                                                      18.60
  Source: City of San Ramon Planning & Community Development Department and Parks & Community Services
  Department
6.5 20‐YEAR PARKLAND NEEDS AND PROPOSED PARKS
A planned buildout population of 96,174 by 2035 will result in a future need of about 625.87
acres at 6.5 acres of parkland per 1,000 residents. Table 6‐3 provides the total existing,
undeveloped, and proposed parkland in San Ramon by 2035. The General Plan 2035
proposes, at buildout, a total of 630.12 acres, exceeding the future parkland need by 4.25
acres. At General Plan buildout, the parkland ratio will be 6.55 acres per 1,000 residents, an
increase from the current ratio of 4.72 acres per 1,000 residents. A detailed inventory of park
acreage is provided in Appendix 6‐A.
                                                     6‐4



                                         Parks and Recreation
                   Table 6‐3: Proposed Parks and Parkland Need in San Ramon by 2035
                                         Category                                             Acres
 Existing, Under Construction, and Undeveloped Parks                                        405.94
 Proposed Parks
        Athey Lot                                                                              2.48
        Big Canyon                                                                          123.50
        Faria Preserve Development Park                                                       13.60
        Laborer’s                                                                             13.00
        North Camino Ramon Specific Plan Park Sites                                            6.00
        NWSP (Panetta Property)                                                                2.50
        NWSP West                                                                              2.00
        PG&E Corridor                                                                         61.10
 Total Existing, Under Construction, Undeveloped, and Proposed Parks                        630.12
 Park Need, at General Plan 2035 buildout                                                   625.87
 (based on a population of 96,174 and 6.5 acres/1,000 residents)
 Parkland Ratio
        Existing Ratio (364.55 acres/77.270 residents)                                         4.72
        Ratio Achieved at General Plan 2035 Buildout (630.12 acres/96,174                      6.55
        residents)
        Parkland ratio above the 6.5 acres/1,000 residents at General Plan 2035                0.05
        buildout
 Source: City of San Ramon Planning & Community Development Department and Parks & Community Services
 Department and Land Use buildout, 2014.
GUIDING POLICY
6.5‐G‐1 Create and maintain a high‐quality public park system for San Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
6.5‐I‐1      Maintain a standard of 6.5 acres of public parks per 1,000 residents at General
             Plan buildout.
             Of the total 6.5 acres per 1,000 residents, at General Plan buildout, maintain a
             goal of 4.5 acres per 1,000 residents for neighborhood and school parks and 2.0
             acres per 1,000 residents for community parks and specialized recreation areas. It
             is the City’s intent to meet the public park standard with a variety of parkland
             including passive and active land use acreage by 2035, the buildout period of this
                                                     6‐7

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
        General Plan. Private recreation facilities (such as golf courses and homeowners’
        association amenities including mini parks, tot‐lots, and picnic areas) shall not be
        substituted for required parkland.
6.5‐I‐2 Provide varied community park and recreational opportunities accessible to all City
        residents.
        It is the City’s goal to ensure that parks in San Ramon are easily accessible to its
        citizens, including the physically disabled, and to provide recreational equipment
        that people of all ages and abilities can use.
6.5‐I‐3 Maintain a minimum size of 2 acres or more for neighborhood parks.
        Smaller parcels are discouraged as city‐maintained parks because they provide
        limited recreational opportunities and incur high maintenance costs.
6.5‐I‐4 Provide passive and active recreational amenities within the City’s parks to meet the
        needs of citizens of all ages and interests.
        While it is important to provide recreation facilities for athletics and team sports, it is
        equally important to develop natural settings for the enjoyment of passive activities,
        such as picnicking or walking.
6.5‐I‐5 Require residential developers to make dedications to the City’s park system.
        The City’s Parkland Dedication Ordinance shall be applied to all residential
        development and shall be used to determine a developer’s dedication of park
        acreage. In‐lieu fees are required when suitable land is not available or desired for
        dedication. Such fees are intended to give the City flexibility to purchase parkland
        elsewhere in the City or to improve existing parks.
6.5‐I‐6 Encourage contributions to the City’s park system by non‐residential developers.
        In addition to improving park facilities for its residents, it is the City’s goal to provide
        active and passive parks for use by employees of San Ramon businesses. The
        park needs of this group can be partially met by encouraging contributions of
        parkland or funds from non‐residential developers.
6.5‐I‐7 Complete all parkland dedication requirements for each development prior to
        occupancy.
6.5‐I‐8 Encourage the development of landscaped and dedicated public spaces, parkways,
        trail systems, and special community service facilities in new developments.
        Development of a Trails Master Plan will identify current, future, and proposed
        citywide trails and trail connections between existing and new development.
                                               6‐8

                                   Parks and Recreation
6.5‐I‐9  Confer with the San Ramon Valley Unified School District to promote continued joint
         development and use of school sites located within the City and its Sphere of
         Influence.
         Joint development and use of school sites is especially important in developed
         areas where park standards have not yet been achieved. This approach will help
         meet community needs for neighborhood parks during periods of parkland
         acquisition and development.
6.5‐I‐10 Seek partnership opportunities with the private sector and with other public
         agencies to enhance park facilities and provide leisure time activities.
         In 2013, the Parks & Community Services Department established a Partnership
         Program to provide the private sector with various levels of sponsorship
         opportunities for City events, facilities, and programs.
6.5‐I‐11 Identify and document sites of historic interest and develop opportunities to acquire
         or preserve sites of historic interest.
6.5‐I‐12 Explore preservation of open space, ridge lands, and scenic corridors in and around
         San Ramon.
         Within San Ramon’s sphere of influence there is a variety of open space amenities
         such as the Bishop Ranch Open Space, the Little Hills Recreation Area, Sycamore
         Valley Regional Open Space, and Las Trampas Regional Wilderness. Through the
         Open Space Advisory Committee, San Ramon continues to work with a variety of
         agencies, including but not limited to, the East Bay Regional Park District, Contra
         Costa County, other municipalities, the State of California and non‐profit trustee
         agencies to facilitate coordination with the preservation of open space in and
         around San Ramon, See Policy 8.4‐I‐13 for further discussion on viewshed criteria.
6.5‐I‐13 Designate Big Canyon within the Westside subarea as a nature preserve and seek
         to add it to the City’s park system as a specialized recreation area with limited
         access.
6.5‐I‐14 Continue to review biennially and update quadrennially the 10‐year Parks and
         Community Services Master Plan.
         The Parks and Community Services Commission implements the Master Plan,
         updates it biennially, and ensures that the development of parks and community
         facilities proceed as planned.
6.5‐I‐15 Maintain service levels and maintenance standards in parks and recreation facilities
         at optimal levels for public use, safety, and cost effectiveness.
6.5‐I‐16 Maintain a standard, at General Plan buildout, that public parks are to be within
         one‐half mile of all homes.
                                                 6‐9

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
          It is anticipated that with existing land ownership and development this standard will
          be met at General Plan buildout.
6.5‐I‐17 Maintain a standard, at General Plan buildout, that Community Parks are to be
           within three miles of all homes.
          It is anticipated that with existing land ownership and development this standard will
          be met at General Plan buildout.
6.5‐I‐18 Increase the accessibility and connectivity to the Iron Horse Trail and the regional/city
           trail network, including the possibility of bicycle/pedestrian overcrossing(s) described
           in the San Ramon Valley Iron Horse Trail Corridor Concept Plan.
         Develop a Trails Master Plan to identify new trail connections for a citywide trail
         system. Work with the East Bay Regional Park District and private landowners to
         form a connected trail network that increases pedestrian and bicycle trail
         accessibility citywide that provides connectivity between parks, schools and open
         space lands. In 2007, the San Ramon Valley Iron Horse Trail Bicycle Pedestrian
         Corridor Concept Plan studied the feasibility of constructing bicycle/pedestrian
         overcrossing(s) along the Iron Horse Trail as an alternative to the at‐grade
         crossings at Sycamore Valley, Crow Canyon Road, and Bollinger Canyon Road.
6.5‐I‐19 Where appropriate, require new development to provide Public Spaces to enhance
           the recreation or leisure interactive experience of residents or visitors for passive or
           active use.
         Public Spaces might include, but is not limited to, areas such as an interactive water
         elements, public art, gardens, trails and paths, plazas, labyrinths, picnic areas, tot‐
         parks, pocket parks, basketball, bocce, or tennis courts and includes a balance of
         hardscape and landscape areas. The City may allow for partial or full parkland
         dedication credit for these types of public spaces.
                                                   6‐10

                                Parks and Recreation
                             Appendix 6‐A
        Detailed Park Acreage Inventory
The following table provides a detailed inventory of park acreage within the City of San
Ramon.
                                                                                      A‐1


Park Type                                                                         GP2035 Notes
Community Parks
          Existing
          Athan Downs                                                               20.45
          Central Park                                                              40.80 Includes Iron Horse MS Park (excludes City Hall 0.50 ac site)
          Memorial Park                                                             16.30
          Rancho San Ramon Phase 1                                                  22.89 Phase I ‐ 22.89 ac (includes Loop Road and Phase I)
                                                                  Total Existing:  100.44
          Under Construction (as of 12/2013)
          Rancho San Ramon Phase 2                                                   8.21 Phase 2 ‐ 8.21 ac
                                                      Total Under Construction:      8.21
                                                Community Parks Grand Total:       108.65
Neighborhood Parks
          Existing
          Arlington Park                                                             4.04
          Bellingham Square                                                          4.06
          Boone Acres                                                                5.47
          Centennial Park                                                            5.51
          Compass Point Park                                                         1.49
          Country Fair Park (Pocket Park)                                            0.18
          Coyote Crossing                                                           11.73
          Creekside Park                                                             5.97
          East Branch Park                                                           5.07
          Fire Truck Park                                                            1.15
          Hidden Crest Park                                                          2.07
          Hidden Valley Park                                                         4.54
          Hummingbird Playground (adjacent to Quail Run ES)                          0.40
          Inverness Park                                                             5.83
          Limerick Park                                                              2.76
          Mill Creek Hollow                                                          3.52
          Monarch Park                                                               6.34
          Mosaic Park Phase I (formerly Gale Phase 3 Linear Park)                    1.61 Existing Mosaic 1.61
          Old Ranch Park                                                             6.73
          Piccadilly Square Park                                                     4.14
          Ramona Park                                                                4.08
          Red Willow Park                                                            4.94
          Richard Fahey Village Green                                                4.35
          Sherwood Park                                                              1.49
          Six Pillars Park                                                           2.74
          Souyen Park                                                                2.40
          Valley View Park                                                          10.01
          Windy Hills Park                                                           1.36
                                                                  Total Existing:  113.98
          Under Construction (as of 12/2013)
          Mosaic Park Phase II Pathway (formerly Gale Phase 3 Linear Park)           2.32 2.32 ac (Tract 8971)
                                                      Total Under Construction:      2.32
                       Neighborhood Parks Sub-Total (Existing & Under Const.):     116.30
          Undeveloped (as of 12/2013)
          Henry Ranch                                                               14.00
                                                         Total To Be Developed:     14.00
                                 Neighborhood Parks Sub-Total (Undeveloped):        14.00
          Proposed (as of 12/2013)
          Faria Development                                                         13.60 Revised Faria Project Plans (includes 12.9 ac for park and 0.7 ac for Rose Garden)
          NWSP West                                                                  2.00
                                                                Total Proposed:     15.60
                                    Neighborhood Parks Sub-Total (Proposed):        15.60
                                              Neighborhood Parks Grand Total:      145.90
                                                                                                     Page 1 of 3

Specialized Recreation Areas
           Existing
           Alcosta Senior & Community Center, Park & Gardens                         7.83 Includes parking lot on adjacent City‐owned parcel
           Bark and Ride                                                             6.68
           Crow Canyon Gardens (w/o MUDD's)                                          7.46
           Del Mar Dog Park                                                          1.21
           Forest Homes Park                                                        14.50
           Gale Phase 1 Park 2 (Gale 1 Overlook Park)                                0.82
           Gale Phase 2 Park 6 (Basswood Trail Access)                               0.09
           Gale Phase 2 Park 7 (Basswood Overlook)                                   0.10
           Gale Phase 2 Park 9 (Neighborhood 5 Park)                                 0.44
           San Ramon Sports Park                                                    14.80
           SR Olympic Pool, Aquatic Park, etc.                                       6.00 Includes pool, portion of parking lot, and tennis courts
           Summit View Trails                                                       13.49
           Tassajara Ridge Staging Area                                              1.03
                                                                   Total Existing:  74.45
           Under Construction (as of 12/2013)
           Gale Phase 4 ‐ Neighborhood 6 Linear Park                                 1.21
           Rose Glenn                                                                8.44
                                                       Total Under Construction:     9.65
             Specialized Recreation Areas Sub-Total (Existing & Under Const.):      84.10
           Undeveloped (as of 12/2013)
           San Cantanio (Wood Lot)                                                   4.60
                                                           Total To Be Developed:    4.60
                        Specialized Recreation Areas Sub-Total (Undeveloped):        4.60
           Proposed (as of 12/2013)
           Athey Lot                                                                 2.48 Includes APN: 208‐290‐005 (1.29 ac) and APN: 208‐290‐028 (1.19 ac)
           Big Canyon                                                              123.50
           Laborer's                                                                13.00
           North Camino Ramon Specific Plan Parks                                    6.00 Includes Village Green (2 ac.), Iron Horse Trail Link (2 ac.), and Residential Park (2 ac.)
           Panetta                                                                   2.50
           PG&E Corridor                                                            61.10 Includes PG&E corridor and Devil Mtn. Nursery ‐ Does not include the PG&E substation or Del Mar Dog Park
                                                                 Total Proposed:   208.58
                            Specialized Recreation Areas Sub-Total (Proposed):     208.58
                                      Specialized Recreation Areas Grand Total:    297.28
                                                                                                    Page 2 of 3

 School Parks (park acreage w/o school)
           Existing
           Elementary Schools
           Bollinger Canyon School/Park                                               3.36 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Country Club School/Park                                                   7.11 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Coyote Creek School/Park                                                   5.25 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Golden View School/park                                                    4.96 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Hidden Hills School/Park                                                   2.96 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Live Oak School/Park                                                       1.50 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Montevideo School/Park                                                     3.68 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Neil Armstrong School/park                                                 4.17 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, school, or playground
           Quail Run School/Park                                                      6.49 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Twin Creeks School/park                                                    3.66 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Walt Disney School/Park                                                    4.72 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, parking lot, or school
           Middle Schools
           Gale Ranch Middle School/Park                                              6.52 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area
           Iron Horse Middle School/Park/Gym                                          0.00 Included in Central Park acerage (41.3 ac total)
           Pine Valley Middle School/Park/Gym                                         9.35 Includes Parks Dept. maintained area, Teen Ctr., Gym, and South parking lot, Does not include blacktop or school
           Windemere Ranch Middle School/Park                                         9.00 Includes most of Parks Dept. maintained area, Does not include blacktop, West parking lot, gym, or school
           High Schools
           California High School/Park (see SR Olympic Pool)
           Dougherty Valley High School/Aquatic Center                                2.95 Includes tennis courts, parking adjacent to tennis courts, and aquatic center
                                                                   Total Existing:   75.68
           Under Construction (as of 12/2013)
           Gale Phase 4 Park 3 (Neighborhood 3 School Park)                           2.61 New Bella Vista Elementary School Park Site
                                                        Total Under Construction:     2.61
                              School Parks Sub-Total (Existing & Under Const.):      78.29
                                                               School Parks Total:   78.29
                                               GRAND TOTAL EXISTING PARKS:          364.55
                               GRAND TOTAL UNDER CONSTRUCTION PARKS:                 22.79
                                         GRAND TOTAL UNDEVELOPED PARKS:              18.60
                                             GRAND TOTAL PROPOSED PARKS:            224.18
AND TOTAL EXISTING, UNDER CONST., UNDEVELOPED, & PROPOSED PARKS:                    630.12
                                              Parkland per 1,000 people (Existing):   4.72 Jan. 1, 2014 DOF estimate 77,270 population
                                          Parkland per 1,000 people (at Build‐Out):   6.55 Build‐out population of 96,174 people
                                                                                                     Page 3 of 3

 
                                                      7
                P ublic Facil ities aand U                                Utilitie    es
The Public Facilities and Utilities Element looks aat aspects rrelating to sspecific funcctional
needss of the com mmunity. Policies in this element aree complemeented by tho         ose in the Growth
Mana  agement and d Land Use elements,
                                e            annd work togeether in achieeving the Citty’s vision.
This Element ide  entifies the capital
                               c         improvements andd facilities nneeded to se    erve San Ra  amon,
includding civic, educational, cultural, fiire, and poolice facilitiees, as well as utilities and
comm munication syystems. Thiss Element also sets forthh standards desired by the communiity for
its puublic schoolss, private insstitutions, puublic utilities,, and solid wwaste manaagement. It iis the
City’ss goal to gua
                  arantee a full range of high quality puublic and priivate facilitie es and servicces to
provid de each resident a safe, healthy, and attractive lliving environnment.
7.1 COMMUN ITY FACIL            LITIES
San Ramon’s co     ommitment to  t providing  g the comm     munity with ooutstanding public placces is
refleccted in the nu
                   umber and quality
                                q        of faccilities it has built:
     •   Four multti‐purpose co ommunity ce    enters (the S   San Ramon C  Community Center at Ce   entral
         Park, thee Alcosta Se   enior & Co   ommunity Ceenter, Park & Gardenss, the Doug           gherty
         Station Coommunity Ce   enter, and th he Amador R     Rancho Centter);
     •   Two com  mmunity gym  mnasiums att Pine Valleey and Ironn Horse Mid           ddle Schools (in
         partnership with the San
                               S Ramon Valley   V        Unifieed School Disstrict);
     •   Two community aqua     atic centers at each highh school (thhe San Ram       mon Olympic Pool
         and Aqua  atic Park att California High and thhe Dougherrty Valley A         Aquatic Centter at
         Doughertyy Valley High  h);
     •   The Doug  gherty Valleyy Performing   g Arts Centeer (joint‐usee with Dough    herty Valley High
         School); and
                   a
     •   Two librarry branches (San Ramon       n Library andd the Doughherty Station Library).
In 20007, the Cityy approved entitlement for    f the consstruction of thhe City Center Project a    at the
interssection of Boollinger Canyyon Road an     nd Camino R     Ramon, adjaacent to the Iron Horse Trail,
Centrral Park, and Community Center. However,  H             duue to an ecoonomic dow wnturn the project
remained on hold  d pending a better
                                 b       econo omic climate..
In 20013, the City entered into o a Memoran    ndum of Undderstanding w    with Sunset Developmen   nt, the
City’s private secttor partner onn the City Ce  enter Projectt, to design aand construcct a new Cityy Hall.
Unde er the terms of
                   o the MOU the t location of the proposed City Halll will move ffrom the approved
location in the Cityy Center Pro
                               oject to a new  w location at the southweest corner of C Central Parkk.
                                                       7‐1

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
In 2014, the City approved the plans for the design of the new City Hall and construction is
expected to be underway in late 2014. Additionally, Sunset Development presented a revised
vision and development concept for phase one of the City Center Plaza District. This first phase
is comprised of the retail and theater portion of the previously approved Project; however based
on the design changes, the City will process an amendment to the approved plans prior to the
start of construction. Construction of phase one of the Project is anticipated to begin in 2015.
Figure 7‐1 illustrates the public facilities in San Ramon. These facilities do more than provide
public services; they are also symbols, which promote pride and collective self‐esteem and
foster a sense of place, mutual ownership, and community. While these public places serve a
wide variety of social, cultural, and recreational needs, service demands have resulted in
rapid growth of the programs and activities offered by the City.
FACILITY CLASSIFICATIONS
The following classifications of public places and facilities are used in San Ramon. Performance
standards for community centers and libraries are included in the Growth Management Element.
     •   Community Center. A facility designed to meet the needs of the population for civic
         meetings, recreational activities, social gatherings, and cultural enrichment such as
         the San Ramon Community Center and the Alcosta Senior & Community Center, Park
         & Gardens.
     •   Community Theater. A cultural facility that provides space for concerts, plays, lectures
         and shows such as the Dougherty Valley Performing Arts Center (a 600 seat theater
         with adjoining rehearsal space) or the Front Row Theater (a 90 seat theater) at the
         Dougherty Station Community Center.
     •   City Center. A downtown Center consisting of a pedestrian friendly, mixed‐use
         development. A few of the major community facility components include and a new
         city hall with council chamber, and a transit center.
     •   Library. A facility in which literary, artistic, and reference materials are kept for public
         use and circulation, and at where people gather for learning and cultural enrichment
         purposes.
GUIDING POLICY
7.1‐G‐1 Provide public and cultural facilities that contribute to the City’s positive image and
            enhance community identity.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
7.1‐I‐1     Confer with Contra Cost County Library to provide superior services including facility
            upgrades and enhancements in response to the results of the Library Usage Survey
            conducted in 2012.
                                                 7‐2



                               Public Facilities and Utilities
          In 2012, the Library Advisory Committee conducted a survey to evaluate the usage
          and the needs of the San Ramon Library and found that new libraries are
          transforming from traditional institutions for book readers and information seekers to
          places for people to gather and socialize for learning and cultural enrichment
          purposes, and meet with people who share common interests. The survey
          suggested that the library patrons would like larger libraries that can accommodate
          more meeting rooms, and enhanced Internet access including power outlets and
          more seating opportunities. The Library Advisory Committee recommended that the
          San Ramon libraries should have a minimum ratio of 0.5 square feet of library
          space per capita, 1 meeting room per 10,000 residents, 5 seats per 1,000
          residents, 2 outlets per 1,000 residents, and 63 annual service hours per 1,000
          residents in order to meet the needs of a growing and vital community that values
          education with updated resources and space.
          In addition to the possible future library expansion at the Diablo Valley College –
          San Ramon Campus facility in Dougherty Valley (see Policy 7.2‐I‐3) the City
          should continue to explore a variety of options to increase library space and
          services as growth in population occurs.
7.1‐I‐2   Ensure that the planned public facilities in Dougherty Valley are provided on a
          timely basis in accordance with the terms of the 1994 Settlement Agreement.
7.1‐I‐3   Maintain teen services on or adjacent to middle school sites.
7.2 EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
School Districts are exempt from local regulations and cannot be required to adhere to City
General Plan policies. However, collaboration between the City and the School District is
essential in order to provide high quality educational facilities and promote a sense of
community.
EXISTING ENROLLMENT AND CAPACITY
The San Ramon Valley Unified School District (SRVUSD) serves the entire San Ramon
Planning Area, as well as Danville and unincorporated areas within Contra Costa County. Within
San Ramon, the District operates eleven elementary schools (grades K‐5), four middle schools
(grades 6‐8), two high schools (grades 9‐12), and Venture, an independent study school
(grades K‐12). Table 7‐1 shows that as of April 2014, approximately 17,793 of the District’s
31,651 students attended schools in San Ramon. The District estimates total school capacity
within San Ramon at 18,043 students. Figure 7‐2 illustrates school sites in San Ramon.
                                              7‐5

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2035
         Table 7‐1: San Ramon Valley Unified School District Schools, Enrollment, and Capacity
                                             in San Ramon (as of April 2014)
                              Level                               Enrollment           Capacity
Elementary (K‐5)
       Bollinger Canyon Elementary School                              576                545
       Country Club Elementary School                                  521                545
       Coyote Creek Elementary School                                1,116              1,040
       Golden View Elementary School                                   659                625
       Hidden Hills Elementary School                               1,074                 988
       Live Oak Elementary School                                    1,126              1,040
       Montevideo Elementary School                                    675                600
       Neil Armstrong Elementary School                                636                600
       Quail Run Elementary School                                  1,068               1,040
       Twin Creeks Elementary School                                   536                540
       Walt Disney Elementary School                                   564                540
Middle (6‐8)
       Gale Ranch Middle School1                                    1,056               1,080
       Iron Horse Middle School                                     1,046                 960
       Pine Valley Middle School                                       952                900
       Windemere Ranch Middle School                                1,236                1,110
High School (9‐12)
       California High School                                       2,577               2,500
       Dougherty Valley High School1                                2,375               2,560
Independent Studies
       Venture                                                         307               N/A
Total                                                              17,793              18,043+
Notes:
“N/A” means data not available
1
  Capacity includes relocatable classrooms.
Source: San Ramon Valley Unified School District, 2014.
                                                    7‐6

                                   Public Facilities and Utilities
As part of its efforts to regulate the impacts of growth and provide excellent services for its
citizens, San Ramon has developed a school performance standard to ensure that new
schools will be in locations accessible to school age children, that adequate capacity is
available to meet projected enrollment needs, and that future development will provide
sufficient facilities for education as well as extra‐curricular activities. Refer to the Growth
Management Element for additional information on school standards.
PROJECTED SCHOOL ENROLLMENT
Based on the sites identified in Table 11‐32, Housing Opportunity Sites of the 2014‐2022
Housing Element, the San Ramon Valley Unified School District may experience growth
within the City of San Ramon. This table shows an increase of approximately 423 single‐
family units and 4,757 multi‐family units being developed outside Dougherty Valley. Based
on the student generation rates listed in Table 7‐2, buildout of the General Plan could
potentially add an estimated 1,465 Kindergarten to 6th Grade students, 349 7th to 8th Grade
students, and 621 high school students to San Ramon schools.
In fall 2016, the School District anticipates the opening of a new 830‐student capacity
elementary school in Gale Ranch Phase 4 named Bella Vista Elementary. Along with the
additional elementary school, the School District can accommodate the potential increase in
student enrollment through strategies such as construction of additional schools, expansion of
the capacity of existing school sites, and/or through boundary changes to redistribute
students to schools with excess capacity. Development of potential housing opportunities
sites listed in Table 11‐32 of the 2014‐2022 Housing Element would require additional study
and close collaboration with the School District and developers.
             Table 7‐2: San Ramon Valley Unified School District Student Generation Rates
                                Single‐Family            Single‐Family            Multi‐Family
      Grade Group               Detached Unit            Attached Unit                Unit
           K‐6                     0.540                     0.540                   0.260
           7‐8                      0.150                    0.080                   0.060
          9‐12                     0.230                     0.160                   0.110
          Total:                    0.920                    0.780                   0.430
 Source: San Ramon Valley Unified School District, 2014.
GUIDING POLICY
7.2‐G‐1 Collaborate with the San Ramon Valley Unified School District in their efforts to
            ensure that all school age children have equal access to equitable facilities.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
7.2‐I‐1     Collaborate with the San Ramon Valley Unified School District in their efforts to
            ensure that all future school sites are developed as “school parks.”
                                                     7‐7

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
7.2‐I‐2 Require that residential development pay fees to the School District to provide
          adequate, permanent classroom space.
          The City works closely with the School District to ensure that all new school
          facilities are within close proximity to the neighborhoods they are intended to serve.
7.2‐I‐3 Encourage the efforts for the Phase II Expansion of the Diablo Valley College – San
          Ramon Campus facility (including the library extension) in Dougherty Valley.
          The 2014 Voter‐approved Contra Costa Community College District Measure E
          (Educational Facility Bond) allows for improvements in educational facilities, parking
          and libraries. Under the current Joint Use Memorandum of Understanding for the
          Dougherty Station Library, the County, the City and the College District are currently
          partners in operating the Dougherty Station Library and shared parking facilities.
          The City will work together with the College District and the County Library to
          ensure that any library expansion at DVC‐San Ramon Campus by the College
          District is also operated as joint use by the college and the community. The parties
          should also continue to work together on improvements to parking at the Village
          Center where these facilities are housed.
7.2‐I‐4   Collaborate with the San Ramon Valley Unified School District to assure that all future
          schools are planned to be open and operational based on student generation rates.
7.3 INSTITUTIONS
Many services that benefit the San Ramon community are provided by private businesses or
public agencies other than the City. The General Plan does not control the provision of such
services. However, it does establish policies to facilitate the availability of services in the City.
GUIDING POLICY
7.3‐G‐1 Encourage development of private educational, cultural, childcare, and medical
          facilities in San Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
7.3‐I‐1   Encourage developers of residential and nonresidential projects to assist in funding
          public or private facilities and services.
          Examples include child care centers, meeting space, interpretive centers or
          displays, community gardens, and other similar facilities and services.
7.3‐I‐2   Facilitate the provision of safe, affordable, and quality elder care and child care
          facilities and services for families who reside or work in San Ramon.
7.3‐I‐3 Actively work with public, private, and non‐profit service providers to create and
          expand opportunities for elder care facilities, programs, and services in San Ramon.
                                               7‐8



                                  Public Facilities and Utilities
7.3‐I‐4    Encourage the development of a variety of housing and recreational opportunities
           for senior citizens close to City services and facilities, including transportation.
           The Alcosta Senior & Community Center, Park & Gardens is a good example of a
           facility that provides a variety of activities, such as art and music classes, dancing,
           gardening, and field trips.
7.3‐I‐5 Encourage the location of appropriate child care facilities in residential areas and
           ensure that such operations are compatible with their surroundings.
           Small family day care facilities are permitted in residential districts as provided for
           by California Health & Safety Code section 1597.45. Large family day care facilities
           are permitted in residential districts with approval through the use permit process.
           Day Care Centers in certain zoning districts are also permitted with approval
           through the use permit process.
7.3‐I‐6 Assess the adequacy of the School‐Aged Child Care Ordinance through periodic
           review and update as necessary to ensure that fees are used appropriately.
          School‐Aged Child Care facilities play an important role for families in San Ramon.
          Continue to implement the Zoning Ordinance land use process for child care facilities.
7.3‐I‐7 Provide opportunities to locate meeting facilities (public or private), preschool
           facilities, and child care facilities in residential areas on arterial or collector streets.
7.3‐I‐8    Encourage and support public facilities and services that contribute to the maintenance
           and long‐term success of a vibrant San Ramon Regional Medical Center.
           The San Ramon Medical Center is one of the premier medical facilities in the Tri‐
           Valley with 188 beds and an approved 6,400 square foot Emergency Room
           expansion. The City can help support the Center by working with transit providers to
           ensure good transit service with conveniently located transit stops and by facilitating
           partnerships with emergency service providers, such as the City of San Ramon
           Police Department and the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District.
7.3‐I‐9    Encourage uses which support the medical facilities within proximity of the Regional
           Medical Center.
           Examples of uses include, but are not limited to, medical offices, outpatient clinics,
           and administrative support facilities.
7.4 UTILITIES
Both Comcast and AT&T provide cable and telephone services while Pacific Gas and Electric
provide natural gas and electrical services throughout San Ramon. New technologies,
particularly in the communications field, continue to converge, forcing the merger of services
offered by utility providers.
                                                  7‐11

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 recognized the emerging and converging
telecommunications technologies, and set new national policies to encourage future
development. This Act has significant implications for San Ramon in that it recognizes the
value of rights‐of‐way as part of telecommunications infrastructure and grants local
governments broad authority to regulate cellular towers and other infrastructure needed for
wireless communications.
Given the City’s employment base, combined with the development of Dougherty Valley and the
future City Center and Faria Preserve projects, San Ramon must continue to facilitate the use of
these new technologies. Many businesses now consider the communications capacity of places
where they want to do business as part of their relocation criteria. Increasingly, firms look for
communities that offer electronic amenities such as fiber optic and satellite linkages, which are
necessary to support activities like telecommuting and teleconferencing programs.
Bishop Ranch Business Park, for example, is equipped with a fiber optic system called
SONET (synchronous optical network), which has contributed to the success of Bishop
Ranch by enabling quick and efficient high‐speed connections between people and firms.
San Ramon welcomes the advanced communication networks and will continue to work with
utility providers to offer a wide range of technology services for both residents and businesses
within our community.
GUIDING POLICY
7.4‐G‐1 Ensure the provision of adequate communication and utility systems for existing and
            future residents and the business community.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
7.4‐I‐1     Coordinate with Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) in their efforts to
            monitor future utility expansion to ensure that facilities are designed and planned
            with minimal impact on existing and future residents.
            One of the concerns of residents adjacent to PG&E corridors are the issues
            surrounding electric magnetic fields (EMFs) which will likely be debated for many
            years to come. Based on the scientific uncertainty that exists in this field, the City
            will monitor developments in this area and will continue to follow the principles of
            “prudent avoidance.”
7.4‐I‐2     Work with PG&E to improve transmission line corridors with attractive, community‐
            serving uses and to upgrade the appearance of the transmission line corridors in
            conjunction with an expansion or co‐use of the corridor.
            Ornamental planting and recreational uses, including trails and playing fields,
            should be encouraged.
7.4‐I‐3 Require new development to underground all utility lines needed to serve the future
            buildings and their occupants, and continue to coordinate with PG&E to
            underground utilities in existing residential neighborhoods, making the Southern San
            Ramon area a priority.
                                                7‐12

                                Public Facilities and Utilities
         The Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances require underground utilities in all new
         development. Requiring utility lines to be underground will help improve the visual
         environment and create an attractive community.
7.4‐I‐4  Continue to explore opportunities to underground existing overhead utility lines
         throughout the City with available funding.
         The City will continue to explore alternate sources of funding in addition to PG&E
         monies available under Rule 20(a), to underground overhead lines.
7.4‐I‐5 Continue to monitor cable video and encourage competition to ensure the highest
         quality service consistent with Federal Communications Commission guidelines.
7.4‐I‐6  Encourage utility providers to foster better access, use, and distribution of multi‐media
         products, including fiber optics, wireless technologies, and satellite communications.
7.4‐I‐7 Encourage all new development to provide the technology to support multiple
         telecommunications facilities and providers.
7.4‐I‐8 Continue to review and update, as necessary, the regulations for wireless
         telecommunication facilities to ensure minimal impacts to the community.
         Potential impacts from wireless telecommunication facilities, such as land use
         compatibility, health and safety concerns, and equipment aesthetics, shall continue to
         be reviewed under the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Chapter within the
         Zoning Ordinance.
7.4‐I‐9 Develop procedures and regulations to ensure minimal impacts to the community
         from the installation of utilities on City streets.
         The City shall develop policies and procedures to reduce the impacts of utility
         installation on City streets and will continue to monitor utility work within the public
         right‐of‐way through the issuance of encroachment permits.
7.4‐I‐10 Encourage co‐location of telecommunication facilities to minimize potential visual
         impacts to the community.
7.4‐I‐11 Coordinate sub‐surface utility work with road improvements and maintenance
         whenever possible.
         The intent of this policy is to maximize the effectiveness of roadway resurfacing and
         improvement efforts by completing sub‐surface utility work prior to repaving. In
         addition, this policy seeks to minimize disruptions associated with uncoordinated work.
                                               7‐13

                                    San Ramon General Plan 2035
7.5 SOLID WASTE
The City of San Ramon currently contracts with Valley Waste Management (VWM) for the
collection and hauling of franchised solid waste, residential recycling, and green waste. San
Ramon also contracts with Republic Services of Northern California to send its solid waste to
the company’s Vasco Road Sanitary Landfill in Alameda County.
Since 2007, Senate Bill (SB) 1016 requires cities to report to the California Integrated Waste
Management Board (CIWMB) the amount of garbage disposed in the landfill per person per
day. Beginning in 2007, the CIWMB calculated San Ramon’s per capita disposal target rate
at 5.7 pounds of garbage per person per day. The objective is to be below this target rate,
which is equivalent to 50 percent diversion.
Table 7‐3 shows the amount of solid waste diverted between 2008 and 2012.
                                         Table 7‐3: Solid Waste Diversion
                      Total Disposal/Population        Total Disposal/Employment
       Year                 (Lbs. per day)                    (Lbs. per day)     Total Landfill Waste (Tons)
       2008                       3.6                              6.3                     40,413
       2009                       3.3                              6.3                    38,097
       2010                       2.8                              6.2                    36,325
       2011                       2.7                              5.6                    36,032
       20121                      2.4                              4.8                    32,364
 50% Diversion 5.7 pounds per resident per 8.2 pounds per employee
 Rate Target        day to meet State standards per day to meet State
                                                     standards
 Note:
 1
   2012 Waste diversion rate subject to final approval
 Source: Jurisdiction Diversion/Disposal Rate Summary (www.calrecycle.ca.gov)
Although cities within Contra Costa County currently have full disposal capacity at nearby
landfills, it is important that all jurisdictions develop programs to divert waste from the landfill
stream. Readily available land to construct new landfills in the future is no longer guaranteed.
While both San Ramon and Contra Costa County feature progressive waste management
plans, the need to divert significant parts of the City’s waste stream through recycling and
reuse remains. Since 2010, San Ramon has implemented an innovative Food Scrap
Recycling Program to allow residents to recycle food items and soiled paper products into
compost instead of the landfill. The maintenance and strengthening of such programs remains
a key issue given the City’s proposed growth. By encouraging solid waste diversion, the City
can reduce future landfill demand. Additionally, as the waste created by construction and
demolition activities in the planning area may adversely affect the City’s recycling efforts,
recycling plans for builders could aid in San Ramon’s recycling efforts.
                                                        7‐14

                               Public Facilities and Utilities
GUIDING POLICY
7.5‐G‐1 Manage solid waste so that State goals are exceeded and the best possible service
         is provided to the citizens and businesses of San Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
7.5‐I‐1  Provide the best possible service for the collection of garbage, recyclables, and
         green waste at the lowest possible cost.
7.5‐I‐2  Provide and promote opportunities to reduce waste in all sectors of San Ramon,
         including residential, commercial, non‐profit, government, and educational sectors.
7.5‐I‐3 Develop consumer friendly, convenient, affordable options for community‐serving
         recycling services.
7.5‐I‐4 Through the development review process, encourage the provision of convenient
         recyclable material storage locations.
         New development should be encouraged to install recycling receptacles on their
         premises. To encourage further recycling habits, in 2011 San Ramon provided all
         multi‐family complexes with recycling receptacles.
7.5‐I‐5 Comply with State requirements for proper handling and storage of solid waste,
         recyclables, and hazardous materials, diversion of solid waste from landfills, and
         provision of programs to make these activities feasible.
7.5‐I‐6 Ensure that solid waste programs effectively address community needs and issues.
7.5‐I‐7 Provide options for the safe disposal of hazardous waste and materials.
         Since 2011, San Ramon has provided a free curbside pick‐up program for
         household hazardous waste.
7.5‐I‐8  Encourage solid waste diversion (e.g. waste prevention, reuse, recycling, and
         composting).
7.5‐I‐9 Require new development projects to comply with the Municipal Code’s construction
         and demolition debris diversion requirements.
7.5‐I‐10 Provide convenient recycling opportunities at large public events and venues.
7.5‐I‐11 Promote public and private efforts to recycle electronic waste.
         The City provides referral information for electronic waste recyclers. Additionally, a
         curbside electronic waste service is provided three times a year.
                                            7‐15

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
7.6 FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES
San Ramon is served by the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District (SRVFPD). The
District is formed as an autonomous Special District and is governed by a five member
elected Board. In addition to the City of San Ramon, the District provides services to several
unincorporated areas within Contra Costa County and the Town of Danville.
The District provides all‐risk fire, rescue, and emergency medical services. It operates a 9‐1‐
1 Communications Center and provides five distinct volunteer programs. The District staffs
five fire stations and one administration building within the San Ramon Planning Area.
In addition to the performance standards for Fire Services in the Growth Management Element,
the following policies guide the city’s collaboration with the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection
District.
GUIDING POLICY
7.6‐G‐1 Collaborate with the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District to deliver a high
            level of public protection services that protect life, property, and the environment.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
7‐6‐I‐1     Continue to coordinate with the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District to provide
            adequate fire protection facilities and services to meet the needs of the community.
7‐6‐I‐2 Seek input from the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District to ensure that fire
            protection measures are identified during the development review process.
7.7 POLICE SERVICES
At the time of incorporation in 1983, San Ramon contracted for Police services with the
Contra Costa County Sheriff’s Department. In June 2006, the City Council created an in‐
house Police Services Department. The newly created Department became operational on
July 1, 2007 and as of May 2014 has 62 sworn police officers. In 2011, the Police Services
Department was relocated to 2401 Crow Canyon Road. Dispatch services continue to be
provided through the Contra Costa County Sheriff’s Department.
In addition to the performance standards established in the Growth Management Element, the
following policies establish a high level of public safety for all people who live and/or work in
San Ramon.
GUIDING POLICY
7.7‐G‐1 Maintain a high level of public safety for all people who live or work in San Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
7.7‐I‐1     Ensure crime‐reduction and public safety features are incorporated into the design
            of new development projects through the Crime Prevention Through Environmental
            Design program (CPTED).
            CPTED principles emphasize highly visible public spaces that deter criminal activity.
                                                7‐16

                           Public Facilities and Utilities
7.7‐I‐2 Monitor new development projects in the unincorporated parts of the San Ramon
        Planning Area that would require law enforcement services from the City.
7.7‐I‐3 Require new development, if appropriate, to provide a funding mechanism to
        support and maintain San Ramon’s high level of police services.
                                         7‐17


                                                8
            Open Space and Conservation
San Ramon’s beautiful settings—the surrounding hills, ridges, creeks, and canyons are highly
cherished by residents. These open space resources are important, not only for aesthetic
value, but also for environmental quality, character, habitat protection, recreation, water
resources, and agriculture. These many functions of open space underscore the importance
of careful land use planning.
In 1999, Measure G mandated the preparation of a new General Plan based on the principles of
smart growth. A key component of this mandate was the preparation of a plan for the acquisition
of ridgeline areas and agricultural lands contiguous to the City of San Ramon. These lands are
to be preserved for open space purposes in perpetuity. In response to this mandate, this
element of the General Plan includes an open space action plan that creates a structure for
implementation by establishing and strengthening partnerships and coordination with relevant
groups and agencies, securing funding sources, and establishing preservation priorities.
This element also encourages rural conservation through compatible development that
preserves natural features, sensitive habitats, and agricultural resources. Water quality is also
a key component of conservation and the quality of life in San Ramon. As such, this element
includes policies to preserve and enhance water quality in the San Ramon Planning Area by
working closely with responsible regional agencies and by incorporating these considerations
into land use planning decisions. Finally, the preservation of archaeological, paleontological,
and historic resources is also an important goal of this General Plan, and relevant policies are
included in this element.
8.1 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES IN SAN RAMON
Preparation of a habitat protection plan may be required by General Plan Land Use Element
Implementing Policy 4.6‐I‐7 as part of the development review process where rural
development could affect potentially sensitive habitat areas, sensitive habitat species, etc.
Sensitive habitat resources are outlined below and illustrated in Figure 8‐1a and Figure 8‐1b.
VEGETATION
Natural vegetation throughout the San Ramon Planning Area is typical of that occurring in the
coast ranges and interior valleys of central California. Non‐native grassland is the dominant
vegetation type throughout the area with perennial species occurring infrequently on ridgetops
and east‐facing slopes. Scattered oak savannahs, comprised of mostly deciduous oak
species, occur in grasslands at middle elevations while live oak woodland is best suited to the
moister north‐ and east‐facing hillsides. Denser oak woodland occurs along drainages and
riparian habitat, often in combination with arroyo willow riparian forest. Chaparral or scrub
                                                8‐1

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
vegetation occurs on dry south and west facing slopes and along margins or openings in oak
woodland at higher elevations. Freshwater emergent vegetation is associated with perennial
standing water and seeps, which are scattered throughout the area.
SPECIAL‐STATUS SPECIES
Special‐status species are those animal and plant species that, in the judgment of the
resource agencies, trustee agencies, and certain non‐governmental organizations, warrant
special consideration in the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) process. This
includes the following species:
    •   Officially designated “threatened,” “endangered,” or “candidate” species federally listed
        by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and protected under the
        Federal Endangered Species Act.
    •   Officially designated “rare,” “threatened,” “endangered,” or “candidate” species state
        listed by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) and protected under
        the California Endangered Species Act. CDFW also maintains a list of “Fully
        Protected” species as well as “California Special Concern” species that are also
        generally included as special‐status species under CEQA.
    •   Species considered rare, threatened, or endangered under the conditions of Section
        15380 of the CEQA Guidelines, such as plant species identified on lists 1A, 1B, and 2
        in the California Native Plant Society (CNPS) Inventory of Rare and Endangered
        Vascular Plants of California.
    •   Bat species listed as Medium or High Priority by the Western Bat Working Group.
    •   Other species considered sensitive, such as nesting birds listed in the Migratory Bird
        Treaty Act (MBTA), which includes most native birds, and plants included in lists 3
        and 4 in the CNPS Inventory.
Plant Species
Four special‐status plant species have been recorded as occurring within the San Ramon
Planning Area boundaries. Recorded occurrences are shown on Figure 8‐1a. The species
include:
    •   Congdon’s tar plant
    •   Diablo helianthella
    •   Mt. Diablo buckwheat
    •   San Joaquin spearscale
                                               8‐2





                                 Open Space and Conservation
Wildlife Species
Fifteen special‐status wildlife species have been recorded as occurring within the San Ramon
Planning Area boundaries. Recorded occurrences are shown on Figure 8‐1b. The species
include:
      •   Alameda whip snake                            •  Ferruginous hawk
      •   American badger                               •  Golden eagle
      •   California horned lark                        •  Northern harrier
      •   California linderiella                        •  Prairie falcon
      •   California red‐legged frog                    •  Tricolored blackbird
      •   California tiger salamander                   •  Western pond turtle
      •   San Joaquin kit fox                           •  White‐tailed kite
      •   Burrowing owl
DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Under General Plan policies, any rural residential development proposed in Bollinger Canyon
and the Westside subareas, both of which are primarily designated Rural Conservation and
Hillside Residential by the General Plan, would have to ensure minimal disruption or loss of
habitat that could support special‐status animal species. Clustering of residential development
to preserve such habitat would be required within the Hillside Residential designation and
encouraged within the Rural Conservation designation, as proposed in the policies of the
Land Use Element. A habitat protection plan may be required for development that could
potentially affect sensitive habitat, sensitive habitat species, etc. and along with required
CEQA mitigation measures will ensure that any biological resources are protected.
GUIDING POLICY
8.1‐G‐1 Protect and maintain the quality of biological resources in the San Ramon Planning
           Area, while also balancing the needs of growth and development.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
8.1‐I‐1    Continue to require new land use and development activities to comply with
           applicable laws and regulations concerning special status species.
           Applicable laws and regulations include the Federal Endangered Species Act, the
           Migratory Bird Treaty Act, the California Endangered Species Act, and California
           Fish and Game Code.
8.1‐I‐2    When special status species and/or critical habitat may be adversely affected by
           land use or development activities, require appropriate and feasible mitigation
           measures in accordance with regulatory agency guidance.
                                               8‐7

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
8.1‐I‐3    Monitor and, as appropriate, engage regulatory agencies on any proposals to
           designate critical habitat and/or other special‐status species protection
           designations within the Planning Area.
           USFWS has proposed several extensive critical habitat designations in the San
           Francisco Bay Area in recent years. New land use and development activities within
           critical habitat designations are often subject to lengthy consultation and permitting
           requirements. Given the economic implications of critical habitat designations, the
           intent of this policy is to ensure that San Ramon is informed about any such
           proposals and has the ability to be engaged in the decision making process.
8.1‐I‐4    Ensure that the rights of private property owners are considered during the
           biological review process and encourage mutually acceptable solutions to special
           status species and/or critical habitat protection.
           Most of the lands where special status plant and wildlife species may occur are in
           private ownership in the Planning Area. This policy is intended to acknowledge that
           special‐status species protection measures may have implications on private
           property rights and, therefore, mutually acceptable solutions should be sought
           whenever possible.
8.2 OPEN SPACE INVENTORY
Growth in San Ramon has included the preservation of steep hillsides and ridges in the area.
West of the City, undeveloped land, including peaks rising 1,400 feet above the valley floor,
form an impressive backdrop for San Ramon. Several specific plans throughout the City
(Westside, Dougherty Valley, and Northwest) reflect the importance of open space protection
in the City by setting aside a significant amount of their respective plan areas as open space.
There is more than 3,500 acres of land designated as open space within the City limits,
including portions of Dougherty Valley, set aside as a condition of development approval.
Many of these designated open space lands consists of the undeveloped ridges and hills that
ring the Valley.
CLASSIFICATION OF OPEN SPACE
State planning law provides a structure for the preservation of open space by identifying the
following open space categories:
     •  Open space for public health and safety including, but not limited to, areas that
        require special management or regulation due to hazardous or special conditions.
        This type of open space might include earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas,
        floodplains, watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks, areas required for the
        protection of water quality and water reservoirs, and areas required for the protection
        and enhancement of air quality. In addition to Figure 8‐1a and Figure 8‐1b, the Safety
        Element includes open space classified as Geotechnical Hazards (Figure 9‐1), Flood
        Zone Hazards (Figure 9‐2), and Wildfire Hazards (Figure 9‐3).
     •  Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but not limited to,
        areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life, including: habitat for fish
                                                 8‐8

                                Open Space and Conservation
         and wildlife species; areas required for ecologic and other scientific study purposes;
         rivers, streams, bays and estuaries; coastal beaches, lakeshores, banks of rivers and
         streams; and watershed lands.
     •   Open space used for the managed production of resources including, but not limited
         to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for
         the production of food or fiber; areas required for recharge of ground water basins;
         bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers and streams that are important for the management
         of commercial fisheries; and areas containing major mineral deposits, including those
         in short supply.
     •   Open space for outdoor recreation including, but not limited to, areas of outstanding
         scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and recreation
         purposes, including access to lakeshores, beaches, and rivers and streams; and
         areas that serve as links between major recreation and open‐space reservations,
         including utility easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway
         corridors.
Figure 8‐2 illustrates a composite of these open space uses as defined in state law. Open
space lands within the City include a variety of site‐specific characteristics and are
programmed for a range of land use activities from rural residential, passive recreational
activities, agricultural production to private and public open space such as conservation areas
and Geologic Hazard Abatement Districts (GHADs). Many of these open space properties
are designated for conservation purposes, with little or no land use activities allowed, others
have been used for purposes such as rural residential, cattle grazing or recreation (e.g. Little
Hills Ranch).
The combination of open space lands associated with the different lands use designations all
help shape and limit the land form and meet open space objectives, such as creating and
preserving greenbelts and open space corridors that implement community design goals and
objectives. Regardless of the site‐specific activities and characteristics, these opens space
resources, especially on the urban perimeter, serve to supplement the established Urban
Growth Boundary (UGB) concepts by creating buffers and transition areas between urban
and rural areas.
8.3 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Conservation and protection of natural open space and scenic resources has always been
and continues to be a vital goal to the quality of life and community character provided in the
City of San Ramon. Open space areas shown on Figure 8‐2 are lands that have been
designated as open space resources for future conservation and preservation within the
Planning Area. These land uses include, but are not limited to, rural residential, resource
conservation areas and Geologic Hazard Abatement Districts.
RESOURCE CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
In 1988, the City adopted the Resource Conservation Overlay District (RCOD). The RCOD
was one of the City’s first set of comprehensive open space regulations implemented through
the Zoning Ordinance. In 1990, the San Ramon electorate circulated and qualified an
                                                 8‐9

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
initiative petition, which the City Council adopted as Ordinance 197, that required land within
the City limits, or land annexed to the City, above the 500‐foot elevation limit to be subject to
the Resource Conservation Overlay District (RCOD). The principles of Ordinance 197 were,
during subsequent years, strengthened, implemented, and integrated into the Zoning
Ordinance. As a result of the expiration of Ordinance 197 on December 31, 2010, General
Plan 2030 continues the City’s history of open space conservation and protection by
restricting development adjacent to ridgelines, on steep slopes, and along creek corridors.
Figure 8‐3 shows lands subject to the hillside, creek, and ridgeline regulations of the
Resource Management Division of the Zoning Ordinance and identifies the approximate
locations of ridgelines and creeks.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD ABATEMENT DISTRICTS
The use of Geologic Hazard Abatement Districts (GHADs) is another tool to secure and
protect open space lands. GHADs are independent governmental bodies that provide for
activity that is necessary or incidental to the prevention, mitigation, abatement or control of a
geologic hazard. These activities may include, but are not limited to, acquisition of property,
and construction, repair and maintenance of improvements. The first GHAD that was created
in San Ramon was the Canyon Lakes GHAD, which was formed in 1985. Geologic Hazard
Abatement District 1990‐01 was formed in 1990 to cover the Westbranch area of San
Ramon and was subsequently expanded with the annexations of Dougherty Valley, Old
Ranch Summit and the Windemere, BLC Property, which includes the Windemere Parkway
extension. The Wiedemann Ranch GHAD was formed in 1998 to provide services to the
Wiedemann Ranch development in Contra Costa County and it subsequently annexed
Subdivision 8118 (Henry Ranch) within the City of San Ramon in 2000. The City Council of
San Ramon also serves as the Board of Directors for GHAD 1990‐01, and the County Board
of Supervisors serves as the Board of Directors for the Canyon Lakes and Wiedemann Ranch
GHADs. GHAD 1990‐01 is currently the largest GHAD in California and owns substantial
amounts of open space, most of which is also overlain by a conservation easement.
GUIDING POLICY
8.3‐G‐1 Acquire, preserve, and maintain open space and its natural resources for future
            generations.
8.3‐G‐2 Strengthen the City’s partnership with East Bay Regional Parks District, Contra
            Costa County, other jurisdictions and private organizations to expand the ridgeline
            and hillside open space system in the City’s Planning Area.
            Open space lands contribute to the quality of life in San Ramon and help establish
            its character. Ridgeline and hillside trails, including the East Bay Regional Parks
            District Calaveras Ridge Trail, as well as other ridgeline trails proposed by this
            General Plan, can provide access to these open space lands.
                                                8‐10





                           Open Space and Conservation
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
8.3‐I‐1 Preserve, protect, and maintain significant native oak woodlands.
8.3‐I‐2 Enhance San Ramon’s creeks and riparian corridors by requiring preservation or
        replacement of riparian vegetation, as appropriate and in conformity with regulatory
        requirements.
        Creeks and riparian corridors provide visual amenity, drainage, and wetland and
        wildlife habitat.
8.3‐I‐3 Explore opportunities to preserve significant creek, riparian areas, sensitive natural
        communities, and prominent topographic features as open space.
8.3‐I‐4 Require maintenance plans for open space areas, including identified natural
        resources such as ridges and waterways.
        As a guide, use standards such as the East Bay Regional Park District’s, Wildland
        Management Policies and Guidelines, for the management and maintenance of
        open space.
8.3‐I‐5 Through the development review process, encourage wildlife corridors to provide
        connectivity between established open space areas, where deemed appropriate.
        Successful wildlife corridors, depending on the animal, provide short and direct
        routes and do not have a physical or psychological barrier. Examples of features
        commonly used as wildlife corridors include creeks and waterways, natural
        depressions, and ridgelines.
8.3‐I‐6 New development shall dedicate open space, as appropriate, through the use of an
        irrevocable instrument.
        Irrevocable instruments may include easements, recorded maps, or deeds of trust.
8.3‐I‐7 Confer with appropriate agencies and organizations to ensure that all development,
        including Dougherty Valley, the Westside subareas, and any other future
        development provides adequate mitigation for any impacts to special status species,
        wetlands, and significant natural biotic communities.
        The environmental reviews for both the Westside and Dougherty Valley Specific
        Plans identified potential impacts to wildlife, wetlands, and their habitats. Mitigation
        monitoring and reporting will ensure these resources are protected.
8.3‐I‐8 Encourage public access to creek corridors, as appropriate.
        Public access would be subject to standards and permitting requirements of
        regulatory agencies.
                                             8‐15

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
8.3‐I‐9 Consider alternatives to culverting or channelization of waterways during all stages
         of the review process.
         Maintaining the natural stream channel is most preferable from a biological and
         hydrological perspective. However, this policy acknowledges that the use of culverts
         or channels may be the safest and most cost effective approach in terms of
         providing adequate drainage and that existing “natural” channels may be
         substantially degraded.
8.3‐I‐10 Promote maintenance and protection of waterways through the use of Geologic
         Hazard Abatement District(s), conservation easements, endowments, special
         assessments, or other appropriate mechanisms.
         While these districts have mainly been used in the Dougherty Valley, they may be
         effective elsewhere in the Planning Area. Future GHADs, or annexation into existing
         GHADs, conservation easements, endowments, special assessments and other
         similar methods to be considered for future developments with open space.
8.3‐I‐11 Continue participation in the Contra Costa Clean Water Program to control
         stormwater pollution and protect the quality of the City’s waterways.
8.3‐I‐12 Monitor the condition of waterways within the city limits and take proactive
         measures to prevent degradation.
         Monitoring includes maintaining an up‐to‐date inventory of creeks and creating a
         creek maintenance program. Proactive measures may include promoting periodic
         waterway clean‐up efforts, installing fencing or other protective barriers to prevent
         unauthorized access in sensitive locations, or planting vegetation along waterways
         to provide shade and prevent erosion.
8.3‐I‐13 Develop viewshed criteria to determine how to manage views of the natural hillsides
         surrounding San Ramon.
         The hills surrounding the City of San Ramon provide a natural hillside backdrop.
         Viewshed criteria would establish the process to evaluate new development and
         potential significant public views of the surrounding natural hillsides.
8.3‐I‐14 Maintain the adopt regulations for the protection and preservation of hillsides,
         creeks, and ridgelines.
         The Zoning Ordinance was amended in 2012 to replace the Resource Conservation
         (‐RC) Overlay Zone with regulations that incorporate the protection and
         preservation of hillsides, creeks, and ridgelines in the Resource Management
         Division. The amended hillside, creek, and ridgeline regulations of the Resource
         Management Division apply to 1) all property over 500 feet in elevation, 2) property
         with a natural gradient in excess of 10 percent, or 3) property within 1,000 feet of a
         major or minor ridgeline. The amended hillside, creek, and ridgeline regulations of
         the Resource Management Division do not apply to Built Urban Land as shown in
         Figure 8‐3, except for creek setback regulations.
                                                8‐16

                               Open Space and Conservation
8.3‐I‐15 Apply the hillside, creek, and ridgeline regulations of the Resource Management
          Division of the Zoning Ordinance to the Resource Management Area as shown in
          Figure 8‐3.
          The Resource Management Area in Figure 8‐3 continues the City’s commitment
          towards hillside, creek, and ridgeline protection and preservation.
8.3‐I‐16 Maintain the slope methodology standards in the Zoning Ordinance to implement
          the resource management policies.
          Slope methodology standards achieve consistent application of the resource
          management policies through the Zoning Ordinance.
8.3‐I‐17 Retain ridgelines as open space, except for ridgelines that may be altered, as
          shown in Figure 8‐3.
          The amended hillside, creek, and ridgeline regulations of the Resource
          Management Division in the Zoning Ordinance shall provide additional standards for
          natural terrain alteration.
8.3‐I‐18 Retain hillsides steeper than 20 percent slope as open space, except for slopes
          and ridgelines that may be altered, as shown in Figure 8‐3.
          The surrounding natural open space continues to be a vital goal to enhance the
          community character and quality of life in San Ramon.
8.4 MEASURE G (1999) OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION ACTION PLAN
The following policies respond to Measure G’s mandate for “a plan for the acquisition of
ridgeline lands, contiguous to the City of San Ramon, to be preserved for open space
purposes in perpetuity.” They also are consistent with the Government Code’s requirement for
an Open Space Action Plan that is to include “specific programs which the legislative body
intends to pursue in implementing its open space plan” (Section 65564).
GUIDING POLICY
8.4‐G‐1 Expand the ridgeline and hillside open space system in the City’s Planning Area by
          joint efforts with East Bay Regional Parks District, Contra Costa County and
          nonprofit trustee agencies.
          This guiding policy expresses the goal of Measure G (1999) and recognizes that
          achieving that goal is a cooperative effort.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
8.4‐I‐1   Confer with appropriate agencies and organizations in the creation of an institutional
          framework and financing mechanisms necessary to acquire additional ridgeline areas
          and agricultural lands, and to preserve, restore, and manage important open space.
          Open space lands may be publicly or privately owned.
                                               8‐17

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
8.4‐I‐2 Encourage developers to explore Transfer of Development Rights (TDRs) in
        conjunction with project review to cluster residential development and preserve
        open space, ridgelines, and creek corridors.
        A TDR program can create an incentive for preservation of large areas of open
        space by allowing the transfer of the development that otherwise would be
        permitted from a “sending area” to a “receiving area” where the additional
        development can be accommodated. A TDR program does not require public outlay
        for the purchase of development rights, but purchase of development rights under a
        TDR program could be an option for an open space lands trust. Implementing
        regulations will need to ensure that once the development rights are transferred, the
        sending areas are preserved as permanent open space.
8.4‐I‐3 Utilize GHADs and/or other secure funding mechanisms for open space to assist in
        the acquisition and on‐going management, operation, and maintenance of a
        ridgeline and hillside open space system.
8.4‐I‐4 Establish the Open Space Advisory Committee to accomplish the required activities
        pursuant to Policy 8.4‐I‐5 below.
        The Advisory Committee will advise the City Council on setting priorities for open
        space acquisition and preservation.
8.4‐I‐5 The Open Space Advisory Committee shall advise and report directly to the City
        Council annually on activities regarding their charge as described below:
        •    Prioritize land at risk for development based upon the Priority Property List
             developed by the Open Space Task Force or refined factors as determined by
             the Open Space Advisory Committee; and
        •    Based upon the prioritization of the Priority Property List recommend potential
             properties for preservation; and
        •    Advise the City Council regarding opportunities and resources available for
             establishing a secure funding source for open space acquisition, permanent
             preservation, and maintenance for properties contiguous to the City limits;
        •    Provide a forum for input from the community regarding open space issues,
             which are consistent with the Committee’s charge.
        •    Seek partnerships with other open space advocacy groups for the purposes of
             sharing information on funding sources and ways to permanently preserve open
             space.
        •    Prepare and submit an annual Work Program for approval by the City Council.
8.4‐I‐6 Use open space in new development to create buffers that delineate the edge of
        urban areas.
                                              8‐18

                             Open Space and Conservation
         Other implementing actions will create additional open space in the Planning Area,
         which will create a backdrop for the City and trail linkages between parks and
         regional open space.
8.4‐I‐7 Encourage the restoration of degraded open space areas as part of new
         development projects, as appropriate.
8.4‐I‐8 Explore funding opportunities to restore degraded habitat on publicly owned open
         space and to provide assistance, where appropriate, to owners of privately owned
         land dedicated as permanent open space, to facilitate private restoration effects.
         Assistance may include inter‐agency coordination, identification of funding
         opportunities, the provision of information, or other efforts to aid private property
         owners in habitat restoration.
8.4‐I‐9 Preserve open space pursuant to Policy 8.4‐I‐5, on a priority basis as funds are
         available using the following criteria:
         •   Lands currently for sale or that can be acquired under favorable terms or
             conditions;
         •   Land with high biological and ecological value, including those that contain
             natural watersheds, wetlands, riparian corridors, sensitive natural communities,
             or occupied by special status plant and wildlife species;
         •   Lands that are contiguous to existing open space properties or other public
             lands and that provide continuity with current uses and buffers; or
         •   Lands that provide trail connections or other recreational opportunities.
         No order of priority is implied by this list.
8.4‐I‐10 Continue planning and managing ridgelines, agricultural lands, and open space
         acquired by the City or other Open Space areas through the Geologic Hazard
         Abatement District(s) and the Dougherty Valley Open Space Management Plan.
8.4‐I‐11 Provide incentives for clustering of allowable residential use on infill open space
         sites to avoid unnecessary grading and site development inconsistent with Plan
         policies for open space and resource conservation.
         An incentive program might be based on the percent of the site to be retained as
         permanent open space, as described in Table 8‐1. Clustering of all buildings should
         be required, including buildings for park and recreation facilities, as well as
         buildings allowable for commercial recreation and entertainment uses.
                                               8‐19

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
                 Table 8‐1: Open Space/Density Provisions for Infill Open Space Sites
            Percent of Site Permanently Preserved
                    as Open Space (gross)                             Maximum Density
            Up to 69.9 percent                      1 unit per 20 net acres
            70 percent or more                      1 unit per 10 net acres; clustering required.
8.4‐I‐12 Confer, through the development review process, with appropriate agencies and
          organizations to create a connecting region‐wide open space system.
8.4‐I‐13 Allow appropriate and beneficial improvements on open space lands, subject to
          standards for environmental protection; city hillside, ridgeline, and creek regulations;
          avoidance of hazards; and building siting and design that will preserve the open
          space character of the site. An example may include work related to the Geologic
          Hazard Abatement District.
8.5 AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES
AGRICULTURAL LAND MAPPING
The California Department of Conservation Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program
(Farmland Program) classifies agricultural lands into five categories:
    •   Prime Farmland: Land with the best combination of physical and chemical features able
        to sustain the long‐term production of agricultural crops. These lands have the soil
        quality, growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields.
    •   Farmland of Statewide Importance: Land similar to Prime Farmland but with minor
        shortcomings, such as greater slopes or less ability to hold and store moisture.
    •   Unique Farmland: Land of lesser‐quality soils used for the production of the State’s
        leading agricultural crops. This land is usually irrigated but may include non‐irrigated
        orchards or vineyards, as found in some climactic zones in California.
    •   Farmland of Local Importance: Land of importance in the local agricultural economy,
        as determined by each county’s Board of Supervisors and a local advisory committee.
    •   Grazing Land: Land with vegetation that is suited to the grazing of livestock.
Prime, Statewide Important, and Unique Farmland are classified as “Important Farmland” by
the Farmland Program. Figure 8‐4 identifies a total of 162 acres in the San Ramon Planning
Area as Prime Farmland and Unique Farmland. The San Ramon Planning Area does not
have any Farmland of Statewide Importance. Land use and development activities that
propose to convert Important Farmland to non‐agricultural use are typically required to
evaluate the impacts of such a conversion using the California Department of Conservation’s
Land Evaluation and Site Assessment (LESA) Model. Farmland of Local Importance and
Grazing Land do not fall within the Important Farmland umbrella and the proposed conversion
of these lands to non‐agricultural use does not require LESA Model evaluation.
                                                 8‐20



                                Open Space and Conservation
Figure 8‐4 also identifies agricultural land within the San Ramon Planning Area, as mapped
by the Farmland Program. As shown in the figure, 8,426 acres of land are mapped as Prime
Farmland, Unique Farmland, and Grazing Land. A fourth category, “Other Land” in Figure
8‐4, includes Farmland of Local Importance and other non‐farmland that does not require
evaluation of impacts associated with conversion to non‐agricultural uses.
WILLIAMSON ACT
The California Land Conservation Act, also known as the Williamson Act, is a voluntary
program that allows agricultural property owners to have their property assessed on the basis
of its agricultural production rather than at the current market value. The property owner is
thus relieved of having to pay higher property taxes, as long as the land remains in
agricultural production. The intent of the Williamson Act is to encourage property owners to
continue to farm their land, and to prevent the premature conversion of farmland to urban
uses. Participation requires that the area consist of 100 contiguous acres of agricultural land
under one or more ownerships.
Upon approval of an application by the County Board of Supervisors in which the property is
located in, the agricultural preserve is established, and the land within the preserve is
restricted to agricultural and compatible uses for at least 10 years. Williamson Act contracts
are automatically renewed annually for an additional one‐year period, unless the property
owner applies for non‐renewal or early cancellation. The Williamson Act contains limited
provisions for cancellation of contracts, and a substantial penalty for early cancellation is
assessed. Generally, the specific findings to justify cancellation are extremely difficult to make
and contracts are rarely cancelled.
Several properties within the Tassajara Valley portion of the Planning Area have active
Williamson Act contracts. Between 2005 and 2009, several Williamson Act contracts within
the Tassajara Valley were cancelled or not renewed in association with pending development
proposals before the County of Contra Costa.
GUIDING POLICY
8.5‐G‐1 Encourage the continuation of appropriate agricultural activities within the City’s
           Planning Area, while being cognizant that such uses may transition to non‐
           agricultural uses in the future.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
8.5‐I‐1    If Important Farmland is proposed to be converted to non‐agricultural use, require
           evaluation to determine significance of conversion impacts. If the conversion is
           found to be significant, require mitigation to offset such impacts.
           An evaluation shall determine the significance of Important Farmland conversion
           impacts. If such impacts are determined to be significant, mitigation in the form of
           onsite or offsite preservation of farmland within Contra Costa County at no less than
           a 1:1 ratio should be pursued. Alternative forms of mitigation may be considered if
           the preferred mitigation approach is not feasible.
                                                 8‐23

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
8.5‐I‐2   Process development applications involving land encumbered by Williamson Act
          contracts only if three years or less remain prior to expiration or cancellation of the
          contract.
          It is the preference of the City to have Williamson Act contract issues resolved prior
          to review of any development applications.
8.5‐I‐3   Minimize land use conflicts between agricultural and urban uses through site
          planning techniques.
          New development near grazing lands or cultivated agricultural uses should
          incorporate design features to minimize or avoid potential complaints associated
          with noise, odors, or early morning operations. Examples of design features include
          buffers and screening measures.
8.5‐I‐4   Explore opportunities with East Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD), other
          government agencies, or private organizations to set aside and manage
          undeveloped lands as open space that are contiguous and sufficient in size to allow
          continued agricultural uses.
          Grazing activities on open space lands can offset the fire prevention and
          maintenance costs measures.
8.5‐I‐5   Designate land for rural conservation along the west side of Bollinger Canyon Road
          near the Las Trampas Regional Wilderness in order to preserve visual open space,
          to provide opportunities for horse‐keeping and part‐time ranching, and to maintain
          compatibility with adjoining agricultural uses.
8.6 WATER CONSERVATION AND QUALITY
East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) and Dublin San Ramon Services District
(DSRSD) provide potable water service to San Ramon. EBMUD generally serves the
northern, western, and central portions of San Ramon, while DSRSD serves the Dougherty
Valley.
WATER CONSERVATION
EBMUD has a comprehensive Water Conservation Program in place that includes both
supply‐ and demand‐side measures, including audits, incentives, optimal management
practices, wastewater and landscape regulations, education programs, support activities,
metering, and leak detection and pipe replacement. EBMUD also recommends that local
cities require water conservation measures as a standard feature in the design and
construction of proposed development projects.
In 2006, state legislation (AB 1881, Laird, 2006) required the Department of Water
Resources to adopt an updated Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO). In
2009, the State Department of Water Resources adopted an updated model ordinance that
became effective January 1, 2010. As a result, the City of San Ramon requires new
                                                8‐24

                               Open Space and Conservation
development to meet the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance in an effort to
conserve landscape water use.
Water reclamation can also significantly reduce water demand and storage requirements.
Reclaimed water is used most effectively for irrigating areas such as parks, greenbelts, golf
courses, roadway medians, and front yards. DSRSD has provided an increasing amount of
recycled water throughout their service area within San Ramon. Additionally, groundwater has
the potential to reduce demand on municipal supplies, although the characteristics of the
aquifer and its water table in the San Ramon Planning Area are variable.
WATER QUALITY
The primary goal of the City of San Ramon Stormwater Program is to reduce pollution of
storm water as it enters the local creeks and the San Francisco Bay. The City of San Ramon
is a member of the Contra Costa Clean Water Program, which has been instrumental in
developing Low Impact Development (LID) techniques for the reduction and treatment of
storm water runoff from development projects. The San Francisco Bay Regional Water
Quality Control Board adopts regulations to satisfy National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements to manage storm water runoff.
The City also monitors construction sites to ensure adequate Best Management Practices
(BMPs) are implemented to reduce water pollution during construction in compliance with the
State General Construction Permit issued by the California State Water Resources Control
Board.
GUIDING POLICY
8.6‐G‐1 Promote the implementation of water quality and conservation programs and
          measures by San Ramon employers, residents, and public agencies.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
8.6‐I‐1   Require new development projects to implement indoor water conservation and
          demand management measures.
          Examples of conservation and demand management measures include low‐flow
          bathroom fixtures, high water efficiency clothes washers and dishwashers.
8.6‐I‐2 Require new development projects to implement outdoor water conservation and
          demand management measures.
          Examples of conservation and demand management measures include separate
          metering of domestic and irrigation water, drought‐resistant vegetation, drip
          irrigation or low‐precipitation‐rate sprinklers, programmable irrigation controllers with
          automatic rain shutoff sensors, and hydrozones that keep plants with similar water
          needs in the same irrigation zone. Furthermore, new development projects are
          encouraged to install drought resistant vegetation instead of turf.
                                                8‐25

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
8.6‐I‐3 New development in areas where recycled water service exists or is planned shall
        be plumbed with “purple pipe” and other measures necessary to accommodate non‐
        potable water service.
        Exceptions are allowed for projects that would not use potable water for non‐
        potable use or would only use small amounts of potable water for non‐potable use.
8.6‐I‐4 Require new development to meet the State Model Water Efficient Landscape
        Ordinance (MWELO).
        Effective January 1, 2010 all development must meet the State MWELO
        requirements which establish landscape design requirements for new and
        rehabilitated landscape areas within the City.
8.6‐I‐5 Collaborate with DERWA (Dublin San Ramon Services District and East Bay
        Municipal Utilities District Recycled Water Authorities) to expand the recycled water
        distribution system in an efficient and timely manner.
        Installing recycled water infrastructure as part of roadway construction projects is an
        effective way to expand the distribution system, while also minimizing disruption to
        residents and businesses.
8.6‐I‐6 Continue implementation of the City of San Ramon Stormwater Management
        Program to reduce storm water pollution, provide public education, and to protect
        the water quality of the City’s local creeks and streams.
        In order to comply with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
        permit requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems, the City of San
        Ramon Stormwater Program performs a variety of activities which may include
        participating in the Contra Costa Clean Water Program, field inspections, educational
        and outreach activities, storm drain cleaning, street sweeping, the implementation of
        new development/redevelopment stormwater controls, or other activities.
8.6‐I‐7 Promote the protection of groundwater resources by collaborating with agencies that
        monitor and oversee clean‐up efforts at existing sources of pollution.
        There are several sites in San Ramon that previously contained leaking underground
        storage tanks. These sites are currently undergoing monitoring and remediation and
        are regulated by agencies including the County of Contra Costa and the San
        Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board. The intent of this policy is to
        ensure that the City is aware of groundwater pollution sources and proactively
        engaged with appropriate agencies to facilitate efficient and timely clean‐up efforts.
                                              8‐26

                               Open Space and Conservation
8.7 ARCHAEOLOGICAL, PALEONTOLOGICAL, AND HISTORIC
       RESOURCES
LOCAL HISTORY
At the time of European contact in the 18th century, the San Ramon area was occupied by the
Ohlone tribe of California Native Americans. The tribal group that most likely occupied the San
Ramon area is the Chochenyo language group, whose territory extended from the southern end
of the Carquinez Strait south to Mission San Jose (present‐day Fremont), east to present‐day
Livermore and west to the San Francisco Bay. The estimated Ohlone population in 1770—when
the first mission was established in Ohlone territory—was approximately 10,000. By 1832, the
population had declined to fewer than 2,000, mainly due to diseases introduced by the
European explorers and settlers. The Gold Rush brought further disease to the native
inhabitants, and by the 1850s, nearly all of the Ohlone had adapted in some way or another to
economies based on cash income. Hunting and gathering activities continued to decline and
were rapidly replaced with economies based on ranching and farming.
Following Mexico’s independence from Spain in 1822, the vast mission lands were granted to
private citizens as ranchos. The San Ramon Valley contained three large ranchos: San
Ramon (Amador), 16,517 acres; San Ramon (Carpentier), 8,917 acres; and San Ramon
(Norris), 4,451 acres.
The population of the Contra Costa County increased rapidly during the Gold Rush and, in
the post‐Civil War Era. The great rancheros of the Spanish period were divided and sold for
agricultural uses, with intensively irrigated farming made possible in some areas of Contra
Costa County by the development of canals that brought water from the eastern portions of
the County to the central portions. Walnuts were an especially attractive orchard crop in
central portions of the County, with farmers using thin‐shelled English walnut branches
grafted to hardy and disease‐resistant American walnut rootstock.
The first settlers to the San Ramon area were Leo and Mary Norris, who purchased 4,450 acres
of land in 1850, and who are the namesakes of Norris Canyon. Other early settlers included
names that are recognizable from local street names and landmarks, including Crow, Bollinger,
and Glass. The first village developed near the site of the present‐day Outpost Sports Bar at the
intersection of Deerwood Road and San Ramon Valley Boulevard. San Ramon was known by a
series of names in the nineteenth century: Brevensville, for a local blacksmith; Lynchville, for the
early settler William Lynch; and Limerick, for the numerous Irish immigrants.
The Southern Pacific Railroad arrived in the San Ramon Valley in the 1890s. Dubbed the
San Ramon Branch Line, the railroad line originally extended from a junction with the
Oakland‐Stockton main line near Martinez south to San Ramon, a distance of approximately
20 miles. Service commenced in June 1891. In 1909, the southern terminus of the San
Ramon Branch Line was extended south to a junction with the Lathrop‐Niles Junction main
line near Pleasanton. San Ramon was served with a station, known as San Ramon Siding,
near the present‐day Iron Horse Trail crossing at Crow Canyon Road. By the mid‐1970s,
traffic on the line had dwindled to 125 carloads annually and the Southern Pacific petitioned
the Interstate Commerce Commission to abandon the branch line. The line was formally
abandoned in 1978 and the counties of Alameda and Contra Costa acquired ownership of the
                                                 8‐27

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
right‐of‐way within their respective jurisdictions. The present‐day Iron Horse Trail follows the
alignment of the San Ramon Branch Line from Pleasanton to Concord.
The San Ramon Valley remained primarily an agricultural area up through the early 1960s.
Following the completion of Interstate 680 (I‐680) through the San Ramon Valley in the
mid‐1960s, the San Ramon area experienced rapid growth. The first residential subdivisions
were developed in South San Ramon (a.k.a. San Ramon Village) and Twin Creeks. In the
early 1980s, Sunset Development began developing the Bishop Ranch Business Park. The
most notable facilities in the Bishop Ranch Business Park are Chevron Park and the AT&T
campus (formerly known as the Pacific Bell campus), both of which opened in the mid‐
1980s. Sunset Development continued to develop the Bishop Ranch Business Park through
the 1980s and 1990s.
With growth came the desire for greater control over land use and development. In March
1983, the City electorate voted to incorporate and the City of San Ramon came into
existence on July 1, 1983. Since incorporation, the City has expanded its limits west to
include the Westside Drive area and portions of Norris Canyon, north to include the Crow
Canyon area, and east to include the Dougherty Hills and Dougherty Valley.
HISTORIC AND PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
The San Ramon Planning Area includes several sites of both historic and prehistoric value.
Forest Home Farms Historical Park is listed on the National Register of Historic Places
(Landmark Plaque No. 2174). The 16‐acre historical park is located 19953 San Ramon
Valley Boulevard and features the Boone House and interpretative exhibits depicting historic
agricultural activities of the San Ramon Valley.
Prehistoric sites consist of Native American habitations and rock art. Native American
archeological sites in this portion of Contra Costa County tend to be situated along ridgetops,
midslope terraces, alluvial flats, at the base of hills, between saddles, near ecotones, and near
sources of water including springs. The Planning Area encompasses all of these environmental
features with recorded Native American archeological sites found in each of these areas.
Several state laws, most notably CEQA Guidelines §15064.5(f) and Public Resources Code
§5020‐5029 and 21083.2, protect archeological and historical resources. To protect historic
resources, the State has formed the State Historical Resources Committee that conducts the
State Historic Resource Inventory and maintains the California Register of Historic Resources,
which identifies historic landmarks and points of interest. The Committee also provides
recommendations for the National Register of Historic Resources.
GUIDING POLICY
8.7‐G‐1 Identify, evaluate, and preserve the archaeological, paleontological, and historic
           resources that are found within the San Ramon Planning Area.
                                                8‐28

                            Open Space and Conservation
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
8.7‐I‐1 Require that new development evaluate potential impacts to historic, archaeological,
        and paleontological resources and, if necessary, implement appropriate mitigation
        measures to protect the resources.
        Projects that disturb undeveloped land or propose the demolition or substantial
        modification of structures 45 years of age or older will be required to evaluate
        potential cultural resource impacts. Exceptions to this policy include infill
        development or redevelopment on sites that have been developed within the
        previous 45 years.
8.7‐I‐2 Protect and maintain the integrity of officially listed historic resources.
8.7‐I‐3 Closely review any proposals to nominate local resources for eligibility for listing on
        national or state historic registers.
        Discretion should be used in reviewing such nominations to ensure that resources
        have significant historic value and have been appropriately evaluated.
8.7‐I‐4 As a standard condition of approval, require all development projects involving
        grading and excavation to implement appropriate measures in the event that burial
        sites or human remains are encountered during earthwork activities.
        Appropriate measures may include stopping work within 100 feet of the find,
        notifying the Contra Costa County Coroner’s Office, and, if the Coroner determines
        that the remains are determined to be of Native American origin, notification of the
        Native American Heritage Commission.
8.7‐I‐5 For projects involving a General Plan Amendment, the development of a Specific
        Plan (or amendment), or designating open space, provide for tribal consultation
        opportunities in accordance with state law.
        State law establishes specific requirements for tribal consultation in these
        circumstances. It broadens the focus from the protection and preservation of
        archaeological sites and artifacts to include protection of traditional tribal cultural
        places on public and private lands, for both federally and non‐federally recognized
        tribes.
                                              8‐29


                                                 9
                                            Safety
The Safety Element of the General Plan is to provide information “for the protection of the
community from unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically induced surface
rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, and dam failure; slope instability leading to
landslides, subsidence, and other geological hazards; flooding; hazardous material accidents;
and wildland and urban fire” (Government Code §65302 [g]). One of the City’s highest
priorities is the protection of its residents from geologic and soils hazards, hazardous
materials, flooding, and fires.
A new component of the safety element is a discussion of the City’s Emergency Operations
Plan. The Emergency Operation Plan premise is to reduce injury and loss of life, property,
and natural resources through the effective management of emergency resources.
9.1 SAN RAMON EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
In 2006, the City of San Ramon City Council adopted its Emergency Operations Plan and a
subsequent update to the plan was initiated in 2009. The Emergency Operations Plan identifies
the appropriate actions to take when an event occurs due to a major earthquake, hazardous
materials incident, flood, national security emergency, wildfire, landslide, and dam failure.
The City’s plan complies with existing state and federal laws. The objectives of the plan are to
reduce injury, and loss of life, property, and natural resource through effective management
of emergency resources. The Emergency Operations Plan identifies the City’s emergency
planning, organizational, and response policies and procedures, while integrating and
coordinating these with other governmental levels when required. The Emergency Operations
Plan institutes the Incident Command System, the Standardized Emergency Management
System, and the National Incident Management System, which provide a common system
that is recognized throughout the State of California as a basis for managing large emergency
incidents that could involve multiple agencies and jurisdictions.
The City’s response to disasters is based on four phases including: increased readiness,
initial response operations, extended response operations, and recovery operations. All
individual departmental plans support the Emergency Operations Plan and inform staff of the
procedures for recalling departmental personnel, disaster assignments, and departmental
resource lists. Response to emergencies follows the Incident Command System, ensuring
unified command by all emergency response teams. Depending on the type of incident, the
most appropriate agency will become the lead agency and will be supported by the other
emergency response teams.
                                                 9‐1

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
GUIDING POLICIES
9.1‐G‐1 Maintain the City’s Emergency Operations Plan as the guide for emergency
          management in San Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
9.1‐I‐1   Maintain and update the City’s Emergency Operations Plan, as required by State
          and Federal laws, to minimize the risk to life and property of seismic and geologic
          hazards, hazardous materials and waste, and fire.
          Disseminate information to community and business leaders and residents
          regarding all aspects of emergency and disaster preparedness, including plans for
          evacuation and alternate access routes and provisions of Emergency Operation
          Plan. The City will participate in a coordinated emergency response in the event of
          any local or regional, natural or man‐made disaster.
9.1‐I‐2   In collaboration with other agencies, maintain and disseminate emergency
          preparedness information.
          The City participates in a Joint Powers Agreement (JPA) Citizen Corps Council
          program as encouraged by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in
          collaboration with the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District, San Ramon Valley
          Unified School District, and Town of Danville. The joint program conducts an annual
          emergency preparedness community fair, provides a Community Emergency
          Response Team (CERT) program, and conducts regular trainings and drills with
          interested residents and businesses. Public education and emergency preparedness
          information are shared between the agencies for common dissemination to the
          public, consistent with the “be ready” federal and state campaigns.
9.1‐I‐3   Coordinate regular exercises and drills with emergency organizations. Provide training
          opportunities for all City staff to be adequately trained to State and Federal
          requirements.
          The City maintains regular employee training programs to meet the National
          Incident Management System (NIMS) and California Standardized Emergency
          Management System (SEMS) requirements.
9.2 GEOLOGIC, SEISMICITY AND SOILS HAZARDS
GEOLOGY
The San Ramon Planning Area is located in the East Bay Hills of the Coast Ranges in the
western part of Contra Costa County, California. The East Bay Hills are part of a block of
folded and faulted Upper Cretaceous age (about 62 to 98 million years ago) marine
sedimentary rocks of the Great Valley Sequence. The local hills are formed from younger
rocks, uplifted between the Hayward and Calaveras fault zones. The Planning Area includes
a series of northwest‐trending ridges and valleys, and is underlain by Tertiary (about 2 to 62
million years ago) marine and non‐marine sedimentary rocks.
                                               9‐2

                                               Safety
SEISMICITY
The major active fault with rupture potential in San Ramon is the Calaveras Fault, which lies
parallel to and just west of San Ramon Valley Boulevard. The California Legislature has
established an Alquist‐Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone along the fault, requiring detailed studies
of rupture hazards prior to new construction. Two smaller faults, the Dublin Fault and the
Bollinger Fault, also traverse portions of the City and its Sphere of Influence and are not
regarded as active. Minor faults, presumed inactive, intersect active or potentially active faults
and any movement of the master fault could trigger adjustments (earthquakes) on minor
cross faults or adjacent subparallel faults.
In 1990, the State Legislature passed the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, which became
effective on April 1, 1991. The purpose of the Act is to protect public safety from the effects of
strong ground shaking, liquefaction, landslides, or other ground failure and hazards caused by
earthquakes. The program and actions mandated by the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
closely resemble those of the Alquist‐Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act. The Seismic
Hazards Mapping Act requires the State Geologist to delineate the various seismic hazard
zones and requires cities to regulate certain development projects within the zones. If a
project is located in this zone, development permits for a site may not be issued until the
geologic and soil conditions of the project site are investigated and appropriate mitigation
measures, if any, are incorporated into development plans.
The United States Geological Survey and the State Department of Conservation’s California
Geologic Survey prepare geologic maps and reports, which should be consulted for locations
of additional minor faults. The existence of any fault line, whether it is inside or outside of an
earthquake fault zone, should be given serious consideration and thorough evaluation prior to
any development decisions.
SOILS
The San Ramon Planning Area is dominated by generally northwest‐trending, broad, rounded
ridges, and intervening valleys with steep side slopes. Sandstone bedrock crops out locally
on ridge crests and underlies upper hill slopes at shallow depths. Northern and eastern
portions of the Planning Area are underlain by non‐marine conglomerate, sandstone, and
mudstone. Alluvial terraces are locally present along major drainages. Soils are thin to non‐
existent on ridges, crests, and hill slopes, thicken toward the base of hill slopes, and
generally are thick in colluvium‐filled swales.
Soils within the San Ramon Planning Area frequently contain clays with high shrink‐swell
potential. Soils in the valley floors generally consist of alluvium and a mixture of sand, silt, and
clay. These areas have an elevated risk of experiencing localized liquefaction in the event of
strong ground shaking. Figure 9‐1 illustrates the geotechnical hazards in San Ramon.
Slopes range from level and gently sloping along the valley floor to slopes exceeding 75 percent
in hilly areas where rock outcrops occur. In these areas, there are high to severe erosion
hazards on slopes where bare soil is exposed as well as elevated risks of landslides. Much of
the Tassajara Valley and Bollinger Canyon Subareas are steeply sloped, with existing and
potential for new landslides posing concerns for new development in these areas.
                                                  9‐3

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
The Bay Area’s seismic activity requires that the City be vigilant with regard to safety. Crucial
measures may include the avoidance of geologic and seismic hazards in building, and the
adequate provision of public information regarding seismic safety.
In the steeper portions of the Planning Area, such as Bollinger Canyon, the Westside, and
Tassajara Valley, active landslides (debris flows, earth flows, and slumps) and severe erosion
potential represent major constraints to development. Any development in valley floors would
require careful siting, grading, and building techniques because these areas have an elevated
risk of experiencing localized liquefaction in the event of strong ground shaking.
GUIDING POLICY
9.2‐G‐1 Minimize risks of personal injury and property damage posed by geologic and
           seismic hazards.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
9.2‐I‐1    Review proposed development sites during the planning process to identify and
           mitigate any potential geologic or seismic hazards.
           Following receipt of a development proposal, engineering staff shall review the
           plans to determine whether a geotechnical review is required.
9.2‐I‐2 Require the preparation of a fault investigation study to identify appropriate setbacks
           for any proposed structure intended for human occupancy within 50 feet of an
           active fault trace.
           It is also the City’s intent to discourage homes, offices, hospitals, public buildings,
           and other similar structures over the trace of an inactive fault, but to allow non‐
           habitable uses such as landscaping, parking lots, and noncritical storage, within
           seismic setback areas that could experience displacement without undue risk to
           people and property. Roads may be built over active faults only where alternatives
           are impractical and where no utility lines are placed in the right‐of‐way.
9.2‐I‐3 Where appropriate, require an independent registered engineering geologist or
           geotechnical engineer to review geotechnical reports submitted by applicants on
           sites in seismically hazardous areas.
9.2‐I‐4    Require comprehensive geologic and engineering studies of critical structures
           regardless of location.
           Critical structures are those most needed following a disaster or those that could
           pose hazards of their own if damaged. They include utility centers and substations,
           water reservoirs, hospitals, fire stations, police and emergency communications
           facilities, and bridges and overpasses.
                                                  9‐4



                                            Safety
9.2‐I‐5 Require geotechnical field review during the construction phase of any new
         development as determined by the City Engineer.
         While proper grading techniques can effectively reduce risks of geologic hazards, it
         is important that a geotechnical engineer and/or engineering geologist provide
         onsite field inspection and testing during construction to ensure compliance with
         geotechnical recommendations.
9.2‐I‐6 Require preparation of a soils report as part of the development review and/or
         building permit process.
         The City is underlain by moderately to highly expansive soils, which must be taken
         into account during building design to minimize potential cracking and settling of
         structures. The report, however, would not be necessary when soil characteristics
         are known, and the City’s Building Official determines it is not needed.
9.2‐I‐7 Limit cut‐and‐fill slopes to 3:1 (33 percent slope) except where an engineering
         geologist or geotechnical engineer can establish to the satisfaction of the City
         Engineer that a steeper slope would not pose undue risk to people and property.
         This grading standard is applied to new development throughout the City to reduce
         the appearance of angled contours and to maintain slope stability. The City
         encourages less steep slopes wherever possible so that the visual impacts of
         grading are minimized. Encourage the use of 3D modeling to assure visual
         mitigation. The San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District should also ensure that
         emergency access to hillside development is maintained.
9.2‐I‐8  Blend cut‐and‐fill slopes with existing contours to avoid the appearance of artificial
         slopes.
         Grading plans should provide variation in horizontal and vertical contours that mimic
         the surrounding terrain such that development blends with the existing environment
         and avoids the visual impacts that result from high cut slopes and steep
         embankments.
9.2‐I‐9  Provide information and establish incentives for property owners to rehabilitate
         existing buildings using construction techniques to protect against seismic hazards.
         San Ramon requires compliance to the City‐adopted California Building Code, which
         specifies seismic standards for new construction, as well as for additions or
         expansions to buildings. It is in the community’s best interest to do all that is
         necessary to ensure that all structures meet current seismic standards. Incentives may
         include free inspections, assistance in obtaining loans, and possibly reduced fees.
9.2‐I‐10 Control erosion of graded areas with revegetation or other acceptable methods.
         Plant materials for re‐vegetation should not be limited to hydro‐seeding and
         mulching with annual grasses. Trees add structure to the soil and take up moisture
         while adding color and diversity.
                                               9‐7

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
9.2‐I‐11 Require financial protection for public agencies and individuals as a condition of
           development approval where geologic conditions indicate a potential for high
           maintenance costs for areas of public benefit.
           The formation of Geological Hazard Abatement Districts (GHAD) is one mechanism
           that can ensure geotechnical mitigation measures are maintained over the long term
           for areas of public benefit. Financial risks are to be equitably shared among owners
           and not borne by the City.
9.2‐I‐12 Encourage continued investigation by State agencies of geologic conditions within
           the City’s Planning Area to promote public awareness of potential geologic and
           seismic hazards.
           The City’s requirement for independent review of geologic reports shall consider the
           most recent available information regarding seismic hazards, including the potential
           for seismic shaking and fault rupture within the Mt. Diablo fold‐and‐thrust belt.
9.2‐I‐13 Review and update, as appropriate, City Code requirements for excavation, grading
           and filling to ensure that they conform to currently accepted standards.
9.3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Some topics regarding public safety can be dealt with only at a regional level, or fall within
the responsibility of public agencies other than the City of San Ramon. The use and
transportation of hazardous substances is one example for which public safety depends in
large part on the actions taken by the state and federal governments.
Pursuant to state law, the City has adopted by reference Contra Costa County’s Hazardous
Waste Management Plan. The Plan establishes a comprehensive approach to management
of hazardous wastes in Contra Costa County, including siting criteria for new waste
management facilities, educational and enforcement efforts to minimize and control the
hazardous waste stream, and policies to maintain a unified database on businesses that
generate hazardous waste.
The California Environmental Protection Agency (CEPA) lists all leaking Underground
Storage Tank (UST) sites and all solid waste disposal facilities from which there is a
migration of hazardous waste. Contaminated sites threaten the quality of the City’s
groundwater and shall be cleaned through decontamination of soils and filtration of
groundwater. Clean‐up shall be required in conjunction with development of property or
alteration of existing uses.
In San Ramon, waste oil is collected at the curb by the franchised waste hauler, and
household hazardous wastes are collected on weekends at various locations throughout the
County. Central Contra Costa Sanitary District (Central San) and Mt. View Sanitary District
(MVSD) jointly operate Contra Costa County’s first permanent Household Hazardous Waste
Facility (HHW) located in Martinez. The HHW collection facility collects household cleaners,
automotive care products, paint and paint‐related products, and garden care and pest control
products at no charge for cities in its service area, which includes the City of San Ramon.
                                                 9‐8

                                            Safety
Although San Ramon does have businesses that use hazardous materials, hazardous waste
is not generated in large amounts and a waste disposal facility is not likely to be sited in the
City. However, a concern exists because of the transportation of hazardous materials along
the I‐680 corridor and other routes of regional significance that pass through or are in close
proximity to San Ramon.
GUIDING POLICY
9.3‐G‐1 Minimize the risk of property damage and personal injury resulting from the
          production, use, storage, disposal, or transportation of hazardous materials.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
9.3‐I‐1   Promote the reduction, recycling, and safe disposal of household hazardous wastes
          through public education and awareness.
9.3‐I‐2 Continue to investigate options for establishing household hazardous waste drop off
          locations that are convenient to San Ramon residents
          Central Contra Costa Household Hazardous Waste Collection Facility was
          constructed in Martinez in approximately 1997 for the collection of hazardous waste
          generated by the residents and businesses of Contra Costa County. The Martinez
          facility is over 20 miles from San Ramon. In order to accommodate the San Ramon
          residents, financially viable options and ventures through local businesses and
          agencies to enhance household hazardous waste collection and disposal programs
          should be explored.
9.3‐I‐3 Require the clean‐up of sites contaminated with hazardous substances.
          The California Environmental Protection Agency publishes the Hazardous Waste
          and Substances Sites List, which identifies properties in the City that have the
          potential for hazardous materials contamination. Contaminated sites are threats to
          the quality of groundwater and shall be cleaned through decontamination of soils
          and filtration of groundwater. Clean‐up shall be required in conjunction with new
          development, reconstruction, property transfer of ownership, and/or the continued
          operation after the discovery of contamination. Continual business operation may be
          permitted during the conduct of clean‐up or remediation of the contamination as
          long as the clean‐up proceeds in accordance with an approved clean‐up plan.
9.3‐I‐4 Support and implement policies contained in the Contra Costa County Hazardous
          Waste Management Plan that encourage and assist the reduction of hazardous
          waste from businesses and homes in San Ramon.
9.3‐I‐5 Require businesses generating hazardous waste to pay necessary costs for local
          implementation of programs specified in the County Hazardous Waste Management
          Plan, as well as the costs associated with emergency response services for a
          hazardous materials release.
                                               9‐9

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
9.3‐I‐6    Work with the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District to minimize potentially
           dangerous conditions from storing, dispensing, using and handling of hazardous
           materials.
           The San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District reviews and approves plans for new
           and existing businesses with hazardous material, and may require new developments
           and change of use of existing facilities to conform to the California Fire Code with
           respect to storing, dispensing, using and/or handling of hazardous materials.
9.4 FLOOD AND STORM DRAINAGE
According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), a majority of Contra
Costa County’s creeks and shoreline lie within the 100‐year floodplain. Drainage facilities in
Contra Costa County are provided by the cities, the County, and the Contra Costa County
Flood Control and Water Conservation District (FCWCD). The FCWCD collects special
assessments to finance drainage improvements in areas with adopted drainage plans.
In the unincorporated parts of the San Ramon Planning Area, lands immediately abutting Alamo
Creek in Dougherty Valley and Tassajara Creek in Tassajara Valley are within the 100‐year
floodplain. Neither Dougherty Valley nor Tassajara Valley is currently in a formal drainage area.
The maintenance of Dougherty Valley flood control facilities will be undertaken by County
Service Area (CSA) M‐29. These facilities will be maintained by the City of San Ramon once
they are annexed to the City as provided for in the Dougherty Valley Settlement Agreement.
The City is generally responsible for maintaining the publicly owned elements of the flood
control system within the incorporated area, except for the San Ramon Creek downstream of
Crow Canyon Road and the Canyon Lakes area, which are the responsibility of the FCWCD.
The 100‐year flood is the flood elevation that has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded each year. Areas that are within the 100‐year flood zone, as determined by FEMA
at the time of preparation of this document are indicated on Figure 9‐2.
The City’s potential vulnerability to flooding makes the maintenance of the creeks system and
the location of structures above the 100‐year floodplain important considerations. Maintenance
tactics, detention of increased runoff, and the grading of land so that buildings remain above the
100‐year floodplain should be a priority in areas of new development and re‐development.
Maintenance practices for existing creeks and drainage systems should also be re‐evaluated
and adjusted because of the changes in the awareness of drainage systems and their
associated environments, as well as public attitudes and the regulatory climate. Changing the
maintenance practices will require considerable resources, and new funding mechanism,
should be explored.
Dougherty Valley’s development concept maintains major creek channels and places
development above the 100‐year floodplain. In addition, the FCWCD and the Contra Costa
County Public Works Department have employed flood detention basins and channeling
systems to control the flows of both Alamo Creek and Tassajara Creek in the Tassajara
                                                 9‐10

                                             Safety
Valley, and the FCWCD has designed storm drainage improvements that are expected to
accommodate creek flows at development build‐out.
GUIDING POLICY
9.4‐G‐1 Protect the community from risks to lives and property posed by flooding and
          stormwater runoff.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
9.4‐I‐1   Reduce hazards caused by local flooding through improvements and ongoing
          maintenance to the storm drain system and/or creek corridors.
9.4‐I‐2 Require new development to prepare hydrologic studies to assess storm runoff
          impacts on the local and subregional storm drainage systems and/or creek
          corridors. New development shall implement all applicable and feasible
          recommendations from the studies.
          Developers shall provide an assessment of a project’s potential impacts on the local
          and subregional storm drainage systems, so that the City can determine appropriate
          mitigation to ensure that system capacity and peak flow restrictions are not exceeded.
9.4‐I‐3 Require new development to provide a funding mechanism for ongoing
          maintenance of drainage facilities and other stormwater control measures.
          Maintenance may be by the City under contract, or by a private entity.
          If wetlands are affected, maintenance of drainage facilities may include mitigation
          monitoring in compliance with regulatory requirements until these requirements have
          been met.
9.4‐I‐4 Establish landscape and maintenance guidelines for required detention basins to
          ensure that such facilities achieve a look and quality that is consistent with the
          landscape of San Ramon and applicable regulatory requirements.
          Detention ponds provide aesthetic as well as safety benefits. Landscape and
          maintenance guidelines incorporated into a maintenance manual and ongoing
          monitoring would ensure that ponds in San Ramon are integral to the look and feel of
          the City landscape.
9.4‐I‐5 Maintain flood insurance rate maps and post for public education.
          Encourage all property owners within flood hazard areas to carry flood insurance.
9.4‐I‐6   Explore new funding mechanisms for enhancing the riparian environment and
          converting, where possible, flood control channels back to a more natural setting while
          keeping the existing uses and maintaining sufficient carrying capacity of the channels.
9.4‐I‐7 All new developments shall not increase runoff to the 100‐year peak flow in the
          City’s flood control channels or to local creeks and shall be substantially equal to
          pre‐development conditions. All new storm water systems shall be in compliance
                                              9‐11

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
          with the requirements of the City’s Stormwater Municipal Regional Permit issued by
          the San Francisco Regional Water Quality Control Board.
          All cities within the Contra Costa County, including the City of San Ramon, are part of
          the Contra Costa Clean Water Program and are co‐permittees of the Municipal
          Regional Permit issued by the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control
          Board. The Permittees are required within their respective jurisdictions to effectively
          prohibit the discharge of non‐stormwater into the storm drain systems and
          watercourses through the enforcement of the Municipal Permit requirements at the
          local level.
9.4‐I‐8   New development shall be required to locate buildings above the 100‐year floodplain
          and outside the special flood hazard area to minimize potential flood damages.
9.5 WILDLAND AND URBAN FIRES
The San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District (SRVFPD) provides fire protection services to
the incorporated and unincorporated portions of San Ramon.
The risk of both urban and wildland fires exists in the San Ramon Planning Area (Figure 9‐3).
The hazards related to wildland fires are related to a combination of factors including winds,
temperatures, humidity levels, fuel moisture content of vegetation and topography. The risk to
the community is increased in some areas because of the combustibility of building materials
including roofs, adequacy of access roads, water supply duration, and pressure and
maintenance of flammable vegetation surrounding structures.
To quantify this potential hazard, the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
(Cal Fire) has developed a fire modeling and mapping process that utilizes three main criteria
in order to evaluate and recommend potential fire hazards in wildland areas. The criteria are
type of vegetation, fire weather, and topography. The maps developed by Cal Fire identify
areas as Fire Hazard Severity Zones and include three severity classifications: moderate,
high, and very high.
Fire hazards in San Ramon are usually created by increases in the number of homes
adjoining open space; therefore, much of the threat of wildland fires is due to open
grasslands abutting residential developments. Many neighborhoods within the City are located
in remote regions and are surrounded by grasslands. As San Ramon continues to expand,
more of these wildland urban interface areas are created. This situation creates extreme fire
hazards, and San Ramon is committed to planning development, with the help of fire
protection agencies, that minimizes the risk of fire to the greatest extent possible.
Because of an extended dry season with low humidity, San Ramon has many days where fire
danger is critical. Within the City, fuel loading is light and wildfire hazard is moderate, except
in areas adjacent to the City where steep woodland slopes and rolling grassy hills create high
to extreme hazards. Areas in San Ramon representing the greatest risk are the Dougherty
Valley and Tassajara Valley areas to the east of the City Limit and the wildland areas at the
Planning Area’s western edge and northwestern corner.
                                                9‐12





                                               Safety
New development will likely create increased fire hazards caused by interactions between
open grassland and dense residential development. Therefore, projected development in the
City’s Planning Area will likely require the construction of fire suppression services facilities
for new subareas. The budgeting and timing of such construction should be considered with
respect to safety and the pace of new development. Moreover, community design techniques
that allow optimal fire services response time should remain a priority.
GUIDING POLICY
9.5‐G‐1 Minimize the risks to lives, property, and natural environment due to fire hazards.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
9.5‐I‐1   Require site design features, which are based on a wildfire risk assessment, and
          fire retardant building materials to reduce the risk of fire within the City.
          While the City enforces the International Building Code on all development and
          redevelopment proposals in San Ramon, the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection
          District may determine, during the initial application review, whether a project is
          located in a Fire Hazard Area and require developments to utilize best development
          practices that allow for both the protection of the structure and the preservation of
          the open space.
9.5‐I‐2 Require the completion of a Fire Protection Plan for new development adjacent to a
          Fire Hazard Area in order to determine which mitigation measures are appropriate
          to minimize fire hazard.
9.5‐I‐3   Work with the Fire Protection District on planning for a new training facility at an
          appropriate location where neighborhood impacts would be mitigated.
9.5‐I‐4 Require sprinklers in new homes located more than 1.5‐miles from a fire station.
9.5‐I‐5   Require sprinklers in all mixed‐use development to protect residential uses from
          non‐residential uses, which typically pose a higher fire risk.
          Appropriate fire protection measures are necessary in mixed‐use developments since
          residential units are typically in close proximity—either above or adjoining—to higher
          fire load non‐residential occupancies, such as retail stores, offices, restaurants, etc.
                                                 9‐17


                                                10
                                             Noise
The purpose of San Ramon’s Noise Element is to set forth policies that regulate the ambient
noise environment and protect residents from exposure to unacceptable noise levels.
Noises vary widely in their scope, source, and volume, ranging from individual occurrences
such as leaf blowers, to the intermittent disturbances of overhead aircraft, to the fairly
constant noise generated by traffic on freeways. Noise is primarily a concern with regard to
noise–sensitive uses such as residences, schools, churches, and hospitals.
Noise is commonly defined as sounds or a series of sounds that are undesirable, intrusive,
irritating, and/or disruptive to daily life. Vehicles are the primary noise source in San Ramon,
with the highest noise levels observed near Interstate 680 (I‐680) and arterial roadways.
Other noise sources include construction activities, landscaping and maintenance activities,
parking lot activities, mechanical equipment, and loading/unloading activities. Additionally,
military training activities at Camp Parks Reserve Forces Training Area are observed within
portions of South San Ramon and the Dougherty Valley.
10.1 MEASUREMENT OF NOISE
Sound levels are usually measured and expressed in decibels (dB) which is a unit of
measurement indicating the relative amplitude of a sound. The zero on the decibel scale is
based on the lowest sound level that the healthy, unimpaired human ear can detect. Sound
levels in decibels are calculated on a logarithmic basis. An increase of 10 decibels represents
a ten‐fold increase in acoustic energy, while 20 decibels is 100 times more intense, etc.
There are several methods of refining decibel scales to make them reflect human perception.
Most commonly used in California is the A‐weighted sound level or dBA. This scale gives
greater weight to the frequencies of sound to which the human ear is most sensitive. Figure
10‐1 shows the decibel noise levels in units of dBA associated with different common sounds,
and illustrates typical sound levels, while Figure 10‐2 provides noise level criteria for a variety
of land uses. Denotation of a land use as “normally acceptable” in Figure 10‐2 implies that
the highest noise level in that band is the maximum desirable for existing or conventional
construction that does not incorporate any special acoustic treatment.
Noise descriptors used for analysis need to account for human sensitivity to nighttime noise.
Common descriptors include the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) and the Day‐Night
Average Level (DNL, symbol (Ldn). Both reflect noise exposure over an average day with
weighting to reflect the increased sensitivity to noise during the night (10 pm to 7 am) and the
CNEL descriptor provides an additional evening (7 pm to 10 pm) weighting. The two descriptors
                                                  10‐1

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
are roughly equivalent. The CNEL descriptor is used in relation to major continuous noise
sources, such as aircraft or traffic, and is the reference level for state noise law.
Knowledge of the following relationships is helpful in understanding how changes in noise
and noise exposure are perceived:
   •   A change in sound level of less than 3 dB generally cannot be perceived;
   •   A 3 dB change is considered a just‐noticeable difference;
   •   A 5 dB change is required before any noticeable change in community response
       would be expected; and
   •   A 10 dB increase is subjectively heard as an approximate doubling in loudness and
       almost always causes an adverse community response.
                                   Figure 10‐1: Typical Sound Levels
                                                  10‐2

              Noise
Figure 10‐2: Land Use Compatibility
                10‐3

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
NOISE IN SAN RAMON
Noise in San Ramon is the result of both traffic and other sources. The nature of this noise is
outlined below.
Traffic noise depends primarily on the speed of traffic and the percentage of truck traffic.
Traffic volume has a lesser influence on traffic noise levels. The primary source of noise from
automobiles is high frequency tire noise, which increases with speed. In addition, trucks and
older automobiles produce engine and exhaust noise, and trucks also generate wind noise.
While tire noise from autos is generally located at ground level, truck noise sources can be
located as high as ten to fifteen feet above the roadbed because of tall exhaust stacks and
higher engines. For roads that are used heavily by trucks, sound walls are not as effective for
mitigating such noise unless they are very tall.
According to common practice for residential areas, CNEL noise exposure up to 60 dB is
considered “normally acceptable” for unshielded residential development. Noise levels above
60 up to 70 dB fall within the “conditionally unacceptable” range, and those in the range
above 70 to 75 dB are considered “normally unacceptable.”
TRAFFIC NOISE LEVELS
The San Ramon Planning Area is subject to noise impacts from several transportation
corridors, as illustrated in Figure 10‐3. Noise contours are lines drawn around a noise source
indicating equal levels of noise exposure.
Figure 10‐4 illustrates future noise contours throughout the Planning Area. By far the greatest
contributor to noise is traffic on I‐680. The California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)
has constructed sound walls adjacent to the freeway and existing nearby homes, but this
measure has occasionally increased ambient noise levels for residences located uphill and at
greater distances from the sound walls. This traffic noise thus presents the City with the
challenge of providing adequate noise mitigation other than sound walls along the freeway or
throughout the City. Other areas that will experience significant increases in ambient noise
levels include Crow Canyon Road, Bollinger Canyon Road, San Ramon Valley Boulevard,
Old Ranch Road, Dougherty Road, East Branch Parkway and Windemere Parkway.
To address local street issues, San Ramon adopted a Residential Traffic Calming Program
(RTC) in 1998. In 2006, the RTC Program was amended to reflect current trends. The
purpose of the RTC Program is to reduce vehicle speeds, improve safety, increase
awareness, and enhance the quality of life within residential neighborhoods through
implementation of traffic calming measures. Slowing traffic as well as providing alternative
modes of transportation could reduce vehicular noise.
CAMP PARKS
Camp Parks, an Army Reserve and National Guard training facility, consists of approximately
2,000 acres in Contra Costa and Alameda Counties. The installation occupies approximately
910 acres of the Planning Area adjacent to the Dougherty Valley and Tassajara Valley.
Facilities include a live fire shoot house, rappel tower, training courses, learning centers, and
bed space for more than 800 soldiers.
                                               10‐4





                                               Noise
The U.S. Army prepared an Environmental Noise Management Plan for Camp Parks in 2005.
The plan stated that helicopter and firearms training activities generate significant noise. The
plan indicated that the incompatible use zone (Zone III) and normally incompatible use zone
(Zone II), which are based on average noise exposure levels, were entirely contained within
the installation boundaries. The plan noted that peak noise levels from individual training
activities may be observed at nearby residential uses. As such, the plan recommended that
neighboring jurisdictions require disclosure of noise levels as part of real estate development
and transfer activities.
OTHER NOISE
Although traffic is the primary source of noise in San Ramon, other sources do exist. These
sources include construction, landscaping and maintenance activities, parking lot activities,
mechanical equipment, and loading/unloading activities. The policies of this Chapter address
the full range of these sources.
The City’s Noise Ordinance, adopted in 1987, establishes guidelines on limiting unnecessary
and excessive noise. The standards in the Noise Ordinance works to reduce the potential
impact noise may have to sensitive receptors and outlines remedies and penalties for noise
violations. Additionally, the City’s Zoning Ordinance provides noise reduction measures
through separation and/or screening of noise‐generating use.
GUIDING POLICY
10.1‐G‐1     Achieve an acceptable noise environment for the present and future residents of
             San Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
10.1‐I‐1     Minimize vehicular and stationary noise sources and noise emanating from
             intermittent activities.
             The City’s regulations restrict the hours of operation for a variety of noise sources,
             and State laws limit the noise levels of motor vehicles and some activities at
             industrial plants. The City’s Residential Traffic Calming Program reduces vehicular
             noise through promoting alternative modes of transportation and implementing
             traffic‐calming measures.
10.1‐I‐2     All projects that are exposed to noise greater than “normally acceptable” levels
             indicated in Figure 10‐2 shall be required to submit a noise analysis. Applicable
             noise attenuation measures shall be implemented with the DNL reduced to 45 dB
             in all habitable rooms.
             Noise attenuation measures may consist of conventional construction practices,
             open space and landscaping, building orientation and design, or other measures
             that buffer or mask sound. The City applies the standards of Title 24, Part II of
             the California Code of Regulations to all housing, thereby requiring an acoustical
             study if a proposed development will be located in an area exposed to a DNL
             (Day‐Night Average Sound Level) in excess of 60 dB.
                                                 10‐9

                           San Ramon General Plan 2035
10.1‐I‐3 Acoustical and vibration studies shall be prepared by qualified professionals in
         accordance with industry‐accepted methodology. All applicable and feasible
         vibration reduction measures shall be incorporated into project plans.
         Industry‐accepted methodology means guidance issued by public agencies or
         private organizations. Examples include Caltrans, the Federal Highway
         Administration, and the Institute of Noise Control Engineering.
10.1‐I‐4 Alternatives to sound walls such as building orientation and landscaped buffers
         shall be considered during the design process. If deemed appropriate, sound
         walls shall be well‐designed and appropriately sited.
         Factors that should be considered in the design and siting of sound walls include
         height, decorative features, graffiti resistance, pedestrian mobility, and sight
         distances.
10.1‐I‐5 New development shall minimize their noise impacts on adjacent properties
         through appropriate means, including, but not limited to, the following actions:
         • Screen and control noise sources, such as parking and loading facilities,
             outdoor activities and mechanical equipment,
         • Increase setbacks for noise sources from adjacent dwellings,
         • Retain or install fences, walls, and landscaping that serve as noise buffers,
         • Use soundproofing materials and other building practices or materials,
         • Encourage the use of commute alternatives,
         • Control hours of operation, including deliveries and trash pickup, to minimize
             noise impacts, and
         • Buffer noise along highways and arterial roadways through natural noise
             buffers and if necessary, install sound walls when compatible with
             neighborhood aesthetics and character.
10.1‐I‐6 Protect especially sensitive receptors such as schools, hospitals, and senior care
         uses, from excessive noise.
         New development that may adversely impact sensitive receptors will be required
         to implement noise attenuation measures to limit excessive noise.
10.1‐I‐7 Implement the City’s noise control standards to ensure appropriate regulation of
         common residential, commercial, and industrial noise sources.
10.1‐I‐8 Require new noise sources to use best available and practical control technology
         to minimize noise from all sources.
10.1‐I‐9 Continue to enforce the City’s Noise Ordinance to reduce noise impacts.
                                            10‐10

                                            Noise
10.1‐I‐10 Update and maintain the Noise Ordinance to improve the City’s ability to reduce
          noise impacts.
10.1‐I‐11 Encourage new developments to provide facilities which support the use of
          alternative transportation modes such as walking, bicycling, carpooling and, where
          applicable, transit to reduce peak‐hour traffic and vehicular noise.
          Traffic and vehicular noise can be reduced using site design incentives like mixing
          of land uses, pedestrian/bicycle trail connections, park and ride lots, and
          designated carpool/vanpool parking areas.
10.1‐I‐12 Designate local truck routes to minimize truck traffic in noise‐sensitive land use
          areas.
10.1‐I‐13 Encourage mixed‐use and commercial developments to locate noise generating
          components such as loading areas, parking lots, driveways, trash enclosures,
          mechanical equipment, and other noisier components away from residential
          development.
          Noise impacts can be reduced by identifying noise‐generating components and by
          locating and/or screening them to minimize impacts to residential development.
10.1‐I‐14 Construction activities are exempt from the standards set forth in Figure 10‐2, but
          must implement all practical noise attenuation measures and practices to limit
          adverse impacts on nearby land uses.
          Noise attenuation measures and practices include limits on hours of operation,
          use of mufflers or engine shrouds, identification of truck haul routes, installation of
          temporary fencing or barriers, and locating staging areas as far as practicable
          from sensitive receptors.
10.1‐I‐15 Continue to enforce state laws and local ordinances that pertain to nuisance noise.
          Nuisance noise includes car alarms, car stereos, car and motorcycle exhaust
          systems, barking dogs, and other sources that diminish the quality of life.
10.1‐I‐16 Require evaluation of potentially harmful noise sources such as pure tones. Prohibit
          or place restrictions on such sources if the evaluation indicates that they may be
          harmful.
          A “pure tone” is defined as sound that can be judged as a single pitch or set of
          single pitches. Although not commonly found in suburban noise environments, pure
          tones can be harmful to human hearing and also may be perceived as highly
          annoying.
10.1‐I‐17 For purposes of city analyses of noise impacts, and for determining appropriate
          noise mitigation, a significant increase in ambient noise levels is assumed if the
          project causes ambient noise levels to exceed the following:
                                             10‐11

                          San Ramon General Plan 2035
          • The ambient noise level is less than 60 dB Ldn and the project increases noise
             levels by 5 dB or more.
          • The ambient noise level is 60‐65 dB Ldn and the project increases noise
             levels by 3 dB or more.
          • The ambient noise level is greater than 65 dB Ldn and the project increases
             noise levels by 1.5 dB or more.
10.1‐I‐18 Require disclosure of potential noise impacts as part of real estate developments
          and transfers of land ownership within the Suggested Noise Disclosure Area of
          Camp Parks.
                                           10‐12

                                               11
                                        Housing
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The Housing Element establishes the City’s housing policies for the planning period of
January 31, 2015 through January 31, 2023. It guides City officials in decision making and
sets forth an action plan to implement the housing goals. This Housing Element is intended to
direct residential development and preservation in a manner consistent with the San Ramon
General Plan and overall requirements of the State Housing Element law.
SCOPE AND CONTEXT
This Housing Element complies with both the letter and spirit of voter‐approved Measure G
(1999). The General Plan takes advantage of infill opportunities while preserving the valued
“quality of life” aspects of San Ramon. A central guiding theme used throughout preparation
of the General Plan was “smart growth” development patterns, which focus on reuse and
intensification of existing sites to provide expanded housing opportunities. A significant
workforce housing supply is proposed to meet the City’s share of regional housing needs,
primarily through redevelopment.
Building on a housing needs assessment and evaluation of the City’s housing programs,
available land, and constraints on housing production, this Housing Element presents a
comprehensive set of housing policies and programs. The Housing Element is organized to
address all of the topics required by the Government Code and State Housing Element
guidelines. Specifically, the Element contains the following discussions:
        Population and employment trends;
        Household characteristics;
        Special housing needs;
        Governmental and non‐governmental constraints;
        Opportunities for energy conservation;
        Existing assisted housing developments;
        Goals, policies, and quantified housing objectives; and
        Housing Programs (Government Code Section 65583).
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
General Plan 2035 is comprised of eleven elements: 1) Economic Development; 2) Growth
Management; 3) Land Use; 4) Traffic and Circulation; 5) Parks and Recreation; 6) Public
                                               11‐1

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
Facilities and Utilities; 7) Open Space and Conservation; 8) Safety; 9) Noise; 10) Housing;
and 11) Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas.
The Housing Element reflects the General Plan strategy of providing workforce housing
through an Urban Growth Boundary (UGB), encouraging a more compact urban form through
increased densities and infill development, and designating mixed use centers that include a
residential component. While other elements of the General Plan implement a range of the
“smart growth” components, the Housing Element focuses specifically on what this means for
the provision of workforce housing in San Ramon. This Element is integral to the overall
General Plan and is therefore internally consistent with all other Plan elements.
The City will ensure consistency between the Housing Element and the General Plan over
time because Measure G (1999) specifically provides authority for the City Council and
Planning Commission to amend the General Plan with a four/fifths vote. General Plan 4.6‐I‐
3 also calls for a review of the UGB in 2022 to provide an opportunity to review the
effectiveness of the UGB in maintaining the necessary housing and employment balance for
the horizon year. Measure G (1999) does provide for interim updates to ensure internal
consistency and meet the requirements of State Planning Law for a current Housing Element.
PUBLIC OUTREACH
Section 65583 (c)(6)(B) of the Government Code states that “local government shall make
diligent effort to achieve public participation of all the economic segments of the community in
the development of the housing element and the program shall describe this effort.” Public
participation played an important role in the formulation of San Ramon’s housing goals and
policies.
HOUSING ELEMENT STUDY SESSIONS/PUBLIC HEARINGS
The City conducted five study sessions and seven public hearings to discuss the Housing
Element update:
        Joint Planning Commission/Housing Advisory Committee Workshop (September
         17, 2013): This meeting provided an overview of the Housing Element requirements,
         contents, potential challenges, and update process. Initial input was received from
         Planning Commissioners, Housing Advisory Committee members, and the public.
        Joint Planning Commission/Housing Advisory Committee Workshop (October 15,
         2013): During the second study session, staff presented potential policy changes to
         the Planning Commission and Housing Advisory Committee. Public comments were
         also received.
        Joint City Council/Planning Commission Workshop (February 18, 2014): During the
         third study session, staff presented potential policy changes and land use
         modifications to the Planning Commission and City Council. Public comments were
         also received.
        Joint City Council/Planning Commission Workshop (September 23, 2014): During
         the fourth study session, additional policy improvements and changes were discussed
         by the Planning Commission and City Council. Public comments were also received.
                                                 11‐2

                                            Housing
       Planning Commission Public Hearing (October 21, 2014): The Draft Housing
        Element was reviewed before the Planning Commission.
       Planning Commission Public Hearing (November 4, 2014): The Draft Housing
        Element was reviewed before the Planning Commission.
       Joint City Council/Planning Commission Workshop (November 18, 2014): During
        the fifth study session, additional policy changes were discussed by the Planning
        Commission and City Council. Public comments were also received.
       Planning Commission Public Hearing (December 2, 2014): The Draft Housing
        Element was reviewed before the Planning Commission.
       Planning Commission Public Hearing (January 6, 2015): The Final Draft Housing
        Element was reviewed by the Planning Commission and recommended to the City
        Council for adoption.
       City Council Public Hearing (January 27, 2015): The Draft Housing Element was
        reviewed before the City Council.
       City Council Public Hearing (February 10, 2015): The Draft Housing Element was
        reviewed before the City Council.
       City Council Public Hearing (April 28, 2015): The Final Housing Element was
        adopted by the City Council.
Meetings were posted on the City’s website, community locations, and/or advertised in San
Ramon Valley Times. Meeting invitations were also sent to service providers that serve the
City’s lower and moderate income persons and persons with special needs. Public hearing
notices were sent to housing opportunity site property owners to inform them of proposed
General Plan 2035 changes and to seek input on the Housing Element update.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The City has a Housing Advisory Committee (HAC) that focuses on housing development in
the City. During the process of updating the Housing Element, housing policy issues were
discussed with HAC. These were regularly scheduled meetings and agendas were posted on
the City’s website. Specific Housing Element related policies were discussed with HAC on
April 25, 2013, July 25, 2013, August 29, 2013, May 29, 2014, August 28, 2014, and
October 23, 2014.
SERVICE PROVIDER INTERVIEWS
As part of this Housing Element update, the City of San Ramon consulted with affordable
housing providers and nonprofit service providers to obtain input on housing needs and
programs. 15 agencies were contacted for consultation, however only seven agencies
responded to the telephone interviews and these are: Satellite Affordable Housing Associates;
Contra Costa Interfaith Housing; Diablo Valley Foundation on Aging; OnLok, Inc.;
Independent Living Resources of Contra Costa County; SHELTER, Inc. and Habitat for
Humanity. Their comments are summarized below:
       Affordable Housing: In general, affordable housing developers need assistance in
        identification of sites and funding. Easing development standards can also increase
                                              11‐3

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
         the feasibility of sites along with expediting entitlement processing and having political
         support for affordable housing. Units suitable for first‐time homebuyers are also in
         great demand. These can be multi‐family units such as condominiums and
         townhomes that are generally lower costs. Housing should be offered near
         employment centers, accessible to public transportation, and walking distance to
         amenities such as afterschool centers and shopping.
        Homeless: While transitional housing for the homeless is needed in the region, San
         Ramon does not have a large homeless population nor the support services to assist
         the homeless. Due to the high cost of rent and land in the Tri‐Valley, subsidizing rents
         and building permanent housing for the homeless is extremely difficult.
        Senior Housing: Assistance to help seniors maintain independent living is needed.
         Seniors need affordable housing due to their limited, fixed incomes as well as access
         to services such as transit, healthcare, and community organizations. Non‐institutional
         types of senior housing, such as assisted living facilities and senior apartments are
         needed in the community.
Appendix 11‐A summarizes the agencies consulted, the services they provide, and housing
needs identified.
HOUSING ELEMENT WEBPAGE
To facilitate timely dissemination of information on the Housing Element update, the City
created a Housing Element webpage on its official site at:
http://www.sanramon.ca.gov/gprc/houseingelemupdate.html
This webpage was updated frequently. Agendas, public notices, minutes, presentation
materials, and other pertinent information were posted on this webpage.
HOUSING ELEMENT FACT SHEET
The City also created a Housing Element Fact Sheet that contains an overview of the
Housing Element requirements and existing housing programs. The Fact Sheet also offers a
space for residents to provide comments on housing issues. The Fact Sheet was distributed
at community locations and community events (such as the City’s Art & Wind Festival).
CITY NEWSLETTER
The City also mailed a citywide newsletter to all households seeking comments on the
Housing Element.
HOUSING ELEMENT RESPONSES
Based on the community outreach and responses received from City‐elected and appointed
officials, residents, and community groups, a series of changes were made to the current
Housing Element. Specifically, in response to input from HAC, Planning Commission, and
City Council, several housing policies are proposed for modification:
        Establishing a residential density range for the Mixed Use (MU) zone to guide
         housing development.
                                                 11‐4

                                            Housing
       Adding and strengthening policies addressing the need for accessible housing and
        senior housing.
       Examining the realistic potential of several Housing Opportunity Sites identified in the
        previous Housing Element.
11.2 HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The City strives to achieve a balanced housing stock that meets the varied needs of all
income segments of the community. To understand the City’s housing needs, the nature of
the existing housing stock and the housing market are comprehensively evaluated. This
section of the Housing Element discusses the major components of housing needs in San
Ramon, including population, household, economic and housing stock characteristics. Each of
these components is presented in a regional context, and, where relevant, in the context of
other nearby communities. A brief history of San Ramon provides community context and a
foundation for the discussion of San Ramon’s housing needs. This assessment serves as the
basis for identifying the appropriate goals, policies, and programs for the City to implement
during the 2015‐2023 Housing Element cycle.
BRIEF HISTORY OF SAN RAMON
No longer a quiet outskirt of the Bay Area, the City of San Ramon values the past while
looking to the future. The area of modern day San Ramon was once home to the Seunen and
Ohlone/Costanoans Native Americans who lived adjacent to the valley creeks. By the 19th
Century, the area served as grazing land for the Mission San Jose until it was eventually
included in Jose Maria Amador's 16,000 plus acre Rancho San Ramon. American settlers
first came to the area in 1850 when Leo and Mary Jane Norris purchased 4,450 acres of
land from Amador. The first village settlement developed at the present day intersection of
Deerwood Road and San Ramon Valley Blvd. A stage line, general store, grammar school,
and post office were established in a 10‐year period from 1863 to 1873.
The arrival of the San Ramon Branch Line of the Southern Pacific in 1891 brought modest
changes to the community. Until 1909, San Ramon was the terminus for the line and boasted
a two‐story depot, the engine house, and a turnaround for the locomotive. The San Ramon
Community Hall became the town’s center early in 1911, drawing farm and ranch families to
dances, school programs, and plays. This prominent civic building was still standing in 1960.
As with the entire Tri‐Valley area, agriculture was the basis for San Ramon economy until
suburban development began. For years a sign “San Ramon Population 100” accurately
reflected the number of people in the area, with the whole San Ramon Valley having just over
2,000 people for many decades.
In 1966, the Interstate 680 freeway was completed through San Ramon to Dublin and the
designation “San Ramon Village” first appeared in the 1970 census with a count of 4,084
people. Developers Ken Volk and Bob McClain built the first San Ramon suburban homes
close to the southern county line. A special district, the Valley Community Services District
(VCSD), provided the water, parks, sewer, fire protection and garbage collection for the new
homes. In 1970, Western Electric purchased 1,733 acres of the Bishop Ranch and proposed
a “new town” complete with a variety of housing, green belts, stores, and light industry,
placed in the center of San Ramon. Eventually part of the land became new homes and, in
                                               11‐5

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
1978, 585 acres became today's Bishop Ranch Business Park ‐ a premier modern office
development. San Ramon incorporated in 1983 and built a new library, community center,
parks, and hospital soon thereafter. The City of San Ramon evolved rapidly from a bedroom
community into the balanced City it is today.
POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS AND TRENDS
The type and amount of housing needed in a community is largely determined by population
growth and various demographic variables. Factors such as age, cultural preference,
household size, occupation, and income work to influence the type of housing needed and
the ability of existing and future residents to afford housing.
POPULATION GROWTH
San Ramon has experienced steady population growth over the past few decades. The City’s
population increased 61 percent from 2000 to 2010 and another seven percent since 2010
to reach 77,270 persons in 2014 (Table 11‐1). The San Ramon General Plan estimates
buildout population within the planning area at 96,179 in 2035. San Ramon’s population
increased by a higher rate than that observed in Contra Costa County and most surrounding
jurisdictions.
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) projects continued population growth
within incorporated cities of Contra Costa County and nearby Alameda County through 2035.
The City estimates that population growth at General Plan buildout will exceed ABAG’s
projections due to implementation of local land use plans not accounted for in ABAG’s
projection estimates (see Land Use Element). Most of the projected population growth is
expected to occur within infill areas and through annexation of the Dougherty Valley Specific
Plan area. Development opportunities exist in the western portion of the City, along with infill
development sites in the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan area and the Crow Canyon
Specific Plan Area.
                                                 11‐6

                                                    Housing
                                     Table 11‐1: Population Growth Trends
                                                                                  Population Growth
                                                                              2000-     2010-    2014-
      Jurisdiction           20001            20101        20142      20353   2010       2014    2035
 Brentwood                   23,302          51,481       54,741      58,400  121%        6%       7%
 Concord                    121,780         122,067      124,656     167,500   0.2%       2%     34%
 Danville                    41,715          42,039       43,146      46,100     1%       3%       7%
 Dublin                      29,973          46,036       53,462      68,500   54%       16%     28%
 Livermore                   73,345          80,968       84,852      99,900   10%        5%      18%
 Pittsburg                   56,759          63,264       66,368      86,400    11%       5%     30%
 Pleasanton                  63,654          70,285       73,067      87,800   10%        4%     20%
 Richmond                    99,216         103,701      106,138     133,100     5%       2%     25%
 San Ramon                   44,722          72,148       77,270      85,500   61%        7%      11%
 Walnut Creek                64,296          64,173       66,183      79,600  ‐0.2%       3%     20%
 County                     948,816        1,049,025    1,087,008   1,280,300   11%       4%      18%
 Sources:
 1
   US Census Bureau, 2000 Census, and 2010 Census.
 2
   California Department of Finance, 2014.
 3
   ABAG – Projections, 2013.
AGE CHARACTERISTICS
A community’s current and future housing needs are determined in part by the age
characteristics of residents. Typically, each age group has distinct lifestyles, family types and
sizes, ability to earn incomes, and therefore, housing preferences. As people move through
each stage of life, housing needs and preferences change. For example, young householders
without children will have different housing preferences than middle‐age householders with
children or senior householders whose children are adults and do not live at home.
Consequently, evaluating the age characteristics of a community is important in determining
the housing needs of residents.
San Ramon’s population increased in children and seniors between 2000 and 2010 (Figure
11‐1). During this period, the proportion of the City’s population belonging to each age cohort
under 20 and over 60 increased, whereas the proportion of residents over 19 to 59 years of
age decreased. As of 2010, 31 percent of San Ramon residents were under 19 years old and
eight percent of the population was comprised of seniors age 65 and up. Approximately 56
percent of the population was between the age of 21 and 59, which is generally considered
prime workforce age.
                                                      11‐7

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
                            Figure 11‐1: Age Characteristics: 2000 and 2010
         40%
         35%
         30%
         25%
         20%
         15%
         10%
          5%
          0%
                     <19           20 to 24       25 to 44        45 to 64  65 +
                                               2000     2010
Source: US Census Bureau, 2000 Census, and 2010 Census.
Although the median age of San Ramon residents is slightly lower than the median age of
County residents (37.1 vs. 38.5 respectively), historically, seniors have comprised a smaller
proportion of the City’s population when compared to the proportion of seniors living in nearby
jurisdictions (Table 11‐2). San Ramon’s population is comprised of slightly more children in
2010 when compared to most nearby communities as well.
Overall, the age distribution of San Ramon reflects a community of primarily families with
primary and secondary school age children. The generally high cost of housing in the City
has resulted in the decline in the proportion of younger people who are just entering the
workforce.
                                                  11‐8

                                                      Housing
                                          Table 11‐2: Age Characteristics
                                                  Under 19                   65 And Up                  Median Age
               Jurisdiction                2000            2010          2000             2010             2010
  Brentwood                                 33%            34%            10%              11%              35.6
  Concord                                   25%            25%            11%              12%              37.0
  Danville                                  29%            29%            10%              14%              44.5
  Dublin                                    21%            25%             5%               7%              35.3
  Livermore                                 28%            28%             8%              10%              38.3
  Pittsburg                                 31%            31%             8%               9%              32.5
  Pleasanton                                28%            29%             8%              11%              40.5
  Richmond                                  28%            28%            10%              10%              34.8
  San Ramon                                 26%            31%             6%               8%              37.1
  Walnut Creek                              18%            18%            25%              27%              47.9
  Contra Costa County                       27%            27%            11%              12%              38.5
  Source: US Census Bureau, 2000 Census, and 2010 Census.
RACE/ETHNICITY CHARACTERISTICS
A community’s racial and ethnic composition may have implications for housing needs to the
extent that different groups have different household characteristics and cultural backgrounds
that may affect housing needs and preferences. Recent studies have also suggested that
different racial and ethnic groups differ in their attitudes toward and/or tolerance for “housing
problems” as defined by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
including overcrowding and housing cost burden.1 According to these studies, perceptions
regarding housing density and overcrowding, as well as the cultural practices of living with
extended families tend to vary among racial and ethnic groups. Communities with a high
proportion of Asian and Hispanic households tend to have a larger average household size
due to the cultural practice of living with extended family members. In contrast, communities
with a high proportion of White households tend to have a smaller average household size.
According to the Census, 48 percent of San Ramon’s population is White or Caucasian, 36
percent Asian or Pacific Islander, nine percent Hispanic or Latino, three percent African
American, and four percent some other race. A larger proportion of San Ramon’s population
1
  Studies include the following: “The Determinants of Household Overcrowding and the Role of Immigration in Southern
  California” by S.Y. Choi (1993); “The Changing Problem of Overcrowding” by D. Myers, William Baer, and S.Y. Choi
  (1996); and “Immigration Cohorts and Residential Overcrowding in Southern California” by D. Myers and S.W. Lee (1996).
                                                          11‐9

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
is White/Caucasian and Asian/Pacific Islander when compared to the County’s population
overall (Figure 11‐2).
                                 Figure 11‐2: Racial/Ethnic Composition
Source: US Census Bureau, 2010 Census.
HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
A household is defined by the Census as all persons who occupy a housing unit. Households
include families, single persons, and unrelated persons sharing a housing unit. Persons
residing in group quarters such as dormitories, prisons, or convalescent homes are not
considered households. The characteristics of a community’s households serve as important
indicators of the type and size of housing needed in a community.
Household type and size, income levels, the presence of special needs populations, and
other household characteristics determine the type of housing needed by residents, their
preferences, and their ability to obtain housing that meets their needs. This section details the
various household characteristics affecting housing needs.
HOUSEHOLD TYPE
Different household types generally have different housing needs. Seniors or young adults
usually comprise the majority of the single‐person households and tend to reside in
apartment units, condominiums, or smaller single‐family homes. Families with children often
prefer single‐family homes.
                                                  11‐10

                                                Housing
                                   Table 11‐3: Household Type – 2010
                                                 San Ramon             Contra Costa County
           Household Type                  Number          Percent    Number          Percent
  Families                                   19,165         76%      265,280            71%
   With children                            11,607          46%      126,893           34%
   With no children                           7,558         30%      138,387           37%
  Singles                                     4,682         19%       85,055           23%
  Other non‐families                          1,437          6%       25,029             7%
  Total Households                          25,284         100%      375,364          100%
  Source: US Census Bureau, 2010 Census.
According to the Census, 25,284 households lived in San Ramon in 2010. Over three‐
quarters of all households were families and a majority of families had children (Table 11‐3).
The household composition in San Ramon is generally comprised of more families with
children and less singles in comparison to the County overall. Family households made up a
smaller percentage of County households, while single households made up a larger
percentage of County households.
HOUSEHOLD SIZE
Household size is another important indicator of housing need. The presence of families with
children, students, and elderly persons, among other groups, can have different effects on the
average household size in a community. For example, household size is smaller, on average,
in communities where the proportion of senior residents (65+) is large in relation to the
proportion families with children.
According to the California Department of Finance, the City’s average household size
increased from 2.85 persons per household in 2010 to 2.91 in 2014. This increase is
consistent with the relative increase in household size reported throughout the County during
this time period. The average size of San Ramon households was higher than the County’s
average household size of 2.81 in 2014. ABAG projects that San Ramon’s average
household size will decline slightly to 2.87 by 2035.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
Income is the most important factor affecting housing opportunities, as it leads directly to the
ability of households to balance housing costs with other basic necessities. While housing
choices, such as tenure (owning versus renting) and location of residences are very much
income‐dependent, household size and type often affect the proportion of income that can be
spent on housing.
The median of household incomes reported to the U.S. Census Bureau’s American
Community Survey (ACS) by San Ramon residents is the second highest among neighboring
                                                   11‐11

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
jurisdictions (Figure 11‐3). The City’s median household income between 2007 and 2011
($124,014) was substantially higher than the median income reported for the County that
same period ($79,135).
                          Figure 11‐3: Median Household Income (2007‐2011)
                        Danville
                     San Ramon
                     Pleasanton
                          Dublin
                      Livermore
                     Brentwood
                   Walnut Creek
            Contra Costa County
                        Concord
                       Pittsburg
                      Richmond
                                 $0         $40,000       $80,000 $120,000 $160,000
Source: US Census Bureau, ACS, 5‐Year Estimates, 2007‐2011.
Median household income as a statistic only provides partial insight into a community’s
income profile. A more detailed breakdown of households by income category can provide
more information about the proportion of households in San Ramon whose limited incomes
may lead them to have a higher incidence of housing problems such as overpayment (paying
more than 30 percent of income on housing) or overcrowding (having more than one person
per room).
According to the ACS, five percent of households earned less than $25,000, while
approximately nine percent of City households earned incomes between $25,000 and
$49,999 (Table 11‐4). Twenty‐one percent of San Ramon’s households earned incomes
between $50,000 and $99,999 and nearly two‐thirds (64 percent) reported $100,000 or
more in income. In comparison, the County income distribution was skewed toward the lower
income levels, explaining the lower median household income reported for the Contra Costa
County when compared to San Ramon.
                                                   11‐12

                                                Housing
                        Table 11‐4: Household Income Distribution – 2008‐2012
                                                                 % of Households
            Household Income                           San Ramon                  County
 Less than $10,000                                         1%                      4%
 $10,000 to $14,999                                        1%                      4%
 $15,000 to $24,999                                       3%                       7%
 $25,000 to $34,999                                      4.5%                      7%
 $35,000 to $49,999                                       5%                      10%
 $50,000 to $74,999                                       11%                     16%
 $75,000 to $99,999                                       11%                     12%
 $100,000 or more                                        64%                      40%
 Total                                                  100%                     100%
 Source: US Census Bureau, ACS, 5‐Year Estimates, 2008‐2012.
The income characteristics of San Ramon can be explained by the relatively high proportion
of residents with high‐wage occupations. As explained in greater detail later in this Housing
Element, the ACS shows that 60 percent of San Ramon employed residents worked in
professional and management occupations, compared to 41 percent of the employed
residents countywide. San Ramon residents’ advanced educational attainment is also
consistent with the City’s high household incomes and occupational profile. According to the
ACS, over half of San Ramon residents aged 25 years and older (62 percent) had at least a
Bachelor’s degree compared to only 29 percent of residents 25 years and older throughout
the county.
The State and Federal government classify household income into several groupings based
upon the relationship to the County Area Median Income (AMI), adjusted for household size.
For purposes of the Housing Element, the State of California utilizes the following income
groups:
        Extremely Low           0‐30% AMI
        Very Low                31‐50% AMI
        Low                     51‐80% AMI
        Moderate                81‐120% AMI
        Above Moderate          120%+ AMI
                                                   11‐13

                                    San Ramon General Plan 2035
In 2010, approximately 84 percent of the San Ramon households earned moderate or above
moderate incomes (Table 11‐5), while 16 percent of households had incomes in the
extremely low, very low, and low income levels.2
                        Table 11‐5: San Ramon Households by Income Category (2010)
              Income Category (% of County AMI)                              Households                  Percent
  Extremely Low (30% or less)                                                    1,065                      4%
  Very Low (31 to 50%)                                                           1,140                      5%
  Low (51 to 80%)                                                                1,625                      7%
  Moderate or Above (over 80%)                                                  20,525                     84%
  Total                                                                         24,355                   100.0%
  Source: HUD, Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2010.
OVERCROWDING
Overcrowding is typically defined as a housing unit occupied by more than one person per
room.3 Overcrowding typically occurs when there are not enough adequately sized units
within a community, when high housing costs relative to income force too many individuals to
share a housing unit than it can adequately accommodate, or when families reside in smaller
units than they need to devote income to other necessities, such as food and health care.
Overcrowding tends to accelerate the deterioration of housing. Therefore, maintaining a
reasonable level of occupancy and alleviating overcrowding are critical to enhancing quality of
life.
According to the 2008‐2012 ACS, approximately two percent of housing units in the City
(443 units) were overcrowded. Overcrowding disproportionately affected renters (four
percent of renters versus one percent of owners), indicating overcrowding may be the result
of an inadequate supply of larger sized rental units. While 72 percent of occupied housing
units in the City had three or more bedrooms (the minimum size considered large enough to
avoid most overcrowding issues for large households), only a small portion of these units
(eight percent) were occupied by renters.
When compared to the County, overcrowding is not a significant issue in San Ramon. The
2008‐2012 ACS shows overcrowding affected four percent of all housing units countywide,
including two percent of owner units and nine percent of renter units.
2
  Data was obtained from the Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) prepared for HUD by the Census
  Bureau using 2010 Census data. CHAS data does not provide a breakdown of household income for those with more than
  80 percent AMI as those households are not qualified for federal housing programs.
3
  Based on the Census Bureau’s definition of “room,” which excludes bathrooms, porches, balconies, foyers, halls, unfinished
  spaces, or half‐rooms. See ACS, question #7a.
                                                            11‐14

                                              Housing
OVERPAYMENT
A household is considered to overpay for housing (or cost burdened) if it spends more than
30 percent of its gross household income on housing. Problems of overpayment occur when
housing costs rise faster than incomes or when households are forced to pay more than they
can afford for housing of adequate size, condition, and amenities to meet their needs. The
prevalence of overpayment varies significantly by income, tenure, household type, and
household size.
The 2008‐2012 ACS reported that 43 percent of San Ramon households overpaid for
housing. Overall, overpayment affected renters more than homeowners (47 percent vs. 42
percent respectively). A closer look at the data by income category reveals that a higher
proportion of lower income renters (<$35,000) overpaid for housing than lower income
homeowners and a smaller proportion of upper income renters (>$75,000) overpaid for
housing than upper income homeowners (Figure 11‐4). According to the 2007‐2011 ACS,
over 81% of extremely low income renter households overpaid while 87% of extremely low
income owner households overpaid for housing. Approximately 88% of all lower income
renters households and 71% of lower income owner households are overpaying for housing.
Overpayment was generally concentrated among households at the lower income ranges and
affected a larger proportion of renter‐households with lower incomes than owner‐households.
For households earning moderate incomes or above, overpayment affected a larger
percentage of homeowners than renters, which indicates that rental housing in San Ramon is
typically more affordable to moderate income households.
The higher incidence of overpayment among middle income ($35,000 to $74,999) and
upper income homeowners when compared to renters within the same income category
reflects a housing market with a limited supply of moderately priced homes.
                            Figure 11‐4: Overpayment by Income and Tenure
                     $75,000+
            $50,000 to $74,999
            $35,000 to $49,999
            $20,000 to $34,999
                     <$20,000
                               0%         20%        40%      60%       80% 100%
                                             Renter     Owner
Source: US Census Bureau, 2008‐2012 ACS 5‐year estimates.
                                                  11‐15

                                     San Ramon General Plan 2035
SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Certain groups have greater difficulty finding decent, affordable housing due to special needs
and/or circumstances. Special circumstances may be related to one’s employment and
income, family characteristics, disability, and household characteristics, among other factors.
Consequently, some residents in San Ramon may experience a higher prevalence of housing
overpayment (cost burden), overcrowding, or other housing problems.
“Special needs” groups include the following: seniors, persons with disabilities (including
persons with developmental disabilities), homeless, single‐parent households, large
households, and migrant/farmworkers (Table 11‐6). This section provides a detailed
discussion of the housing needs facing each particular group as well as programs and
services available to address their housing needs.
                                         Table 11‐6: Special Needs Groups
            Special Needs Group                        Persons         Households % of Total
  Seniors (65+)                                        5,627                —         8%
        With a disability1                             1,578                —         2%
  Senior Households                                         —           2,981        12%
        Renter                                              —             674         3%
        Owner                                               —           2,307         9%
  Seniors living alone1                                     —            1,109        4%
  Persons with Disabilities1                           3,544                —         5%
  Female‐headed Households                                  —           1,997         8%
        With own children                                   —            1,169        5%
  Large Households                                          —           2,818        11%
        Renter                                              —             549         2%
        Owner                                               —           2,269         9%
  Agricultural Workers1                                    77               —       <1%
  Homeless2                                                  4              —       <1%
  Total Person/Households                               9,252           8,905
  Sources:
  1
    ACS‐2012
  2
    Contra Costa Inter‐Jurisdictional Council on Homelessness, 2013.
  Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census (unless otherwise noted).
                                                         11‐16

                                            Housing
Seniors
Many senior‐headed households have special needs due to their relatively low incomes,
disabilities, or limitations, and dependency needs. Specifically, people aged 65 years and
older often have four main concerns:
        Housing: Many seniors live alone and may have difficulty maintaining their homes.
        Income: People aged 65 and over are usually retired and living on a limited income.
        Health care: Seniors are more likely to have high health care costs.
        Transportation: Many of the elderly rely on public transportation; especially those with
         disabilities.
Although seniors comprised a relatively small proportion of San Ramon residents in 2010
(eight percent), individuals over the age of 65 suffer disproportionately from poverty: five
percent of the population over 65 lived below the poverty level, compared to two percent of
the population under 64 at the time of the Census.
In 2010, 12 percent of City households were headed by someone 65 years old or older. Of
these households, most (77 percent) owned their homes, while the remainder (23 percent)
rented. According to HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) from 2007‐
2011, 41 percent of senior‐headed households overpaid for housing of which 19 percent are
severely overpaying for housing.
Aside from overpayment problems faced by seniors due to their relatively fixed incomes,
many seniors are faced with various disabilities. Roughly 28 percent of San Ramon’s senior
population was listed as having one or more disabilities in the 2008‐2012 ACS. Among
these disabilities, the most common were ambulatory disabilities (28 percent) and
independent living disabilities (23 percent).
Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly (RCFEs) ‐ sometimes called “Assisted Living” or
“Board and Care” facilities ‐ are non‐medical facilities that provide a level of care that
includes assistance with activities of daily living. RCFEs provide room, board, housekeeping,
supervision, and personal care assistance with basic activities like personal hygiene,
dressing, eating, and walking for persons 60 years and older. San Ramon currently has 374
beds in 23 licensed RCFEs.
The 105‐unit Valley Vista Senior project was constructed in San Ramon through the City’s
participation in the County umbrella for Community Development Block Grants (CDBG) and
Home Investment Partnership Act (HOME) funds. The City supported the application of the
American Baptist Homes of the West to receive a $1.2 million HOME allocation and an
allocation of CDBG funds in the amount of $800,000 to help make the project a reality.
Persons with Disabilities
In San Ramon and elsewhere, persons with disabilities have a wide range of different
housing needs, which vary depending on the type and severity of the disability as well as
personal preference and lifestyle. Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities may
prevent a person from working, restrict one’s mobility, or make it difficult to care for oneself.
                                                11‐17

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
“Barrier‐free design” housing, accessibility modifications, proximity to services and transit, and
group living opportunities represent some of the types of considerations and accommodations
that are important in serving this group. Also, some residents suffer from disabilities that
require living in a supportive or institutional setting.
The 2008‐2012 ACS defines six types of disabilities: hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory,
self‐care and independent living. The ACS defines sensory and physical disabilities as “long‐
lasting conditions.” Mental, self‐care, ambulatory, and employment disabilities are defined as
conditions lasting six months or more that makes it difficult to perform certain activities. A
more detailed description of each disability is provided below:
        Hearing disability: Refers to a person who is deaf or has a hearing impairment that
         makes it difficult to hear conversations, televisions, or radio broadcasts.
        Vision disability: Refers to a person who is blind or has serious difficulty reading or
         driving due to a visual impairment.
        Cognitive disability: Refers to a person who has a physical, mental, or emotional
         condition that makes it difficult to concentrate, remember or make decisions.
        Ambulatory disability: Refers to a person who has a serious difficulty walking or
         climbing stairs.
        Self‐care disability: Refers to a person who has a serious difficulty dressing or
         bathing oneself.
        Independent living disability: Refers to a person who has a physical, mental or
         emotional condition that makes it difficult to do errands such as visiting a doctor’s
         office or shopping.
According to the 2008‐2012 ACS, approximately five percent of San Ramon residents over
five years of age had a disability. ACS tallied the number of disabilities by type for residents
with one or more disabilities. Among the disabilities tallied, 18 percent were hearing
disabilities, nine percent were vision disabilities, 19 percent were cognitive disabilities, 25
percent were ambulatory disabilities, 12 percent were self‐care disabilities, and 18 percent
were independent living disabilities (Table 11‐7).
Perhaps the most important factor in regard to planning for housing for persons with
disabilities is that there are a wide range of different disabilities, and different people with the
same ‘disability’ may have different levels of functioning which affect their housing needs and
choices. People with disabilities include parents who are raising families, teenagers who are
members of large families, seniors living with their spouses or children, and young people
who desire to live on their own, as only a few examples.
                                                 11‐18

                                                    Housing
                                 Table 11‐7: Disabilities Tallied by Age and Type
                                                               % of Disabilities Tallied
                 Type of Disability                  5 to 17         18 to 64             65+ Total
  Hearing disability                                   13%             18%                19%  18%
  Vision disability                                     9%             11%                 7%   9%
  Cognitive disability                                 46%             22%                11%  19%
  Ambulatory disability                                 4%             26%                28%  25%
  Self‐care disability                                 29%              9%                11%  12%
  Independent Living disability1                        —              14%                23%  18%
  Total                                               100%            100%               100% 100%
  Note:
  1
    Tallied only for persons 17 years and over.
  Source: US Census Bureau, 2008‐2012 ACS
San Ramon’s housing policies, as embodied in this Housing Element, promote barrier‐free
design in all housing so that people with disabilities have a similar range of housing choice as
people without disabilities. The special housing needs of disabled persons include accessible
housing units in close proximity to public services and commercial centers with special design
features that alleviate the disability. State and federal laws require that a portion of all rental
apartments containing five or more units are made accessible to disabled persons. The City
applies standard conditions of approval to residential development projects that reflect that
mandate. This Housing Element also calls for the City to continue to implement standards to
ensure that housing in San Ramon is designed for those with special needs (Program 20).
San Ramon has undertaken a variety of programs in response to the housing needs of
people with disabilities, including ensuring that developers of senior housing give special
attention to the mobility limitations of seniors. All 160 units of the Villa San Ramon project are
wheelchair accessible and are equipped with grab bars in the bathrooms. The City provided
financial assistance to facilitate the construction of this project. The Muirlands at Windemere
project, also assisted with City funds, provides six wheelchair accessible units, eight units
meeting the accessibility standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and a
wheelchair lift for the swimming pool area.
The City Building and Safety Services Division provides ongoing assistance to complete
rehabilitation work for single‐family properties and public facilities to install necessary
accommodations, including installation of accessibility ramps and railings to meet
handicapped accessibility. The City also actively funds improvements to curbs and gutters to
include wheelchair ramps and barrier‐free design, and increase accessibility for disabled
residents throughout the community.
                                                        11‐19

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
Housing for people with HIV/AIDS (Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome) is provided within the greater Contra Costa County area by the non‐
profit agency Shelter, Inc. Transportation service for persons with disabilities is available
through the County Connection Link, operated by the Central Contra Costa Transit Authority.
The County Connection LINK paratransit service provides door‐to‐door and dial‐a‐ride
services to individuals whose disabilities prevent them from using lift‐equipped public
transit. The special service operates at similar times and in similar areas as existing non‐
commute (off‐peak), fixed‐route transit.
Independent Living Resource, an area non‐profit organization, provides information, referral,
attendant referral, advocacy, housing assistance and peer counseling to persons with
disabilities. Independent Living Resource’s programs and services aim to maintain or increase
access to services, benefits, and other social services and the organization advises clients
regarding their rights as individuals with disabilities. Housing referral services are also
provided to clients by maintaining a registry of accessible, adaptable, affordable apartments
and houses.
A number of state‐licensed facilities serving persons with disabilities are located in San
Ramon, including 23 Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly (RCFEs) providing a total of
374 beds, five Group Homes with a total of 30 beds, and two Adult Residential Facility with
ten beds.
Persons with Developmental Disabilities
A recent change in State law requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of
persons with developmental disabilities, As defined by Section 4512 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code, “developmental disability” means a disability that originates before an
individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which includes mental retardation,
cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also include disabling conditions found to
be closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment similar to that required for
individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include other handicapping conditions that
are solely physical in nature.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community based
services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families
through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two
community‐based facilities. The Regional Center of the East Bay (RCEB) is one of 21
regional centers in the State of California that provides point of entry to services for people
with developmental disabilities. The RCEB is a private, non‐profit community agency that
contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to individuals with
developmental disabilities and their families.
The following information from Area Board 5 of the State Council on Developmental
Disabilities provides a closer look at the disabled population. Data shown in Table 11‐8
estimates the number of San Ramon individuals with developmental disabilities including both
RCEB consumers and those unaffiliated with the RCEB.
                                               11‐20

                                                      Housing
              Table 11‐8: Developmentally Disabled Residents, by Age, for San Ramon, 2014
                                 0‐14         15‐22            23‐54      55‐65
                                Years         Years            Years      Years 65+ Years Total
  San Ramon Total                352            170             128         6      16     672
  Source: State Council on Developmental Disabilities, Area Board 5, 2014
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a
conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living
environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may
require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are
provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in
supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living
situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
Services for persons with disabilities are typically provided by both public and private
agencies. State and Federal legislation regulate the accessibility and adaptability of new or
rehabilitated multi‐family apartment complexes to ensure accommodate for individuals with
limited physical mobility. Housing options for persons with disabilities include various
community care facilities. These facilities include 23 Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly
(RCFEs) providing a total of 374 beds, five Group Homes with a total of 30 beds, and two
Adult Residential Facility with ten beds.
Homeless
According to the HUD, a person is considered homeless if he/she is not imprisoned and:
         Lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence;
         The primary nighttime residence is a publicly or privately operated shelter designed for
          temporary living arrangements;
         The primary residence is an institution that provides a temporary residence for
          individuals that should otherwise be institutionalized; or
         The primary residence is a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily used
          as a regular sleeping accommodation.
The Behavioral Health Homeless Program, in partnership with the Contra Costa Inter‐
jurisdictional Council on Homelessness, conducted a count of the regional homeless
population on January 30, 2013. The survey identified 3,798 homeless persons in Contra
Costa County, including 858 children and 24 unaccompanied youth. A total of 2,448 persons
(64 percent) of the County’s homeless population were sheltered at the time of the survey
and another 1,350 individuals (36 percent) were unsheltered.
The survey documented four unsheltered homeless individuals in San Ramon or less than
one percent of the countywide unsheltered population. Although the point‐in‐time count
identified four homeless persons in San Ramon, the survey represents only a snapshot
                                                         11‐21

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
reflecting those persons identified as homeless on the day of the count during a limited time
frame. Many individuals and families move in and out of homelessness and shelters over the
course of a year. Homeless individuals and families have perhaps the most immediate
housing need of any group. They also have one of the most difficult set of housing needs to
meet, due to both the diversity and complexity of the factors that lead to homelessness, and
to community opposition to the siting of facilities that serve homeless clients.
Homelessness in San Ramon, as in other communities, results from a combination of factors,
including loss of employment, inability to find a job due to lack of skills, and high housing
costs in comparison to incomes. For some, homelessness may also be the result of chronic
health problems, physical disabilities, mental health disabilities, or substance abuse. While
the specific nature of the factors causing homelessness may vary, there are typically three
root causes:
        Lack of affordable housing;
        Lack of access to affordable support services; and
        Low household incomes.
Although no homeless shelters are located within the City of San Ramon, various facilities
located in Contra Costa County and the Tri‐Valley area are available to provide shelter for
homeless individuals and families. These facilities are categorized and described in detailed
in Appendix 11‐B.
The City will continue to support the Contra Costa County Continuum of Care Board and
supporting agencies and organizations to address the problem of homelessness throughout
the County. The City will also continue to analyze and address impediments to the provision
of housing for the homeless and near homeless by facilitating and encouraging the
development of affordable housing and facilities for the homeless, including homeless
shelters, transitional housing, single room occupancy units, and permanent supportive
housing. The Zoning Ordinance was amended in 2012 to facilitate the development of
homeless shelters, transitional housing facilities, supportive housing facilities, and single room
occupancy units.
Single Parent Households
Single‐parent families, particularly female‐headed families with children, often require special
consideration and assistance because of their greater need for affordable housing and
accessible day care, health care, and other supportive services. Female‐headed families with
children are considered a vulnerable group because they must balance the needs of their
children with work responsibilities, often while earning limited incomes.
The 2010 Census showed that single parents comprised approximately ten percent of San
Ramon families. Of these families, 70 percent were headed by females. Female‐headed
families have a higher incidence of poverty when compared to all households.
Female‐headed households need affordable housing in areas suitable for child‐rearing and
with access to transit networks, schools and parks, and daily services. The City offers
housing programs and supportive services (e.g. child care subsidies and recreational
                                               11‐22

                                             Housing
programs) for lower and moderate income households that also benefit female‐headed
households.
Large Households
Large households are defined as those consisting of five or more members. These
households comprise a special need group because of the often limited supply of adequately
sized and affordable housing units in a community. To save for other basic necessities such
as food, clothing, and medical care, it is common for lower income large households to reside
in smaller units, which frequently results in overcrowding.
In 2010, approximately 11 percent of the total number of households in San Ramon contained
five or more people. Of these large households, approximately 81 percent owned the units
they occupied and 19 percent rented. In comparison, an estimated 71 percent of smaller
households were homeowners and 29 percent were renters.
Finding rental housing with higher than average bedroom counts is a typical problem for large
families, particularly renters with lower income levels. Of the 17,770 housing units in San
Ramon with three or more bedrooms at the time of the 2008‐2012 ACS, only 12 percent were
occupied by renters. Of large renter‐households, only 20 percent occupied apartment units.
Migrant and/or Farm Workers
San Ramon is an urbanized area of Contra Costa County and has only 1.81 acres of land
zoned for agricultural use. According to the Census Bureau, no resident of San Ramon was
employed in farming, fishing, and forestry occupations in 2012. Less than one percent of
County residents were employed in these occupations. Therefore, San Ramon has no
specific need for farmworker housing.
Within the City’s Sphere of Influence (SOI), 2,244 acres of land are pre‐zoned for Agriculture
(AG). However, these lands are located in the unincorporated County areas and governed by
the land use policies of Contra Costa County.
ECONOMIC AND TRANSPORTATION
Employment
Employment has an important impact on housing needs. Incomes associated with different
jobs and the number of workers in a household determines the type and size of housing a
household can afford. In some cases, the types of jobs themselves can affect housing needs
and demand (such as in communities with military installations, college campuses, and large
amounts of seasonal agriculture). Employment growth typically leads to strong housing
demand, while the reverse is true when employment contracts.
San Ramon’s occupation profile of residents generally reflects the occupational profile of
Contra Costa County residents, with the exception that a higher proportion of City residents
were employed in managerial and professional occupations according to the 2008‐2012 ACS
(Table 11‐9). Approximately 42 percent of San Ramon residents were employed in these
high paying occupations when compared to the County overall. Sales and Office occupations
accounted for the second largest proportion of occupations held by City and County residents
                                               11‐23

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
(24 percent and 25 percent respectively). Except for certain sales positions, relatively higher
paying jobs can be found in both categories, translating into higher incomes for San Ramon
residents engaged in these occupations.
As reported by the California Employment Development Department, San Ramon’s
unemployment rate (2.4 percent) in June of 2014 was substantially lower than the
countywide unemployment rate (6.0 percent). The number of unemployed residents living in
San Ramon represented only 2.2 percent of unemployed persons living throughout Contra
Costa County at the time of the report.
                                      Table 11‐9: Employment Profile
                                        San Ramon1                 Contra Costa County1
                                                                                                 Mean Wage
   Occupation of Residents            #               %              #                  %         or Salary2
 Managerial/Professional          21,626            61%          205,974              42%         $128,829
 Sales/Office                      8,441            24%           119,653             25%          $45,801
 Service                           3,295             9%           84,096              17%          $28,138
 Construction/Maintenance/
                                    1,112            3%           39,593               8%          $62,371
 Extraction/Repair
 Transportation/Production/
                                   1,184             3%           37,765               8%          $40,687
 Material Moving
 Total                            35,658           100%           487,091            100%          $59,886
 Sources:
 1
   US Census Bureau, ACS 2008‐2012
 2
   California Employment Development Department, Occupational Employment Statistics Contra Costa County, First
   Quarter 2013.
COMMUTING PATTERNS
Commuting patterns demonstrate the relationship between housing to employment
opportunities. Figure 11‐5 shows travel time for workers age 16 and over in San Ramon and
the Contra Costa region according to the 2008‐2012 ACS. A large portion of the employed
San Ramon residents either worked relatively close to their places of employment (38
percent had travel times to work of less than 20 minutes) or worked at home (seven
percent). An additional 31 percent had commutes between 20 to 44 minutes and the
remaining 31 percent had commutes of 45 minutes or longer. San Ramon residents had
shorter average commutes when compared to employed residents of the County overall (31.7
minutes vs. 32.8 minutes).
                                                    11‐24

                                                Housing
                                    Figure 11‐5: Travel Time to Work
             40%
             35%
             30%
             25%
             20%
             15%
             10%
              5%
              0%
                       <20 Minutes    20 to 44 Minutes    45+ Minutes     Worked at home
                                     San Ramon      Contra Costa County
Source: US Census Bureau, 2008‐2012 ACS.
A larger proportion of San Ramon residents drove alone to work according to the 2008‐2012
ACS and a smaller proportion of residents carpooled or took public transportation when
compared to residents countywide (Table 11‐10). The longer average commute times for
County residents described above may be explained by the greater reliance on public
transportation and carpooling when compared to residents of San Ramon.
                              Table 11‐10: Means of Transportation to Work
                    Means of Transportation                        San Ramon             County
  Drove Alone                                                         76%                 70%
  Carpooled                                                            8%                 12%
  Public Transportation                                                6%                  9%
  Walked                                                               2%                  2%
  Other means                                                          1%                  2%
  Worked at home                                                       7%                  6%
  Total                                                              100%                100%
  Source: US Census Bureau, 2008‐2012 ACS.
                                                  11‐25

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
JOBS/HOUSING BALANCE
Balancing employment and housing opportunities is an important issue for San Ramon at
both the local and regional level. The right mix of housing units with jobs can help reduce
traffic congestion, improve air quality, and secure an adequate labor supply for businesses in
San Ramon. An improved jobs/housing balance can also help reduce the effects of housing
cost burden as lower transportation costs can increase the amount of discretionary income
available for other essentials, including housing.
Until the early 1980s, the City of San Ramon was primarily a bedroom community for the
major employment centers in the Bay Area: San Francisco, Oakland, and San Jose. The
development of the Bishop Ranch Business Park, beginning in 1981, has transformed the City
into a significant regional employment center itself. According to the San Ramon Economic
Development Services Division, the City’s top employers now include companies from the oil
and gas (Chevron USA Inc.), financial (Bank of the West), telecommunications (AT&T and
Sprint PCS), and business services (Robert Half International Inc.) sectors.
The jobs/housing ratio is a concept that correlates economic growth with the anticipated
increase in demand for housing. The ratio actually compares the number of jobs available
within the City to the number of employed residents living there. The General Plan 2035
estimates the jobs/housing balance at 1.26 jobs per housing unit in 2014, with more jobs
than employed residents. Upon buildout of the San Ramon General Plan, the jobs/housing
ratio is projected to lower to 1.22 by the year 2035. Maintaining a healthy balance between
employment and housing growth is an important part of the City’s vision.
The availability of affordable housing plays a major role in employers’ locational decisions.
The lack of affordable housing also contributes to longer commutes and increased congestion
as local workers are forced to live in more distant areas due to high housing costs. A range
of housing options and prices serves complimentary social and economic development
functions. First, it allows new buyers and renters to enter the San Ramon housing market,
settle into the community, and stay in the City as their housing needs change. Second,
recruitment and retention of employees are significant challenges for companies. Employers
looking to expand or relocate their business often seek out communities with a diverse and
stable labor market.
HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS
A community’s housing stock is defined as the collection of all housing units located within
the jurisdiction. The characteristics of the housing stock, including growth, type, age and
condition, tenure, vacancy rates, housing costs, and affordability are important in determining
the housing needs for the community. This section details the housing stock characteristics of
San Ramon in an attempt to identify how well the current housing stock meets the needs of
current and future residents of the City.
HOUSING UNIT GROWTH AND TYPE
San Ramon has experienced strong housing growth since 2000. The total number of housing
units increased 34 percent between 2000 and 2010 and five percent from 2010 to 2014.
San Ramon’s housing growth has consistently outpaced countywide housing growth as well
as growth experienced in most surrounding communities (Table 11‐11).
                                               11‐26

                                               Housing
                                     Table 11‐11: Housing Growth
                                                                         % Change
   Jurisdiction       2000             2010              2014     2000‐2010       2010‐2014
 Brentwood            7,767           17,523            18,242       56%             4%
 Concord             44,967           47,125            47,155        5%             <1%
 Danville            15,336           15,934            16,010        4%             <1%
 Dublin               9,889           15,782            18,640       37%             15%
 Livermore           26,550           30,342            30,884       12%              2%
 Pittsburg           18,379           21,126            21,699       13%             3%
 Pleasanton          23,987           26,053           26,305         8%              1%
 Richmond            36,151           39,328            39,398        8%             <1%
 San Ramon           17,425           26,222            27,492       34%              5%
 Walnut Creek        31,480           32,681           33,008         4%              1%
 County             354,577          400,263           405,828       11%              1%
 Source: US Census Bureau, 2000 Census, and 2010 Census.
San Ramon’s housing stock is more diverse than the countywide housing stock. In 2013,
single‐family detached homes made up 62 percent of the housing stock, while single‐family
attached homes comprised 11 percent (Figure 11‐6). Another four percent consisted of multi‐
family units with two to four units per structure and 23 percent were multi‐family with five or
more units per structure. In comparison, approximately 67 percent of the Contra Costa
County housing stock consisted of single‐family detached homes, eight percent were single‐
family attached homes, seven percent were multi‐family with two to four units per structure,
and 17 percent were multi‐family with five or more units per structure.
                                                 11‐27

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                    Figure 11‐6: Housing Stock Composition
                         80%
                         70%
                         60%
                         50%
                         40%
                         30%
                         20%
                         10%
                           0%
                                     Single      Single
                                                            Multifamily Multifamily Mobile
                                    Family       Family
                                                             2‐4 Units   5+ Units   Homes
                                   Detached     Attached
                   San Ramon          62%         11%           4%         23%       0%
                   Contra Costa       67%          8%           7%         17%       2%
Source: California Department of Finance, 2013.
HOUSING AGE AND CONDITION
Housing age can be an important indicator of housing condition within a community. Like any
other tangible asset, housing is subject to gradual physical or technological deterioration over
time. If not properly and regularly maintained, housing can deteriorate and discourage
reinvestment, depress neighboring property values, and eventually impact the quality of life in
a neighborhood. Thus, maintaining and improving housing quality is an important goal for the
City. Overall, the housing stock in San Ramon is in excellent condition, a reflection of the
City’s relative young age. As of January 2013, approximately nine percent of the City’s
dwelling units were built before 1970 and less than one percent was constructed before 1960
(Figure 11‐7). A much larger proportion of San Ramon’s housing stock was constructed after
1980 when compared to the County (73 percent v. 41 percent).
A general rule in the housing industry is that structures older than 30 years begin to show
signs of deterioration and require reinvestment to maintain their quality. Therefore, assuming
a straight line of production during the 1980s, an estimated 6,837 units (28 percent of the
housing stock) would be of sufficient age to be susceptible to deterioration requiring
maintenance or rehabilitation as of 2013. According to the City’s Building Official, there were
263 cases opened in 2013 related to housing stock conditions, of which approximately 94
percent were resolved without having to lien the properties with a special tax for the
abatement of substandard conditions. The Building Official also estimated that 50 homes
were in need of substantial rehabilitation and/or replacement.
A review of the Building and Safety Services Division permit records shows that, over the
past five years, approximately 2,444 building permits have been issued for additions and
alterations of the single‐family housing stock. This permit activity represented an upgrade,
financed by the private sector, of approximately nine percent of single‐family housing stock.
                                                      11‐28

                                                Housing
Continued investment by homeowners in updating and expanding their homes will be one of
the primary means of maintenance and preservation of the City’s older housing stock.
                                     Figure 11‐7: Year Structure Built
             40%
             35%
             30%
             25%
             20%
             15%
             10%
              5%
              0%
                       1939 or    1940 to     1960 to     1980 to      2000 to 2010 or
                       earlier      1959       1979         1999        2009    later
                                      San Ramon      Contra Costa County
Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2008‐2012 ACS.
In years past, the City has provided housing rehabilitation loan services for single‐family
homeowners under the CDBG program. Two types of loans are provided under the County
program for up to a maximum of $50,000: an amortized three percent loan payable over 15
years and a zero percent deferred loan that is due and payable upon the sale of the property.
Only three San Ramon households have been assisted through this program in the past
couple of years due to a dwindling pool of CDBG funds, income of San Ramon residents, and
program eligibility based on maximum home value set by the CDBG regulations.
Recognizing the County’s funding limitations, the City funded one program in Fiscal Year
(FY) 2012‐13. The Home Rehabilitation Grant Program provides up to $5,000 to median
and lower income households to perform needed health and safety home repairs such as
roofing, plumbing, electrical, general home repairs, windows, doors, handicapped accessibility
modifications and seismic strengthening. The grant is non repayable. Between inception of
the program in 2006 and January 2014, housing rehabilitation grants have been awarded to
96 income qualified households. Among assisted households, 36 were headed by seniors,
35 were headed by females, and 25 were family households. The City will continue to
implement the Rehabilitation Grant Program (Program 2).
Due to the funding limitations of the County, the Redevelopment Agency (before its
dissolution in 2012) established a Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program in November of
2007. The maximum loan amount for this program was $35,000, which could be combined
with a $5,000 Home Rehabilitation Grant for first time recipients. Although the loan is issued
at three percent interest for a 30‐year period, both principal and interest are deferred until
                                                   11‐29

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
sale, transfer or refinance of the property. The household income ceiling served was the
County median income or less. Eleven loans were issued through 2011 under the program.
HOUSING TENURE AND AVAILABILITY
Housing tenure and vacancy rates are important indicators of the supply and cost of housing.
Housing tenure refers to whether a unit is owned or rented. Vacancies are an important
housing market indicator in that the vacancy rate often influences the cost of housing and
reflects the match between housing demand and availability.
Tenure
According to the Census, approximately 71 percent of San Ramon households were occupied
by homeowners, while the remaining 29 percent were occupied by renters (Table 11‐12).
Housing tenure in San Ramon was generally comparable to the County, and the neighboring
Pleasanton and Livermore. In comparison, a much larger proportion of households owned
their homes in Brentwood and Danville, whereas the proportion of renter‐households was
higher in Concord, Dublin, Pittsburg, and Richmond.
                                     Table 11‐12: Housing Tenure
                                                          Percent of Occupied Units
               Jurisdiction                          Owner                          Renter
 Brentwood                                            76%                            24%
 Concord                                              61%                            39%
 Danville                                             84%                            16%
 Dublin                                               63%                            37%
 Livermore                                            70%                            30%
 Pittsburg                                            59%                            41%
 Pleasanton                                           70%                            30%
 Richmond                                             52%                            48%
 San Ramon                                            71%                            29%
 Walnut Creek                                         67%                            33%
 Contra Costa County                                  67%                            33%
 Source: US Census Bureau, 2010 Census.
Vacancy
A certain number of vacant units are needed to moderate the cost of housing, allow sufficient
choice for residents, and provide an incentive for unit upkeep and repair. Specifically, a
vacancy rate of 1.5 to two percent for ownership housing and five to six percent for rental
housing is considered necessary to balance demand and supply for housing.
                                                11‐30

                                                 Housing
HOUSING COSTS AND AFFORDABILITY
The cost of housing is directly related to the extent of housing problems in a community. If
housing costs are relatively high in comparison to household income, there will be a
correspondingly higher prevalence of housing cost burden and overcrowding. This section
summarizes the cost and affordability of the housing stock to San Ramon residents.
Homeownership Market
The California Association of Realtors (CAR) publishes median home sales price data
compiled by DataQuick for cities and counties throughout the State. Although San Ramon
had the second highest median home sales price ($800,000) among nearby jurisdictions in
Contra Costa County in April 2014, the median home price in San Ramon increased from a
year earlier (Table 11‐13). San Ramon’s median home sales price rose 7.31 percent from the
median price recorded in April 2013, whereas prices increased 14.25 percent countywide
during the same period.
                                   Table 11‐13: Median Home Sale Price
     Jurisdiction             April 2013                 April 2014         % Change
 Brentwood                    $391,500                   $408,000              4.21%
 Concord                      $342,500                   $402,000             17.37%
 Danville                     $865,000                   $995,000             15.03%
 Dublin                       $609,000                   $743,000               22%
 Livermore                    $465,000                   $570,000            22.58%
 Pittsburg                    $194,000                   $286,000            47.42%
 Pleasanton                   $725,000                   $783,000                8%
 Richmond                     $200,000                   $284,000               42%
 San Ramon                    $745,500                   $800,000              7.31%
 Walnut Creek                 $653,000                   $578,500            ‐11.41%
 Contra Costa
                              $398,250                   $455,000             14.25%
 County
 Source: 2014 Data Quick Information Systems; DQNews.com
Data was also obtained from the Multiple Listing Service (MLS) to facilitate a more thorough
analysis of San Ramon’s home sale market. The MLS listed 79 detached home, 13
townhomes, and 36 condominiums for sale in June 2014 (Table 11‐14). The median asking
price for any unit was $816,000, with a range of $289,000 to $2,120,024. Detached units
were priced higher ($966,884 median) than townhomes ($648,462 median) and condos
($470,789 median), with median asking prices increasing with unit size.
                                                   11‐31

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                      Table 11‐14: Home Sales Market
      Unit Type       Bedrooms       Units Listed           Range                Median      Average
                          3             20         $600,000‐ $923,000           $748,500     $761,509
  Detached Homes          4             38         $675,000‐ $1,900,000         $953,050   $1,009,394
                          5              21        $1,025,000‐ $2,120,024      $1,199,900  $1,408,339
                          2               2        $385,000‐ $619,000           $502,000    $502,000
  Townhomes               3               8        $449,000‐ $749,000           $662,000     $627,125
                          4               3        $699,000‐ $749,000           $710,000    $709,333
                          1               6        $289,900‐ $349,500           $322,450    $320,050
  Condominiums            2              15        $339,900‐ $599,950           $419,500    $450,087
                          3              15        $398,000‐ $719,000            $581,413   $608,087
  Source: MLS Real Estate Database, Zip Realty.com accessed on 6/26/14.
Rental Market
Websites were searched in June 2014 and rental price information was collected for seven
market rate apartment complexes within the City (Table 11‐15). In June, rents for studio
apartment units ranged from $1,350 to $1,695 per month, while one‐bedroom units rented for
$1,349 to $2,463. Larger units were more expensive. Rents for two‐bedroom units ranged
from $1,883 to $3,729. Three‐bedroom units at two developments were offered at rents
ranging from $2,580 to $2,750 per month.
                                   Table 11‐15: Rental Apartment Market
                Apartment Complex                                       Rental Price Range
  Bel Air
     Studio                                                              $1,350 ‐ $,1424
     1 BR                                                                $1,823 ‐ $2,032
     2 BR                                                                $2,370 ‐ $3,381
  Bridges at San Ramon
     Studio                                                              $1,650 ‐ $1,695
     1 BR                                                                $1,899 ‐ $1,975
     2 BR                                                                $2,285 ‐ $2,475
                                                     11‐32

                                                Housing
                               Table 11 15 (cont.): Rental Apartment Market
                  Apartment Complex                                   Rental Price Range
  Canyon Woods
     Studio                                                                 $1,575
     1 BR                                                                   $1,900
     2 BR                                                                   $2,615
  Seasons
     1 BR                                                              $1,634 ‐ $1,654
     2 BR                                                              $1,883 ‐ $1,993
  Fairway Village
     1 BR                                                              $1,349 ‐ $1,695
     2 BR                                                              $1,979 ‐ $2,129
  Crow Canyon
     1 BR                                                               $1,669‐ $2,463
     2 BR                                                              $2,286 ‐$3,729
  Promontory View
     1 BR                                                              $1,550 ‐ $1,850
     2 BR                                                              $1,995 ‐ $2,535
     3 BR                                                              $2,580 ‐ $2,750
  Sources: Rent.com, accessed 6/26/14 and Apartments.com, accessed 6/26/14
Market Affordability Summary
Housing affordability can be inferred by comparing the cost of renting or owning a home in
the City with the maximum affordable housing costs for households at different income levels.
Taken together, this information can generally show who can afford what size and type of
housing and indicate the type of households most likely to experience overcrowding and
overpayment.
HUD conducts annual household income surveys nationwide to determine a household’s
eligibility for federal housing assistance. Based on this survey, the California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD) developed income limits that can be used to
determine the maximum price that could be affordable to households in the upper range of
their respective income category. Households in the lower end of each category can afford
less by comparison than those at the upper end. The maximum affordable home and rental
prices for residents of Contra Costa County are shown in Table 11‐16.
                                                    11‐33

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
Affordability by Household Income
Table 11‐16 shows the maximum amount that a household can pay for housing each month
without incurring a cost burden. This amount can be compared to current housing asking
prices (Table 11‐14) and market rental rates (Table 11‐15) to determine what types of
housing opportunities a household can afford.
Extremely Low income Households: Extremely low income households earn 30 percent or
less of the County area median income—up to $19,650 for a one‐person household and up
to $28,050 for a four‐person household in 2013. Extremely low income households cannot
afford market‐rate rental or ownership housing in San Ramon.
Very Low income Households: Very low income households earn between 31 percent and
50 percent of the County area median income – up to $32,750 for a one‐person household
and up to $46,750 for a four‐person household in 2013. A very low income household can
afford homes offered at prices below $192,000, adjusting for household size. Given the costs
of single‐family homes and condominiums in San Ramon, very low income households would
not be able to afford a home in the City. Similarly, very low income renters could not afford
market‐rate rental units in San Ramon. After deductions for utilities, a very low income
household at the maximum income limit can afford to pay approximately $819 to $1,169 in
monthly rent, depending on household size.
Low income Households: Low income households earn between 51 percent and 80 percent
of the County’s area median income ‐ up to $46,350 for a one‐person household and up to
$66,250 for a four‐person household in 2013. The affordable home price for a low income
household at the maximum income limit ranges from $190,000 to $272,000. Based on the
asking prices of homes and condominiums advertised for sale in June 2014 (Table 11‐14),
no one‐ and two‐bedroom units would be affordable to low income households. After
deductions for utilities, a one‐person low income household could afford to pay up to $1,159
in rent per month and a four‐person low income household could afford to pay as much as
$1,656. In June of 2014, no adequately sized apartment units in San Ramon were listed for
rent at rates that were affordable to low income households (Table 11‐15).
Moderate income Households: Moderate income households earn between 81 percent and
120 percent of the County’s Area Median Income – up to $112,200 depending on household
size in 2013. The maximum affordable home price for a moderate income household is
$322,293 for a one‐person household, $368,247 for a two‐person family, and $414,406 for
a four‐person family. Moderate income households could afford a few of the condominiums
listed for sale in June 2014; however, the asking price for a large majority of the units listed
were well beyond the affordable range of these households. The maximum affordable rent
payment for moderate income households is between $1,964 and $2,525 per month.
Although these households can afford most of the apartment units listed for rent, large
moderate income households may have difficulty finding adequately sized and affordable
rental housing. Only one apartment complex that advertised units on‐line in June 2014
offered three‐bedroom units and the starting rate for homes with three or more bedrooms
listed for rent was $2,580.4
4
  Apartments.com, accessed 6/26/14
                                              11‐34

                                                      Housing
   Table 11‐16: Ability to Pay for Housing Based on HCD Income Limits – Contra Costa County 2013
                                                                Max. Monthly Gross       Max. Monthly Purchase
         Household                    Income Level                      Rent1                      Price2
Extremely Low Income (0‐30% AMI) Households at 50% of 2013 Median Household Income
1‐Person                                 $19,650                        $491                     $80,625
2‐Person                                $22,450                         $561                      $92,113
3‐Person                                $25,250                         $631                     $103,602
4‐Person                                $28,050                         $701                     $115,090
Very Low Income (31‐50% AMI) Households at 50% of 2013 Median Household Income
1‐Person                                $32,750                         $819                     $134,374
2‐Person                                $37,400                         $935                     $153,453
3‐Person                                 $42,100                       $1,053                    $172,738
4‐Person                                $46,750                        $1,169                    $191,817
Low Income (51‐80% AMI) Households at 70% of 2013 Median Household Income
1‐Person                                $46,350                        $1,159                    $190,176
2‐Person                                $53,000                        $1,325                    $217,461
3‐Person                                $59,600                        $1,490                    $244,541
4‐Person                                $66,250                        $1,656                    $271,826
1‐Person                                 $65,450                       $1,636                    $268,544
2‐Person                                 $74,800                       $1,870                    $306,907
3‐Person                                 $84,150                       $2,104                    $345,270
4‐Person                                 $93,500                       $2,338                    $383,634
Moderate Income (81‐120% AMI) Households at 120% of 2013 Median Household Income
1‐Person                                 $78,550                       $1,964                    $322,293
2‐Person                                 $89,750                       $2,244                    $368,247
3‐Person                                $101,000                       $2,525                    $414,406
4‐Person                                $112,000                       $2,800                    $495,540
Notes:
1
  Assumes that 30% of income (or 35 percent for moderate‐income owners) is available for either monthly rent,
  including utilities; or mortgage payment, taxes, mortgage insurance, and homeowners insurance.
2
  Assumes 95% loan at 5 percent annual interest rate and 30‐year term with taxes, mortgage insurance, and
  homeowners insurance as 21 percent of total payments
Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development
                                                         11‐35

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
ASSISTED HOUSING UNITS AT RISK OF CONVERTING TO MARKET RATE RENTS
Housing that receives governmental assistance is often a significant source of affordable
housing in many communities. Because of its significance, this section identifies publicly
assisted rental housing in San Ramon, evaluates the potential of such housing to convert to
market rate during a ten‐year planning period (2015 to 2025), and analyzes the options and
associated costs to preserving these units.
Covenants and deed restrictions are the typical mechanisms used to maintain the affordability
of publicly assisted housing, ensuring that these units are available to lower and moderate
income households in the long term. Over time, the City may face the risk of losing some of
its affordable units due to the expiration of covenants and deed restrictions. As the relatively
tight housing market continues to put upward pressure on market rents, property owners are
more inclined to discontinue public subsidies and convert the assisted units to market‐rate
housing.
Table 11‐17 provides the inventory of assisted rental housing units in San Ramon as of
January 2014. Of the 2,075 total assisted units within 13 developments, 687 units in five
developments are at risk of converting to market‐rate during the 2015 to 2025 period.
                                               11‐36

                                                    Housing
                         Table 11‐17: Inventory of Publicly Assisted Rental Housing
                                          Assisted       Household            Funding          Earliest Expiration
      Project Name          Total Units     Units           Type             Source(s)          of Affordability
                                                                                                      2015
Park Place                      36            20           Family       City Agreement
                                                                                                    (At‐risk)
                                                                                                      2015
Cambrio                         85             2           Family       City Agreement
                                                                                                    (At‐risk)
                                                                        County Tax                    2015
Bollinger Crest                  65           15           Family
                                                                        Exempt Bonds                (At‐risk)
                                                           Family,      County
Mill Creek at                                                                                        2023
                               400           400        Persons w/      Inclusionary
Windemere                                                                                           (At‐risk)
                                                         Disabilities   Housing
                                                                        County
Canyon Oaks at                                                                                       2023
                               250           250           Family       Inclusionary
Windemere                                                                                           (At‐risk)
                                                                        Housing
                                                                        County
                                                                                                     2030
Falcon Bridge                  256           256           Family       Inclusionary
                                                                                                 (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        Housing
                                                                        CHFA Bond
                                                                                                     2045
Villa San Ramon                 120           24           Senior       RDA Loan
                                                                                                 (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        LIHTC
                                                                        LIHTC
Muirlands at                                                            MRB                          2059
                               350           350           Family
Windemere                                                               Workforce Hsg            (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        Grant
                                                                        County
Cornerstone at Gale                                                                                  2035
                               266           266           Family       Inclusionary
Ranch                                                                                            (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        Housing
                                                                        County
                                                                                                     2067
Highland Points                293           293           Family       Inclusionary
                                                                                                 (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        Housing
                                                                        County
                                                                                                     2038
Seville at Gale Ranch          165           165           Family       Inclusionary
                                                                                                 (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        Housing
                                                                        County
                                                                                                      2041
Valencia at Gale Ranch         186           186           Family       Inclusionary
                                                                                                 (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        Housing
                                                                        Tax Credit
                                                                        HUD 202
                                                                                                     2066
Valley Vista                   105           104           Senior       County CDBG
                                                                                                 (Not At‐risk)
                                                                        HOME
                                                                        RDA Loan
Total                         2,321         2,075
Sources: California Housing Partnership Corporation, 2014; Contra Costa County, 2014; City of San Ramon, 2014.
                                                       11‐37

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
Park Place: Park Place is a 36‐unit apartment complex that is comprised of a mixture of
affordable units. There are 5 very low income units, 5 low income units, and 10 moderate
income units in the rental complex. The terms of the affordable agreement run through 2015.
Cambrio: Cambrio is an 85‐unit ownership townhome community. Two units within the
subdivision have been set aside as rentals to moderate income households. The developer of
the townhomes entered into an affordable agreement with the City through 2015.
Bollinger Crest: Bollinger Crest has set aside 15 of the 65‐unit apartment complex as below
market rate. Specifically, 13 units are designated for very low income and 2 units are
designated for moderate income households. The 15‐year regulatory agreement for below
market rate units expires in 2015.
Mill Creek at Windemere: Mill Creek is a moderate income property in Dougherty Valley that
has 400 units and is governed by an affordable agreement with Contra Costa County
pursuant to an inclusionary agreement. There was no subsidy provided to this project. The
20‐year regulatory agreement for rental to moderate income households expires in 2023.
Canyon Oaks at Windemere: Canyon Oaks is a moderate income property in Dougherty
Valley that is governed by an affordable agreement with Contra Costa County pursuant to an
inclusionary requirement. There was no subsidy provided to the 250‐unit project. The 20‐
year regulatory agreement for rental to moderate income will expire in 2023.
Preservation and Replacement Options
To preserve the existing affordable housing stock, the City must either preserve the existing
assisted units or facilitate the development of new units. Of the 687 at‐risk units, 18 units are
designated for very low income, five units are low income, and 664 units are moderate
income. Depending on the circumstances of the at‐risk projects, different options may be
used to preserve or replace the units. Preservation options typically include: 1) transfer of
project to non‐profit ownership; 2) provision of rental assistance to tenants using other
funding sources; and 3) purchase of affordability covenants. In terms of replacement, the
most direct option is the development of new assisted multi‐family housing units. These
options are described below.
Transfer of Ownership: Transferring ownership of an at‐risk project to a non‐profit housing
provider is generally one of the least costly ways to ensure that the at‐risk units remain
affordable for the long term. By transferring property ownership to a non‐profit organization,
low income restrictions can be secured and the project would become potentially eligible for a
greater range of governmental assistance. The estimated market value for the at‐risk units in
five projects is provided in Table 11‐18.
Current market value for the units is estimated on the basis of the project’s potential annual
income, and operating and maintenance expenses. As indicated below, the estimated market
value of the five projects is $158,580,510. (These estimates are provided for purposes of
comparison and understanding the magnitude of costs involved and do not represent the
precise market values of these projects. The actual market values at time of sale will depend
on market and property conditions, among other factors). $158,580,510 represents the cost
of replacing all 687 very low to moderate income at‐risk units. Of the 687 total at‐risk units,
                                              11‐38

                                                       Housing
23 of the units are affordable to very low and low income households. The market value of
the 23 very low and low income units is $6,211,150.
                                    Table 11‐18: Market Value of At‐Risk Projects
                             Project Information                                            Total
 1‐bedroom Units                                                                             376
 2‐bedroom Units                                                                             279
 3‐bedroom Units                                                                              32
 Total Units                                                                                 687
 Annual Gross Income                                                                     $17,180,160
 Annual Operating Cost                                                                   $2,763,750
 Net Annual Income                                                                       $14,416,410
 Estimated Market Value                                                                $158,580,510
 Notes:
 Market value for project is estimated with the following assumptions:
 * Average market rent is estimated to be $1,800 for a one‐bedroom unit, $2,400 for a two‐bedroom unit and
   $2,665 for a three‐bedroom unit (Table 11‐15).
 * Bedrooms per unit: Park Place (20 two bedroom units); Cambrio (2 three‐bedroom units); Bollinger Crest (15
   two‐bedroom units); Mill Creek at Windemere (230 one‐bedroom units, 152 two‐bedroom units, and 18 three‐
   bedroom units); and Canyon Oaks (146 one‐bedroom units, 92 two‐bedroom units, and 12 three‐bedroom units).
 * Average unit size is estimated at 750 square feet for a one‐bedroom unit, 850 square feet for a two‐bedroom unit
   and 1,050 square feet for a three‐bedroom unit.
 * Vacancy rate is assumed at 0% as the projects are usually fully occupied.
 * Annual operating expenses per square foot are estimated to be $5.00.
 * Market value = Annual net project income x multiplication factor.
 * Multiplication factor for a building in moderate condition is 11.
 * Of the 687 at‐risk units, 23 are very low and low income units in Park Place (10 two bedroom units) and Bollinger
   Crest (13 two‐bedroom units), with an estimated market value of $6,211,150.
Rental Assistance: Rental subsidies using other funding sources can be used to maintain
affordability of the at‐risk affordable units. These rent subsidies could be structured to mirror
the federal Section 8 program. Under Section 8, HUD pays the difference between what
tenants can pay (defined as 30 percent of household income) and what HUD estimates as
the fair market rent (FMR) on the unit. In Contra Costa County, the 2014 FMR was $1,255
for a one‐bedroom unit, $1,578 for a two‐bedroom unit and $2,204 for a three‐bedroom unit.
At‐risk very low and low income units would need a rental subsidy to pay the difference
between what tenants can pay and the FMR. Moderate income units would not qualify for a
rental subsidy since moderate income households would spend less than 30 percent of their
household income on FMR.
                                                            11‐39

                                    San Ramon General Plan 2035
The feasibility of this alternative is highly dependent upon the availability of reliable funding
sources necessary to make rent subsidies and the willingness of property owners to participate
in the program. As indicated in Table 11‐19, the total cost of subsidizing the rents of 23 at‐risk
very low and low income units is estimated at $11,030 per month or $132,360 annually.
                                     Table 11‐19: Rental Subsidies Required
                                                                        Affordable
                           Fair                                            Cost        Monthly
    Unit       Total     Market      Household      Household            (Minus        Per Unit     Total Monthly
    Size      Units1      Rent2          Size         Income3           Utilities)4    Subsidy         Subsidy
  Very Low Income (50% AMI)
  2‐br          18       $1,578           3          $42,100             $1,053         $525           $9,450
  Low Income (80% AMI)
  2‐br           5       $1,578           3          $50,490             $1,262         $316           $1,580
    Total       23                                                                                     $11,030
  Notes:
  1
     Bedrooms per unit: Park Place (10 two bedroom units); and Bollinger Crest (13 two‐bedroom units).
  2
     Fair Market Rent (FMR) is determined by HUD.
  3
     Contra Costa County 2013 Area Median Household Income (AMI) limits set by the California Department of
     Housing and Community Development (HCD).
  4
     Affordable cost = 30% of household income minus utility allowance.
Purchase of Affordability Covenants: Another option to preserve the affordability of the at‐
risk project is to provide an incentive package to the owner to maintain the project as
affordable housing. Incentives could include writing down the interest rate on the remaining
loan balance, providing a lump‐sum payment, and/or supplementing the rents to market
levels. The feasibility of this option depends on whether the complex is too highly leveraged.
By providing lump sum financial incentives or ongoing subsides in rents or reduced mortgage
interest rates to the owner, the City can ensure that some or all of the units remain
affordable.
Construction of Replacement Units: The construction of new low income housing units is a
means of replacing the at‐risk units should they be converted to market‐rate units. The cost
of developing housing depends upon a variety of factors, including density, size of the units
(i.e. square footage and number of bedrooms), location, land costs, and type of construction.
Assuming an average construction cost of $162,000 per multi‐family unit (assuming a
1,200‐square‐foot unit at $135 per square foot), it would cost approximately $3,726,000
(excluding land costs) to construct 23 new assisted very low and low units. Including land
costs, the total cost to develop replacement units would be higher.
Cost Comparisons
The above analysis attempts to estimate the cost of preserving the at‐risk units under various
options. The cost of acquiring the five projects and transferring ownership of all 687 at‐risk
                                                        11‐40

                                            Housing
units to non‐profit housing organizations is high ($158,580,510). The cost of acquiring the
23 very low and low income at‐risk units and transferring ownership to non‐profit housing
organizations is $6,211,150. In comparison, the annual costs of providing rental subsidies to
preserve the 23 assisted very low and low units are relatively low ($132,360); however,
long‐term provision of rental subsidies for at least 55 years would cost more than $7 million.
Overall, new construction of 23 replacement units is also a costly option ($3,726,000,
excluding land costs) and is constrained by a variety of factors, including growing scarcity of
land zoned for residential use and rising land costs.
Resources to Preserving at‐Risk Units
Available public and non‐profit organizations with the capacity to preserve assisted housing
developments include Contra Costa County, the City of San Ramon, and various non‐profit
developers, including Eden Housing, Resources for Community Development, Mercy
Housing, East Bay Housing Organizations, and Bridge Housing Corporation. Financial
resources available include affordable in‐lieu fees and bond financing, as well as CDBG and
HOME funds, Section 8 rental assistance, low income housing tax credits, and Proposition 1C
funds. (See the Housing Resources section later for further details.)
CURRENT HOUSING NEEDS
A continuing priority for the community is to enhance or maintain the quality of life. One
measure of quality of life is the extent of “housing problems” that exist. The Comprehensive
Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) developed by the Census for HUD provides detailed
information on housing needs by income level for different types of households in San
Ramon. Detailed CHAS data based on the 2007‐2011 ACS is displayed in Table 11‐20.
Housing problems considered by CHAS include:
       Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom);
       Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room);
       Housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or
       Severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 50 percent of gross income.
The types of problems vary according to household income, type, and tenure. Some
highlights include:
       Owner‐occupied households had a higher level of overpayment (30 percent)
        compared to renter‐occupied households (22 percent).
       Owner‐occupied households with large families had the highest level of overpayment
        amongst owner households (44 percent).
       Elderly renter‐occupied households had the highest level of overpayment amongst
        renter‐occupied households (28 percent).
       Sixteen percent of all owner‐occupied households and renter‐occupied households
        are severely overpaying for housing.
                                               11‐41

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
                     Table 11‐20: Severe Housing Overpayments by Type and Tenure
       Household by Tenure              Elderly      Small Family Large Family        Other            Total
 Renter Households
 Total # by Household Type               930             2,990         354            2,655            6,929
 Overpayment (>30%)                      28%              21%           4%             24%              22%
 Severe Overpayment (>50%)               34%              17%           1%             11%              16%
 Owner Households
 Total # by Household Type              2,655           10,745        1,705           2,330           17,074
 Overpayment (>30%)                      20%              28%          44%             33%              30%
 Severe Overpayment (>50%)               14%              13%          19%             18%              16%
 Source: Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
 (CHAS), 2007‐2011
FUTURE HOUSING NEEDS
Future housing need refers to the share of the regional housing need that has been allocated
to the City. HCD supplies a regional housing goal number to ABAG. ABAG is then mandated
to allocate the housing goal to city and county jurisdictions in the region. In allocating the
region’s future housing needs to jurisdictions, ABAG is required to take the following factors
into consideration pursuant to Section 65584 of the State Government Code:
        Market demand for housing;
        Employment opportunities;
        Availability of suitable sites and public facilities;
        Commuting patterns;
        Type and tenure of housing;
        Loss of units in assisted housing developments;
        Over‐concentration of lower income households; and
        Geological and topographical constraints.
The ABAG Executive Board adopted its Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) in July
2013. The RHNA covers an eight‐year planning period and addresses housing issues that
are related to future growth in the region. The RHNA allocates to each city and county a “fair
share” of the region’s projected housing needs by household income group. The major goal of
the RHNA is to assure a fair distribution of housing among cities and counties within the Bay
Area region, so that every community provides an opportunity for a mix of housing affordable
to all economic segments. The housing allocation targets are not building requirements, but
                                                    11‐42

                                                     Housing
goals for each community to accommodate through appropriate planning policies and land
use regulations. Allocation targets are intended to assure that adequate sites and zoning are
made available to address anticipated housing demand during the planning period and that
market forces are not inhibited in addressing the housing needs of all economic segments of
a community.
San Ramon’s share of regional future housing needs totals 1,417 new units for the January
31, 2015 to January 31, 2023 period. This allocation is distributed into four income
categories, as shown below in Table 11‐21. The RHNA includes a fair share adjustment which
allocates future (construction) need by each income category in a way that meets the State
mandate to reduce the over‐concentration of lower income households in one community.
                                   Table 11‐21: Housing Needs for 2015‐2023
              Income Category (% of County AMI)                       Number of Units               Percent
 Very Low (50% or less)1                                                      516                    36.4%
 Low (51 to 80%)                                                              279                     19.7%
 Moderate (81% to 120%)                                                       282                     19.9%
 Above Moderate (Over 120%)                                                   340                    24.0%
 Total                                                                       1,417                  100.0%
 Note:
 1
   The City has a RHNA allocation of 516 very low income units (inclusive of extremely low income units). While the
   RHNA did not separately define housing needs for extremely low income households, the very low income allocation
   can be split evenly between very low‐ and extremely low income households. The City’s RHNA of 516 very low
   income units has been allocated accordingly.
 Source: Final Regional Housing Needs Allocation, ABAG, 2014.
11.3 HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
This section describes various governmental, market, and environmental constraints on the
development of housing that meets the needs of all economic segments of San Ramon’s
population.
GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Local policies and regulations can impact the price and availability of housing and, in
particular, the provision of affordable housing. Land use controls, site improvement
requirements, fees and exactions, permit processing procedures, among other issues may
constrain the maintenance, development, and improvement of housing. This section
discusses potential governmental constraints in San Ramon.
LAND USE CONTROLS
The Land Use Element sets forth City policies for guiding local land use development. These
policies, together with existing zoning regulations, establish the amount and distribution of
                                                        11‐43

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2035
land allocated for different uses. Table 11‐22 lists the land use categories in San Ramon that
permit residential uses.
                       Table 11‐22: Land Use Categories Permitting Residential Use
                                                         Density/
    Land Use Category        Zoning District(s)          Intensity                        Character
                                                    1 unit per 5        Rural single‐family development in
 Rural Conservation          RC
                                                    gross acres         unserviced areas.
                                                    0.2 to 2 units
 Hillside Residential        HR                                         Single‐family residential in serviced areas.
                                                    per acre
 Single Family
                             RE‐A, RE‐B,            0.2 to 3 units
 Residential –                                                          Single‐family residential development.
                             RS‐12, RS‐10           per acre
 Low Density
 Single Family
 Residential –               RS‐10, RS‐7,           3 to 6 units per
                                                                        Single‐family residential development.
                             RS‐6                   acre
 Low Medium Density
 Single Family                                                          Single‐family residential development,
 Residential –                                      6 to 14 units per including detached units, zero lot line
                             RS‐6, RS‐D
                                                    acre                units, garden patio homes, and
 Medium Density
                                                                        townhomes.
 Multiple Family –                                                      Multiple‐family residential development.
                                                    14 to 30 units
                             RM, RMH, RH                                Structure parking necessary at the higher
 High Density                                       per acre
                                                                        end of the density range.
 Multiple Family –                                  30 to 50 units      Multiple‐family residential development at
                             RH, RVH
 Very High Density                                  per acre            densities. Structure parking necessary.
                                                                        Integrated mix of non‐residential uses
                                                    0.70 Floor Area     (retail, service, office) and residential
 Mixed Use                   CC, MU, CCMU
                                                    Ratio (FAR)1        uses. Structure parking may be
                                                                        necessary.
 Note:
 1
   Additional FAR may be allowed for projects that provide more than the required 25 percent of total units as
   workforce housing.
 Source: Land Use Element, City of San Ramon General Plan, 2014.
MEASURE G (1999): GROWTH MANAGEMENT
In 1999, San Ramon voters approved a growth management measure (Measure G (1999))
to initiate a General Plan update that would create urban growth boundaries to encourage
smart growth by promoting infill development through mixed use development and
discouraging urban sprawl. The measure also directed the City to plan for the acquisition of
ridgeline areas and agricultural lands contiguous to the City boundary to be preserved in
perpetuity as open spaces.
                                                         11‐44

                                            Housing
Measure G (1999) is implemented by the Growth Management Element of the General Plan.
A guiding policy of the Growth Management Element is to: “Manage the City’s growth in a
way that balances existing and planned transportation facilities, protection of open space and
ridgelines, provision of diverse housing options and job opportunities, and the preservation of
high quality community facilities and services.” Housing related implementing policies of the
Growth Management Element include:
       Policy 3.1‐I‐4: Allocate the number of new housing units according to the City’s ability
        to provide public services and housing needs through the use of adopted performance
        standards.
       Policy 3.1‐I‐5: Use growth management policies to encourage the construction of
        workforce housing necessary to meet local housing needs.
       Policy 3.1‐I‐7: Allow urban development only within the City’s Urban Growth
        Boundary and only in accord with a plan for full urban services (police, fire, parks,
        water, sewer, streets and storm drainage) to which all providers are committed.
Establishment of an Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) reflects one of the most significant
aspects of the General Plan. The UGB concept responds specifically to Measure G (1999),
which also states that smart growth should be pursued within the UGB in order to discourage
urban sprawl and preserve open space. As called for by Measure G (1999), the UGB
represents the ultimate edge of urban development in San Ramon, beyond which
development would remain rural in nature and without urban services. The primary purpose of
the UGB is to limit the extent to which urban development and services are provided through
2035 with the UGB to be re‐evaluated in 2022. Land beyond the UGB is intended to remain
rural in nature. The UGB serves other purposes as well, such as protecting visible hillsides
and ridgelines from development, protecting significant natural resources, preserving open
space, encouraging infill development and workforce housing, and encouraging efficient
provision of municipal services such as sewer and water.
The Growth Management Element includes public facility performance objectives and
standards for the following services:
       Community Centers: At General Plan buildout, maintain a minimum ratio of 1.2
        square feet of community center space per 1,000 residents.
       Fire and Emergency Services: Prior to project approval, require written verification
        from the San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District that a five‐minute total response
        time can be maintained for 90 percent of emergency calls in urban and suburban
        areas and/or that there will be a fire station within 1.5 miles of all development.
       Flood Control: Prior to project approval, require written verification from the San
        Ramon Engineering Services Department that the new development will provide
        adequate storm drain facilities to accommodate 25‐year storm events, or other at the
        discretion of the City Engineer. Runoff from the development will not increase the
        100‐year peak flow in the City’s flood control channels and will be substantially equal
        to pre‐development conditions.
                                               11‐45

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
      Parks: At General Plan buildout, provide a ratio of 6.5 acres of public park per 1,000
       residents, with a goal to have park and recreation facilities within one‐half mile of all
       residences.
      Police: Prior to project approval, require written verification from the San Ramon
       Police Department that a three‐ to five‐minute response time for emergency calls and
       a 20‐minute response for all other calls can be maintained 95 percent of the time.
      Sanitation: Prior to project approval, require written verification from the approved
       service provider that adequate sanitation facilities and services will be available to
       serve the project.
      Schools: Require new development to provide necessary land, funding, and/or
       capital facilities for the school system, as determined by the San Ramon Valley
       Unified School District and applicable State law.
      Water: Prior to project approval, require written verification from the approved service
       provider that adequate water quality, quantity, and distribution will be available to
       serve the project.
New projects will be approved only after findings are made that: 1) the City’s performance
standards will be maintained following project occupancy; 2) project‐specific mitigation
measures will ensure that the City’s performance standards will be maintained; and/or 3)
planned capital projects will ensure that the City’s performance standards will be maintained.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development primarily
through the Zoning Ordinance. The following zoning districts allow residential uses:
      Rural Conservation (RC) ‐ 0.0 to 0.2 du/ac: The RC zone is applied to areas of the
       City without urban services, with open space and habitat value, where rural single‐
       family residential development may occur at densities of up to one unit per five gross
       developable acres. Clustering is encouraged to permit suitable development sites with
       less than 20 percent slope, where the overall project preserves 90 percent of its site
       as open space.
      Hillside Residential (HR) ‐ 0.2 to 2.0 du/ac: The HR zone is applied to hillside areas
       of the City appropriate for single‐family dwellings, where proposed development
       requires special standards to ensure resource preservation and limited visual impacts.
       Single‐family residential development may occur at densities of up to two units per
       acre. Clustering is required to permit suitable development sites on less than 20
       percent slope, and to preserve 70 percent of an overall development site as open
       space.
      Residential Estate (RE) ‐ 0.2 to 3.0 du/ac: The RE zone is applied to areas of the
       City appropriate for very low‐density residential land uses, at densities of 0.2 to 3.0
       units per acre, compatible with the topography and public service capacities. The
       specific allowable density for each parcel is shown on the Zoning Map by a numerical
       suffix residential density designator.
                                              11‐46

                                               Housing
         Single‐Family Residential (RS) ‐ 3.0 to 6.0 du/ac: The       RS zone is applied to areas
          of the City appropriate for single‐family residential land   uses in neighborhoods at a
          density of three to six units per net acre, subject to        appropriate standards. The
          specific allowable density for each parcel is shown on       the City’s Zoning Map by a
          numerical suffix residential density designator.
         Medium‐Density Residential (RM) ‐ 6.0 to 14.0 du/ac: The RM zone is applied to
          areas of the City appropriate for multiple residential uses, including duplexes,
          townhouses, or cluster housing with landscaped open space for residents' use at a
          density of six to 14 units per net acre. Single‐family dwellings are also permitted.
         Medium‐High Density Residential (RMH) ‐ 14.0 to 22.0 du/ac: The RMH zone is
          applied to areas of the City appropriate for townhouses or apartments at a density of
          14 to 22 units per net acre. Single‐family dwellings are also permitted.
         High‐Density Residential (RH) ‐ 22.0 to 30.0 du/ac: The RH zone is applied to areas
          of the City appropriate for compact, high density, well designed residential
          development, including apartments and townhouses with a density range of 22 to 30
          units per net acre.
         Multiple Family ‐ Very High Density (RVH) ‐ 30.0 to 50.0 du/ac: The RVH zone is
          applied to areas appropriate for the highest density multiple‐family residential
          development within the City, at densities between 30 and 50 units per net acre.
          Proposed development will reflect high quality design with integrated open space and
          recreational and/or cultural amenities, as well as providing workforce housing, and
          structured parking.
         Mixed Use (MU): The MU zone is applied to areas of the City appropriate for an
          integrated mix of non‐residential uses, including retail, services, and offices, together
          with residential uses at intensities of up to 0.70 FAR. Development should reflect high
          quality design with integrated open space and recreational and/or cultural amenities,
          and opportunities for affordable housing. Structured parking may be required.
          Additional FAR, up to a maximum of 1.00, may be allowed for projects that provide
          more than the required 25 percent of total units for workforce housing and significant
          public benefit.
Currently, developers of mixed use developments contribute to affordable housing production
via a combination of the payment of an in‐lieu fee and provision of affordable units. In order
to facilitate mixed use development in the City, the City will be amending its policy to exempt
mixed use development that contribute to affordable housing from the commercial linkage fee
(Program 13).
To further facilitate the development of affordable residential units, the Zoning Ordinance will
also be amended to include a density range of 14 to 30 dwelling units per acre in the Mixed
Use zone (outside of Specific Plan areas). The new range provides flexibility in mixed use
development projects based on site conditions while ensuring that the City’s goal for a
compatible mix of uses can be accomplished (Program 18).
         City Center Mixed Use (CCMU): The CCMU zone is applied to the City Center
          properties in compliance with the General Plan to develop the City Center into a
          cultural, recreational, and compatible retail center that provides a cohesive mix of
                                                  11‐47

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
        civic, retail, office, residential, and open space uses. Development intensities of up to
        0.70 FAR will be permitted. Additional FAR, up to a maximum of 1.35, may be
        allowed for projects that include such elements as affordable housing and significant
        public benefits and/or amenities such as public art and plazas, public facilities,
        and/or a transit facility nearby or in close proximity to the CCMU zone. Development
        should reflect high quality design, with integrated open space and recreational and/or
        cultural amenities, as well as opportunities for workforce housing. Structured parking
        may be required.
Development standards specific to each zone district are designed to protect and promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of residents as well as implement the policies of the
General Plan. These standards also serve to preserve the character and integrity of existing
neighborhoods. Specific residential development standards are summarized in Table 11‐23.
Generally, development standards can limit the number of units that may be constructed on a
particular piece of property. These include density, minimum lot and unit sizes, height, and
open space requirements. By limiting the number of units that could be constructed, the per‐
unit land costs would be higher and, all other factors being equal, results in higher
development costs that could impact housing affordability.
Parking requirements for single‐family and multi‐family residential uses in San Ramon are
summarized in Table 11‐24. Parking required for a prototypical 100‐unit multi‐family
residential development in San Ramon and other Tri‐Valley area communities is presented in
Table 11‐25. San Ramon’s requirement is nearly the same as what would be required for the
same development in Danville and higher than the requirement for the same development in
Dublin, Livermore, and Pleasanton. Dublin and Pleasanton are located along the Bay Area
Rapid Transit (BART) lines with stations stopping at these cities, allowing these cities to take
advantage of public transit. Although the provision of off‐street parking can increase the cost
of housing, San Ramon’s standards are reasonable as requirements for multi‐family
developments are equal to or less than requirements for single‐family detached dwellings.
Guest space requirements for multi‐family developments are also reasonable because these
types of developments do not have private driveways for each unit to accommodate parking
for guests as is required for new single‐family homes. Nonetheless, because the increased
cost of off‐street parking can make financing the development of housing affordable to lower
and moderate income households more difficult, reduced parking and other incentives,
concessions, or waivers and modifications of development standards are available for
developers of affordable projects that are eligible for a density bonus.
                                                  11‐48

                                                     Housing
                              Table 11‐23: Residential Development Standards
                                                                         Setbacks (ft.): Front,
               Maximum                              Minimum Lot          Interior Side, Corner
  Zoning        Building         Minimum                                    Side, Aggregate          Maximum Lot
  District       Height       Net Lot Area       Width        Depth           Sides, Rear              Coverage
RC                35 ft          5 acres         300 ft       300 ft      30, 20, 25, 40, 35             None
HR                35 ft          5 acres         300 ft       300 ft      30, 20, 25, 40, 30             None
RE‐A              35 ft         20,000 sf        100 ft       150 ft      25, 15, 20, 35, 15             None
RE‐B              35 ft         15,000 sf        100 ft       120 ft      20, 10, 15, 25, 15             None
RS‐12             35 ft         12,000 sf        100 ft       100 ft      20, 10, 15, 25, 15             None
RS‐10             35 ft         10,000 sf         70 ft       100 ft      20, 10, 15, 20, 15             None
RS‐7              35 ft          7,000 sf         65 ft        95 ft       20, 5, 15, 15, 15             None
RS‐6              35 ft          6,000 sf         60 ft        90 ft       20, 5, 15, 15, 15             None
RS‐D              35 ft          3,500 sf         40 ft        80 ft       15, 0, 10, 10, 15             None
RM                35 ft          3,500 sf         60 ft        90 ft       15, 6, 10, 16, 15             25%
RMH               35 ft         10,000 sf         70 ft        90 ft       15, 6, 10, 16, 15             35%
RH                35 ft         10,000 sf         70 ft        90 ft       15, 6, 10, 16, 10             35%
RH‐R              35 ft          1,500 sf         70 ft        90 ft       15, 6, 10, 16, 10             45%
RVH               50 ft         10,000 sf         70 ft        90 ft       10, 6, 10, 16, 10             50%
MU                60 ft1        10,000 sf         80 ft        N/A2         15, 0, 15, 0, 03             30%4
CCMU              90 ft1           N/A2          N/A2          N/A2               N/A5                   None
Notes:
1
  Must not intercept a 30‐degree daylight plane inclined inward at an adjacent residential zone boundary line.
  Daylight plane requirements apply to all non‐residential development adjacent to a residential zone.
2
  Determined through subdivision process.
3
  Except that a 25‐foot wide side and/or rear yard shall be required abutting a residential zone, and where a lot
  abuts the Interstate 680 right‐of‐way.
4
  May be waived for mixed‐use projects.
5
  Determined through project review and approval.
Source: Zoning Ordinance, City of San Ramon, 2014.
                                                        11‐49

                                  San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                     Table 11‐24: Parking Requirements
      Type of Residential Development                              Required Parking Spaces
Single‐Family Dwellings
Up to four bedrooms                            2 covered spaces per unit within a garage
Five bedrooms                                  3 covered spaces per unit within a garage
Six or more bedrooms                           4 covered spaces per unit within a garage
Mobile homes, individual                       2 spaces per unit; at least 1 within a garage
Mobile home parks                              2 spaces for each mobile home; 1 additional space for each
                                               4 mobile homes for guests
Multi‐Family Dwellings
Studio units and one‐bedroom units             1 covered space per unit in a garage/carport.
Two‐ and three‐bedroom units                   2 spaces for each unit, at least 1 within a garage/carport.
Four‐bedroom units and above                   3 spaces for each unit, at least 1 within a garage/carport.
Guest parking                                  1 additional space for each 4 units.
Residential care homes
Six or fewer clients                           2 covered spaces within a garage/carport.
Seven or more clients                          1 space for each 3 beds in the facility is licensed to
                                               accommodate; plus 1 space for each 4 units for guests and
                                               employees.
Rooming or boarding houses                     1 covered or uncovered space for each bedroom.
Second dwelling units                          1 off‐street, all weather surface parking space for each unit,
                                               plus the off‐street parking required for the primary dwelling.
                                               The parking space for the second unit may be provided
                                               within a required non‐front yard setback area.
Live/work units                                2 spaces for each unit.
Source: Zoning Ordinance, City of San Ramon, 2014.
                                                    11‐50

                                                        Housing
                         Table 11‐25: Comparison of Residential Parking Requirements
        Unit Type             San Ramon            Dublin             Danville            Livermore   Pleasanton
  Single‐Family              2 to 4/unit       2.0/unit            2.0/unit           2.0/unit      2.0/unit
  Multi‐Family
  Studio units               1.0/unit          1.0/unit            1.0/unit           1.75/unit     1.5 ‐ 2.0/unit2
  1‐BR units                 1.0/unit          1.0/unit            1.5/unit           1.75/unit     1.5 ‐ 2.0/unit2
  2‐BR units                 2.0/unit          1.0/unit            2.0/unit           1.75/unit     1.5 ‐ 2.0/unit2
  3‐BR units                 2.0/unit          1.0/unit            2.0/unit           1.75/unit     2.0/unit
  4‐BR units                 3.0/unit          1.0/unit            2.0/unit           1.75/unit     2.0/unit
  Guest Parking                    25%              100%               25%1                 None          14%
  100‐Unit Multi‐
                              230 spaces        200 spaces          228 spaces        175 spaces    212 spaces
  Family Prototype2
  Notes:
  1
    Applies to requirement for two or more bedrooms;
  2
    Requirement for first 4 units; 1.5 spaces per unit required for each unit thereafter.
  Sources: City of San Ramon Municipal Code, 2014; City of Danville Municipal Code, 2014; City of Dublin Municipal
  Code, 2014; City of Livermore Municipal Code, 2014; and City of Pleasanton Municipal Code, 2014.
ZONING OVERLAYS
In addition to development standards established for the residential and mixed use base zone
districts, overlay districts of the Zoning Ordinance provide additional regulations for residential
development. The following zoning overlays apply to residential development in portions of
the City:
Landmark Overlay (‐L): The Landmark Overlay Zone is intended to implement historic
preservation goals of the General Plan by preventing the demolition, alteration, or neglect of
historic or architecturally significant buildings that form an important link to San Ramon’s past.
The overlay also provides a mechanism to resolve conflicts in an orderly fashion between the
goals of landmark preservation and alternative land uses. The Planning Commission must
approve a discretionary permit for the construction, alteration, enlargement, or demolition of a
building or structure located in the overlay. The Commission must also find that any proposed
new construction within will be compatible with and help achieve the purposes of the
landmark overlay zone prior to granting Architectural Review approval. Director of
Planning/Community Development approval is required for the removal or alteration of
landscape materials identified as significant resources by a Landmark District Conservation
Plan. Owners of property within the –L Overlay Zone and owners of designated landmarks
are responsible to maintain their structures and premises in good repair at all times.
Currently, no land within San Ramon is affected by the Landmark Overlay Zone.
                                                           11‐51

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
Senior Housing Overlay (‐SH): The Senior Housing overlay zone is intended to encourage
the production of housing that meets the special needs of seniors and provide standards to
ensure that senior housing be compatible with existing neighborhood character. The –SH
Overlay Zone currently applies to 49 acres of land within San Ramon and may be combined
with any residential base zone. Developments utilizing the Overlay Zone must be for
residents age 55 years or older. One or more density bonus incentives are available for
senior citizen housing development.
PROVISION FOR A VARIETY OF HOUSING TYPES
Housing element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of a variety of housing types for all economic segments of the population. This
includes single‐family homes, multi‐family housing, second units, mobile homes, homeless
shelters and transitional housing, among others. Table 11‐26 below summarizes the various
housing types permitted within the City’s zoning districts.
Besides single‐family homes, the City provides for various other housing types to meet the
special needs of the community, including persons earning lower income, seniors, persons
with disabilities, the homeless, and agricultural workers, among others.
                           Table 11‐26: Housing Types Permitted by Zone
                                       RS‐12, RS‐
                            HR, RE‐A, 10, RS‐7,
    Housing Types       RC    RE‐B     RS‐6, RS‐D RM, RMH      RH     RVH MU  CCMU     CT
 Single‐Family           P      P           P          P        —      —  —     —      —
 Dwellings
 Second Units            P      P           P          P        —      —  —     —      —
 Manufactured and        P      P           P          P        —      —  —     —      —
 Mobile Homes
 Mobile Home Parks      UP     UP          UP         UP        UP     UP —     —      —
 Multi‐Family           —       —          —           P         P      P —     —      —
 Homeless Shelters      —       —          —           —        —      —  —     —      P
 Single‐room            —       —          —           —        UP     UP —     —      —
 Occupancy Unit
 Transitional Housing,   P      P           P          P         P      P UP    UP    UP
 6 or fewer persons
 Transitional Housing,  UP      —          —           —        UP     —  UP    UP    UP
 7 or more persons
 Supportive Housing,     P      P           P          P         P      P UP    UP    UP
 6 or fewer persons
 Supportive Housing,    UP      —          —           —        UP     —  UP    UP    UP
 7 or more persons
                                               11‐52

                                                    Housing
                             Table 11 26 (cont.): Housing Types Permitted by Zone
                                              RS‐12, RS‐
                                 HR, RE‐A, 10, RS‐7,
     Housing Types         RC       RE‐B     RS‐6, RS‐D RM, RMH           RH      RVH       MU    CCMU       CT
 Residential Care, 6 or     P         P            P             P         P        P      MUP     MUP        —
 fewer persons
 Residential Care, 7 or UP           UP           UP           UP         UP       UP      MUP     MUP        —
 more persons
 Residential Care          UP        UP           UP           UP         UP       UP        —       —        —
 Facility for the Elderly
 Rooming or Boarding        P         P            P             P         P        P        —       —        —
 House
 Live/Work Units            —        —            —             —          —       —       MUP     MUP       UP
 Mixed Use Residential      —        —            —             —          —       —         P       P        —
 Notes:
 P = Permitted, Zoning Clearance Required; MUP = Minor Use Permit; UP = Use Permit Required; — =Use not allowed.
 Source: Zoning Ordinance, City of San Ramon 2013.
Single‐Family Dwellings
A “single‐family dwelling” is defined in the Zoning Ordinance as a building designed for
and/or occupied exclusively by one family. This definition also includes factory built, modular
housing units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and mobile
homes/manufactured housing units that comply with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, placed on permanent foundation systems
(see Mobile Homes below). The term “family” is not defined in the Zoning Ordinance. Single‐
family dwellings are permitted in all residential zones, with the exception of the RH and RVH
zones.
Second Units
A “second unit” is defined as a second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary
dwelling on the same site. A second unit or carriage house provides complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, sanitation, and parking, and if attached to the primary dwelling, is provided
exterior access separate from the primary dwelling. Second units may be an alternative
source of affordable housing to lower income households and seniors.
Second units can be constructed with a ministerial permit within the RC, HR, RE, RS, RM,
RM‐R, RMH, and RMH‐R, subject to the following standards:
          Unit must be at least 350 square feet, but no more than 35 percent of the net floor
           area of the existing dwelling up to a maximum of 1,200 square feet;
          Net floor area of existing dwelling must not be reduced by more than 20 percent to
           accommodate a second unit;
                                                       11‐53

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
        Unit must not include more than two bedrooms and two bathrooms;
        Unit must provide one covered or uncovered parking space not located in the front
         yard setback in addition to the parking required for the primary unit; and
        Owner must occupy either primary or second unit.
The City has issued building permits for six second dwelling units since 2009 through 2013.
Manufactured and Mobile Homes
Manufactured housing and mobile homes can be an affordable housing option for low and
moderate income households. The California Department of Finance reported in 2014 that
San Ramon’s housing stock included only 37 mobile homes.
A mobile home built after June 15, 1976, certified under the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Act of 1974, and built on a permanent foundation may be located in
any residential zone where a conventional single‐family detached dwelling is permitted
subject to the same restrictions on density and to the same property development regulations,
provided that the mobile home has received approval of the Architectural Review Board and
receives a Certificate of Compatibility. Criteria for issuing a Certificate of Compatibility are
established in the Zoning Ordinance to protect neighborhood integrity, provide for harmonious
relationship between mobile homes and surrounding uses, and minimize problems that could
occur as a result of locating mobile homes on residential lots. Mobile homes are not allowed:
        On lots that do not meet the dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance;
        As a second or additional unit on an already developed lot;
        On lots with an average slope of more than 10 percent, or on any portion of a lot
         where the slope exceeds 15 percent; or
        On lots covered by the Landmark overlay zone (‐L) or on a designated historical site.
Mobile Home Parks
Although no mobile home parks are located in San Ramon, the Zoning Ordinance
accommodates this use within all residential zones. Mobile home parks require a Use Permit
in residential base zones.
Multi‐Family Housing
According to the State Department of Finance, multi‐family housing makes up approximately
27 percent of the 2014 housing stock in San Ramon. Multi‐family housing, including
apartments, condominiums, and townhomes, is permitted within the RM, RM‐R, RMH, RMH‐
R, RH, RH‐R, and RVH zone districts. Multi‐family rental housing developments that do not
involve a major subdivision (five or more lots) require review by the Architectural Review
Board (ARB) and approval by the Zoning Administrator (ZA). Subdivisions of five or more
lots, including large condominium and townhome subdivisions, are subject to ARB review and
Planning Commission review and approval. The City has approved several large apartment
complexes since 2009. Recently approved project include Highland Points (293 units),
Seville (165 units) and Valencia (186 units). Given the City’s success in providing multi‐
                                               11‐54

                                              Housing
family housing, development standards and permit processing procedures are not onerous
and do not serve to constrain multi‐family housing development.
Homeless Shelters
Homeless shelters provide shelter to homeless families and/or homeless individuals on a
limited short‐term basis. Senate Bill 2, enacted in October 2007, requires local governments
to identify one or more zoning categories that allow emergency shelters without discretionary
review. The statute permits the City to apply limited conditions to the approval of ministerial
permits for emergency shelters. The identified zone must have sufficient capacity to
accommodate at least one year‐round shelter and accommodate the City’s share of the
regional unsheltered homeless population. San Ramon’s share of the regional unsheltered
homeless population is estimated to be four individuals.
The City amended the Zoning Ordinance in 2012 to permit homeless shelters with a
ministerial permit within the Thorough Fare Commercial (CT) zone consistent with State law.
Properties zoned CT are centrally located along major transportation corridors. Criteria to
review non‐discretionary applications for homeless shelters were incorporated into the Zoning
Ordinance in 2012. The Zoning Ordinance was also amended to provide a definition of
homeless shelters that is consistent with the definition contained within Health and Safety
Code Section 50801(e).
The CT zone covers approximately 11.58 acres on six parcels in San Ramon. Adequate
capacity exists either on underutilized properties or through conversion of older buildings to
accommodate a homeless shelter for at least four homeless individuals.
Transitional Housing
Transitional housing is defined by the City as a residence that provides housing for up to two
years. Residents of transitional housing are usually connected to supportive services
designed to assist the homeless in achieving greater economic independence and a
permanent, stable living situation. Transitional housing can take several forms, including
group quarters with beds, single‐family homes, and multi‐family apartments and typically
offers case management and support services to help return people to independent living
(often six months to two years).
California Health and Safety Code (Section 50675.2) defines “transitional housing” and
“transitional housing development” as buildings configured as rental housing developments,
but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and
recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined
future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. In 2012, the City amended the
Zoning Ordinance to permit transitional housing facilities serving six or few persons in all
residential districts by‐right. Transitional housing facilities serving seven or more persons are
allowed within the RC, RH, MU, CCMU, and CT zones with approval of a Use Permit.
Residential Care Facilities
Residential care facilities licensed or supervised by a Federal, State, or local health/welfare
agency provide 24‐hour non‐medical care of unrelated persons who are handicapped and in
need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of
                                                11‐55

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family‐like environment. According to the
State Department of Social Services, Community Care Licensing Division, five licensed group
homes with 30 beds and one licensed adult residential facility with four beds are located in
San Ramon.
Residential care facilities serving six or fewer clients are permitted within all residential zones
and require a Minor Use Permit in the MU zones. Residential care facilities serving seven or
more clients require a Use Permit in the CC zone and all residential zones.
Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly (RCFEs)
RCFEs are licensed by the State where 75 percent of the residents are at least 62 years of
age and where varying levels of care and supervision are provided, as agreed to at the time
of admission or as determined necessary at subsequent times of reappraisal. RCFE projects
may include basic services and community space and include assisted living facilities (board
and care homes), congregate housing, independent living centers/senior apartments, and life
care facilities. A total of 374 beds in 23 RCFEs are currently located in San Ramon,
according to the State Department of Social Services.
In 2012, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to allow RCFEs serving six or fewer
persons as permitted by‐right in all residential zones. RCFEs serving seven or more persons
continue to require a Use Permit within all residential zones.
Rooming or Boarding Houses
Rooming or boarding houses are dwellings or part of a dwellings where rooms may be rented
for occupancy by no more than four persons who are not members of a single housekeeping
unit, with no more than four bedrooms rented in each dwelling. Rooming or boarding houses
are permitted in all residential zones.
Live/Work Units
A Live/work unit is an integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a
single household in a structure, either single‐family or multi‐family, that has been designed or
structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity. Live/work
units are permitted with approval of a Minor Use Permit in the MU and CCMU zones and with
a Use Permit in the CT and CS commercial zones. Minor Use Permits require approval of the
Zoning Administrator. A public hearing is only required if requested by an interested party.
Mixed Use Residential
Mixed use projects combine both non‐residential and residential uses on the same site.
Mixed use development can help reduce the effects of housing cost burden by increasing
density and offering opportunities for reduced vehicular trips by walking, bicycling or taking
public transportation. Mixed use residential developments are permitted within the MU and
CCMU zones.
Single Room Occupancy Units (SROs)
SRO units are one‐room units intended for occupancy by a single individual. They are distinct
from a studio or efficiency unit, in that a studio is a one‐room unit that must contain a kitchen
                                                 11‐56

                                             Housing
and bathroom. Although SRO units are not required to have a kitchen or bathroom, many
SROs have one or the other. In 2012, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to facilitate
the provision of SROs consistent with SB 2 enacted in 2007. SROs are permitted with a Use
Permit in the RH and RVH zones.
Supportive Housing
Supportive housing links the provision of housing and social services for the homeless,
people with disabilities, and a variety of other special needs populations. California Health
and Safety Code (Section 50675.2) defines “supportive housing” as housing with no limit on
length of stay, that is occupied by the low income adults with disabilities, and that is linked to
on‐site or off‐site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when
possible, work in the community.
In 2012, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to permit supportive housing facilities
serving six or few persons in all residential districts by‐right. Supportive housing facilities
serving seven or more persons are allowed within the RC, RH, MU, CCMU, and CT zones
with approval of a Use Permit. The Zoning Ordinance was also amended to include a
definition of supportive housing that is consistent with the definition contained within Health
and Safety Code Section 50675.2.
Farmworker Employee Housing
Only 1.81 acres of land within San Ramon is zoned for agricultural use and no residents of
San Ramon were identified by the Census as employed in farming, fishing, or forestry
occupations. Moreover, less than one percent of Contra Costa County residents were
employed in these occupations. Therefore, San Ramon has no specific need for farmworker
housing. However, pursuant to the State Employee Housing Act (Section 17000 of the
Health and Safety Code), employee housing for agricultural workers consisting of no more
than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single family or
household is permitted by right in an agricultural land use designation. Therefore, for
properties that permit agricultural uses such as in the Agricultural, Rural Conservation,
Hillside Residential and Residential Estate zones, a local jurisdiction may not treat employee
housing that meets the above criteria any differently than an agricultural use. Furthermore,
any employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees shall be
deemed a single‐family structure with a residential land use designation, according to the
Employee Housing Act. The Zoning Ordinance permits employee housing for six or fewer
persons where a single‐family residence is permitted. No conditional or special use permit or
variance is required. The Zoning Ordinance also allows agricultural employees to live in
mobile homes within the Agricultural zone.
In the City’s Sphere of Influence, 2,244 acres of land are pre‐zoned Agriculture where the
City considers major agricultural operations are appropriate. However, these are
unincorporated lands under the land use jurisdiction of the County of Contra Costa.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
The processing time needed to obtain development permits and required approvals is
commonly cited by the development community as a prime contributor to the high cost of
                                                11‐57

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
housing. Depending on the magnitude and complexity of the development proposal, the time
which elapses from application submittal to project approval may vary considerably. Factors
that can affect the length of development review on a proposed project include: rezoning or
general plan amendment requirements, public hearing required for Commission/Council
review, or a required Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report (EIR).
Generally, all developments undergo an environmental, land use, and design review process
to ensure quality development throughout the City. This process can take anywhere from
three to four months for a minor subdivision application, to a year or more for a major
subdivision requiring an EIR. In many cases, the lengthy period of time between project
application and approval is necessary due to complicated environmental, infrastructure, or
other development issues. However, it is recognized that time lapse equals increased costs,
and affordable housing projects are given priority in the review process (Program 22). San
Ramon’s review and entitlement processes and procedures are described in detail in
Appendix 11‐D.
Land Use Development Application Processing Timelines
Applications for development are generally processed based on the following schedule:
       30 days or less: Lot line adjustments; single‐family residence alterations and
        additions; and staff level Architectural Review.
       45 days or less: Variances; Architecture Board Review (new single‐family homes);
        and Minor Use Permits.
       180 days or less: Residential development applications; mixed‐use developments;
        Hillside residential developments; and Use Permits.
       180 days or more: Any project requiring an EIR; Rezoning; General Plan Amendment;
        Specific Plan Amendment; and Zoning Text Amendment.
Overall, the City is able to process development applications in a timely manner. However,
the City will prioritize the processing of affordable housing projects with more than 25 percent
BMR units (Program 22).
SITE IMPROVEMENTS, DEVELOPMENT FEES AND EXACTIONS
For large subdivisions, the City requires the construction of reasonable on‐ and off‐site
improvements as permitted by the Subdivision Map Act. Typical improvements required of a
developer include:
       Grading and improvement of public and private streets including surfacing, curbs,
        gutters, sidewalks, street lighting, street name signs, and necessary barricades or
        traffic safety devices;
       Assessing and collecting fees for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost
        of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares;
       Storm drainage and flood control facilities within and outside of the subdivision (when
        necessary) to carry storm runoff both tributary to and originating within the
        subdivision;
                                                 11‐58

                                                   Housing
         A public or private sewage system that meets public sewer system standards;
         A water supply system providing an adequate supply of potable water to each lot and
          fire hydrant within the subdivision;
         Fire hydrants and connections of the type and at locations specified by the San
          Ramon Valley Fire Protection District;
         Public utility distribution facilities including gas, electric, telephone and cable television
          necessary to serve each lot in the subdivision; and
         Local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, park‐and‐ride facilities
          and similar items for large subdivisions.
Specific standards for design and improvements of subdivisions must be in accordance with
the applicable sections of the General Plan, Specific Plans, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Ordinance, and other requirements of the Director of Engineering Services.
The City also may require dedication of land for public use. Dedicated rights‐of‐way must be
designed, developed, and improved according to City standards. The City of San Ramon
Street Design Criteria is summarized in Table 11‐27.
                                    Table 11‐27: Roadway Design Criteria
                                                  Right‐of‐     Curb‐to‐                     Sidewalk
                Roadway Type                        Way           Curb        Dividing Strip   Area
 Principle Thoroughfares – Type A                   110‐ft        72‐ft            18‐ft       20‐ft
 Principle Thoroughfares – Type B                  100‐ft         64‐ft            16‐ft       20‐ft
 General Thoroughfares                               84‐ft        64‐ft             —          20‐ft
 General Arterials                                   60‐ft        40‐ft             —          20‐ft
 Source: City of San Ramon, Subdivision Ordinance, 2014.
In addition to improvements and dedication of public land, residential developers are subject
to a variety of fees and exactions to process permits and provide necessary services and
facilities as allowed by State law. The City requires parkland dedication or fee in‐lieu of
dedication in accordance and consistent with the Quimby Act; as such, credit can be received
for private open space against the requirement for land dedication or payment of fees in‐lieu
of dedication. In general, these development fees can be a constraint to the development of
housing and compromise project feasibility because the additional cost borne by developers
contributes to overall increased housing unit cost. However, the fees are necessary to
maintain adequate planning services and other public services and facilities in the City.
The City’s permit processing fee schedule for residential development is displayed in Table
11‐28. Most permit processing fees are levied on a full cost recovery basis to recoup actual
administrative costs incurred to the City during the development review process. Development
impact fees are also levied to offset fiscal impacts of new developments, consistent with
                                                      11‐59

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
implementing policies of the Growth Management Element of the General Plan. San Ramon’s
development impact fees are summarized in Table 11‐29.
As shown in Table 11‐30, development fees for a model single‐family dwelling unit total
approximately $81,702.90. Development fees for a model multi‐family unit total
approximately $45,262.28. These figures exclude Parkland Dedication Fees, which are
based on Fair Market Value as derived from an appraisal at the time of project approval.
These fees include school, water, and sewer fees that are imposed by outside agencies over
which the City has no control.
In 2014, San Ramon formed a Community Facilities District (CFD)—a financing district that
levies a special tax to fund the cost of certain additional facilities and services required by the
new development, but not fully funded by revenue generated by the development. The CFD’s
Maximum Special Tax rates per year (in FY 2013‐14 dollars) are as follows for the various
classes of properties: Single‐Family Parcels—$743.75 per residence, Condominiums/
Townhomes—$595 per residence, and Multi‐Family—$446.25. For FY 2014‐15 and on, the
Special Tax Rate for Single Family, Condominium, and Multi Family parcels will be increased
by the Consumer Price Index for San Francisco Bay Area Urban Wage Earners (from
December 2013) with a minimum of four (4.00%) compounded annually.
Each new development prepares a fiscal analysis (nexus study). Upon completion of the
fiscal analysis and a determination that the project will generate insufficient General Fund
revenues to annually pay for the General Fund expenses of servicing the development,
approval of the new development will include a condition of project approval that would
require the project developer to fund the negative fiscal impact of the project. One
mechanism for funding would be to join the City’s CFD.
New developments that choose to be annexed into the CFD will be done so at the current
special tax rate or if necessary a lower/higher special tax rate will be set based upon the
fiscal analysis provided to the City. At the time of annexation, consideration will be taken on
what type of development will be annexed into the CFD (multi‐family vs. single‐family, senior
housing, affordable housing, etc.) in order to set the special tax rate. For new affordable
development projects where an affordable housing agreement will be signed, the City will
analyze the CFD rate and its impact to lower income housing units as part of the affordable
housing agreement review.
Annexation into the CFD is not mandatory for new development; developments are given the
option to join the existing CFD or form a new financing mechanism to fund any negative fiscal
impact of the project. New developments that choose to join the CFD can be expeditiously
annexed into the existing district with the unanimous approval of the landowner of the parcel
or parcels and one City Council action. This allows future subdivisions with similar financial
deficiencies to be easily annexed into the CFD.
While the City’s fees and special taxes are tied to the costs of providing necessary services,
they can impact the development of affordable housing. Reduced, waived, deferred, or
reimbursed fees and a lower CFD rate are possible incentives and may be available through
density bonus incentives. Additionally, a comprehensive update of the City’s development
impact fees is currently underway and will evaluate infrastructure, capital, and affordable
                                               11‐60

                                                Housing
housing needs commensurate with anticipated growth. Policy 2.3‐I‐24 of the General Plan
(Economic Development Element) includes a policy that the City will continue to review its
impact fee structure to assure that fees are equitable and fair in relationship to the needs and
desires of the community and fees are reflective of actual costs and remain consistent with
State law.
                                   Table 11‐28: Permit Processing Fees
                            Type                                              Amount
 Architectural Review
    1 unit                                                         T&M plus $500 deposit
    2 to 10 units                                                  T&M plus $1,000 deposit
    10+ units                                                      T&M plus $3,000 deposit
 Development Agreement                                             T&M plus $2,000 deposit
 Residential Development Plan                                      T&M plus $5,000 deposit
 Environmental Review
    Categorical Exemption                                          $75
    Negative Declaration
      Administratively prepared                                    T&M plus $1,500 deposit
                                                                   Consultant’s Cost + 30%
      Consultant prepared
                                                                   Administrative Fee
                                                                   Consultant’s Cost + 30%
    Environmental Impact Report
                                                                   Administrative Fee
 Mitigation Monitoring Administration
    County Filing Fee                                              $50
    CDFG Filing Fee                                                $2,181.25 to $3,029.75
 Mitigation Monitoring Program
                                                                   Consultant’s Cost + 30%
    Implementation/Special Peer/Consultant Review
                                                                   Administrative Fee
    Mitigation Monitoring Staff Time                               T&M plus $1,500 deposit
 General Plan Amendment                                            T&M plus $5,000 deposit
                                                                   T&M + Consultant’s Cost +30%
 Specific Plan
                                                                   Administrative Fee (for deposit)
 Rezone                                                            T&M plus $3,000 deposit
                                                  11‐61

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                 Table 11‐28 (cont.): Permit Processing Fees
                             Type                                                       Amount
Subdivisions
   Major                                                                    T&M plus $3,000 deposit
   Minor                                                                    T&M plus $3,000 deposit
Use Permits
    Congregate Care/Group Homes when located within
                                                                            T&M plus $1,500 deposit
    a residence
    Major Use Permit and Amendments requiring Public
                                                                            T&M plus $3,000 deposit
    Hearing(s)
    Minor Use Permit and Amendments                                         T&M plus $750 deposit
Variance
    Administrative Variance                                                 $500
    Public Hearing Required                                                 T&M plus $1,500 deposit
    Single Family Residence                                                 $300
    Minor Exception                                                         $300
                                                                            Retain 25% of Residential Building
Zoning Review/Building Permit
                                                                            Permit fee
Notes:
T&M is time and materials for “fully burdened” hourly rates for each employee working on the application. The fully
burdened hourly rate includes City overhead for clerical and other support employees, facilities, and equipment.
Deposit amounts are set at assumed average cost of time and materials to provide the service.
Source: City of San Ramon, Fee Schedule, July 1, 2013.
                                                         11‐62

                                              Housing
                           Table 11‐29: Residential Development Impact Fees
                    Impact Fee Type                                           Amount
School Age Child Care Fee                               $445.45 per dwelling unit
Beautification/Cultural Activities                      0.001 of the building code valuation
GIS Mapping Fee                                         0.0008 of the building code valuation
Westside SP Recovery Costs                              $492.91 per dwelling unit
General Plan Recovery Costs                             0.003 of building code valuation
Zoning Ordinance Recovery Costs                         0.001 of building code valuation
Parkland Dedication In‐Lieu Fee                         Fair Market Value
Crow Canyon SP Recovery Fee                             $598.11 per unit
Citywide Traffic Impact Mitigation Fees
    Single‐Family                                       $751 per unit
    Apartment, Townhouse, Condo                         $523 per unit
Southern Contra Costa JEPA Traffic Impact Mitigation Fees
    Contra Costa Sub‐Regional: Residential              $3,455 per unit
    Southern Contra Costa Sub‐Regional: Residential     $1,252 per unit
Tri‐Valley Transportation Development Fees
    Single Family                                       $2,313 per unit
    Multifamily                                         $1,472 per unit
County Flood Control District – Drainage Fee            $.20 per square foot of new impervious surface
Creek Study Drainage and Mitigation Fee
    Twin Creeks Watershed                               $3,000 per developable acre
    South San Ramon Creek                               $1,500 per developable acre
    Oak Creek Watershed                                 $1,750 per developable acre
                                                        $0.30 per sq. ft. or portion thereof of site
Drainage Mitigation Fee
                                                        impervious surface
Water System Connection Fee
    EBMUD—Single Family                                 $34,460 per unit
    EBMUD—Multi‐Family                                  Varies1
    DSRSD—Single Family                                 $12,246 per unit
    DSRSD—Multi‐Family                                  Varies1
                                                 11‐63

                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
                    Table 11‐29 (cont.): Residential Development Impact Fees (cont.)
                    Impact Fee Type                                         Amount
Sewer Connection Fee
DSRSD—Single‐Family Home                                 $16,656 per unit
                                                         Condominium $12,493 per unit,
DSRSD—Multi‐Family Unit
                                                         Apartment $10,977 per unit
CCCSD—New Dwelling Unit                                  $7,435 per unit
School Impact Fee
   New Single‐Family Home                                $5.61 per square foot
Note:
1
  Varies, depending on size of water meter
                                                  11‐64

                                                      Housing
                             Table 11‐30: Model Development Fees in San Ramon
                                                    Single‐Family                            Multi‐Family
Assumed Project Size (units)                             140                                       85
Living Area per Unit (sq. ft.)                          2,050                                    1,330
Garage per Unit (sq. ft.)                                470                                      470
GIS Mapping Fee                                       $287.95                                   $96.82
City Beautification Fee                               $359.94                                  $121.03
Child Care                                            $445.45                                  $445.45
Issuance Fee                                             $35                                      $35
Microfilm1                                         $1.50 per page                          $1.50 per page
Plan Check Fees                                      $2,727.08                                $1,241.95
Permit Fees                                          $5,479.42                               $2,477.56
Parkland Dedication2                      Dependent on Fair Market Value          Dependent of Fair Market Value
SMIP Residential                                       $46.80                                   $15.86
General Plan Recovery                                $1,079.82                                 $363.08
Zoning Ordinance Recovery                             $359.94                                  $121.03
Traffic Mitigation
    City                                                $790                                     $550
    Region                                              $1,317                                  $1,317
    Sub‐Region                                         $3,635                                   $3,635
Tri‐Valley Development                                 $2,433                                   $1,549
Water Connection Fee3                                 $34,460                                   $9,210
Sewer Connection Fee4                                  $16,656                                 $12,493
School Impact Fee                                    $11,500.50                              $11,500.50
                                                                                       $45,262.28 + Parkland
Total Fees per Unit                      $81,702.90+ Parkland Dedication
                                                                                              Dedication
Note:
1
  Estimated 60 pages to be microfilmed
2
  Parkland Dedication In‐Lieu Fee is based on Fair Market Value of land and derived from an appraisal at the time of the
  project. Parkland Dedication In‐Lieu Fee has ranged between $19,000 to $23,000 per dwelling unit between 2012 to
  2014. Estimate based on higher range of fee
3
  Estimate based on higher fees charged by EBMUD
4
  Estimate based on higher fees charged by DSRSD
Source: City of San Ramon Planning Services Department, 2014 and 2015.
                                                         11‐65

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
BUILDING CODE AND ENFORCEMENT
Effective January 1, 2014, the City implements the 2013 California Building Codes, which are
based on the International Building Codes. The California Building Codes establish standards
and requires inspections at various stages of construction to ensure code compliance and
minimum health and safety standards. Although these standards may increase housing
production costs, these standards are mandated by the State of California and are intended
to provide structurally sound, safe, and energy‐efficient housing.
HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Both the federal Fair Housing Amendment Act (FHAA) and the California Fair Employment
and Housing Act direct local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e.
modifications or exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use
and enjoy a dwelling. The City conducted an analysis of the zoning ordinance, permitting
procedures, development standards, and building codes to identify potential constraints for
housing for persons with disabilities. The City’s policies and regulations regarding housing for
persons with disabilities are described below.
Zoning and Land Use
Under State Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (aka Lanterman Act), small
licensed residential care facilities for six or fewer persons must be treated as regular
residential uses and permitted by‐right in all residential districts; San Ramon is compliant with
the Lanterman Act. State licensed residential care facilities serving six or fewer clients are
permitted within all residential zones. Residential care facilities serving seven or more clients
require a Use Permit in all residential zones. Criteria that would be used to review Use Permit
applications for residential care facilities serving seven or more clients pertain to performance
standards and are not specific to the proposed use. Occupancy standards for residential care
facilities are the same as those for all other residential uses as promulgated by the California
State Fire Marshal’s Office. The City has not adopted a spacing requirement for residential
care facilities.
The Land Use Element and Zoning Ordinance provide for the development of multi‐family
housing in the RM, RMH, RH, and RVH zones. Regular multi‐family housing for persons with
special needs, such as apartments for seniors and the disabled are considered regular
residential uses permitted by‐right in these zones. The City’s land use policies and zoning
provisions do not constrain the development of such housing.
It may also be reasonable to accommodate requests from persons with disabilities to waive a
setback requirement or other standards of the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that homes are
accessible for the mobility impaired. The City Building and Safety Services Division provides
ongoing assistance to complete rehabilitation work for single‐family properties and public
facilities to install necessary accommodations, including installation of accessibility ramps and
railings to meet handicapped accessibility. Necessary improvements to enhance accessibility
may result in conflicts with Zoning Ordinance standards.
In 2012, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to allow reasonable accommodation
through a non‐discretionary review process for persons with disabilities seeking equal access
                                                 11‐66

                                             Housing
to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and
Housing Act. The Zoning Ordinance establishes specific procedures and thresholds for
reasonable accommodation requests with ministerial approval by the Zoning Administrator.
Building Codes
The Building and Safety Division actively enforces 2013 California Building Code provisions
that regulate the access and adaptability of buildings to accommodate persons with
disabilities. No unique restrictions are in place that would constrain the development of
housing for persons with disabilities. Government Code Section 12955.1 requires that 10
percent of the total dwelling units in multi‐family buildings without elevators consisting of three
or more rental units or four or more condominium units subject to the following building
standards for persons with disabilities:
        The primary entry to the dwelling unit shall be on an accessible route unless
         exempted by site impracticality tests.
        At least one powder room or bathroom shall be located on the primary entry level
         served by an accessible route.
        All rooms or spaces located on the primary entry level shall be served by an
         accessible route. Rooms and spaces located on the primary entry level and subject to
         this chapter may include but are not limited to kitchens, powder rooms, bathrooms,
         living rooms, bedrooms, or hallways.
        Common use areas shall be accessible.
        If common tenant parking is provided, accessible parking spaces is required.
Entitlement and Permit Processing
As a standard condition of approval, the Planning Services Division requires all residential
development applications to provide opportunities for potential home buyers to purchase
dwelling units that are modified for accessibility to meet the home buyer’s special needs. Prior
to building permit issuance, developers must demonstrate that project sales information
identify handicapped accessibility modifications as an option for prospective buyers.
Development and Planning Fees
The City charges a variety of planning fees to cover the expenses and staff resources
incurred during the review process, and development impact fees to provide necessary
services, facilities, and infrastructure. Planning and development fees increase the cost of
housing and may potentially constrain the development of housing for persons with
disabilities, many of whom are of lower income due to earning limitations. To facilitate the
development of housing affordable to persons with disabilities, the City has provided financial
assistance, reduced parking requirements, and other incentives to reduce the cost of
development. The City will assist with future development of housing affordable to special
needs groups, including seniors and persons with disabilities, with funding assistance and
other regulatory concessions/incentives, as appropriate and subject to funding availability
(Program 10).
                                                11‐67

                                     San Ramon General Plan 2035
Definition of Family
“Family” is not defined in the San Ramon Zoning Ordinance. The City does not regulate
residency by discriminating between biologically related and unrelated persons nor does it
regulate or enforce the number of persons constituting a family.
MARKET CONSTRAINTS
Market constraints significantly affect the cost of housing in San Ramon, and can pose
barriers to housing production and affordability.
VACANT/UNDERDEVELOPED LAND
The City of San Ramon is located in an established, nearly built‐out valley surrounded by
pristine hillsides. The City faces increasing development pressure with a limited supply of
vacant, unconstrained land. No undeveloped residential land parcels were listed for sale in
July 2014, and 14 of the Housing Opportunity Sites identified in the Housing Resources
section are vacant parcels. These undeveloped sites are mainly located along the edges of
the City on foothill slopes. The limited availability of undeveloped and unconstrained land for
residential uses drives up the cost of housing. Significant future housing construction is
anticipated in mixed‐use development areas within the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan
area and the Crow Canyon subarea, or as intensification of existing commercial centers.
COST OF HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
Construction costs are the largest component of total costs for a single‐family detached unit,
accounting for 30 to 40 percent of the finished sale price. According to RS Means
Residential Square Foot Costs (2013),5 construction costs for an average two‐story single‐
family home (2,000 square feet of living area), and built of stucco on wood frame total $114
per square foot in the Oakland area. For multi‐family attached units, construction costs are
slightly higher at $135. A reduction in amenities and quality of building materials could result
in lower costs and sale prices; however, high quality design and sufficient tenant amenities
are necessary to maintain minimum health and safety standards.
AVAILABILITY OF FINANCING
The availability of financing affects a person’s ability to purchase or improve a home. Under
the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions are required to disclose
information on the disposition of loan applications by the income, gender, and race of the
applicants. This applies to all loan applications for home purchases, improvements, and
refinancing, whether financed at market rate or with government assistance.
Table 11‐31 summarizes the disposition of loan applications submitted to financial institutions
in 2012 for home purchase, refinance, and home improvement loans in San Ramon.6
Included is information on loan applications that were approved and originated, approved but
not accepted by the applicant, denied, withdrawn by the applicant, or incomplete.
5
  RSMeans is an online resource for construction books and other related products.
6
  HMDA data is aggregated by census tract, not by municipal boundary. HMDA data presented in this Housing Element is
  based on the census tracts that approximate the geographic coverage of the City of San Ramon.
                                                          11‐68

                                                        Housing
Home Purchase Loans
In 2012, a total of 1,416 San Ramon households applied for conventional loans to purchase
homes. The overall loan approval rate was 80 percent and eight percent of applications were
denied. 226 applications were submitted for the purchase of homes in San Ramon through
government‐backed loans (e.g. FHA, VA) in 2012. To be eligible for such loans, residents
must meet the established income standards and most applicants are lower or moderate
income households. Among applications for government‐backed home purchase loans in
2012, 76 percent were approved and 12 percent were denied.
Refinance Loans
San Ramon residents filed 9,740 applications for home refinance loans in 2012 with 78
percent of these applications approved and 10 percent denied. The number of refinance loans
has gone up considerably since the mortgage banking crisis that began in 2008. Lending
restrictions due to the mortgage banking crisis placed homeownership out of reach for many,
but in 2012 lenders have begun to ease the qualifications required for a competitive
mortgage rate7
Home Improvement Loans
San Ramon residents filed 141 applications for home improvement loans with 70 percent of
applicants approved and 23 percent denied by lending institutions in 2012. The large
proportion of home improvement loan denials may be explained by the nature of these loans.
Whereas the common home equity loan of credit is secured by equity in a home, most home
improvement loans are unsecured loans and can be more risky for lenders.
To address potential private market lending constraints and expand homeownership and
home improvement opportunities, the City of San Ramon offers and/or participates in a
variety of programs. These include the First Time Homebuyers and Housing Rehabilitation
programs offered by the Tri‐Valley Opportunity Center and the City, respectively. Such
programs assist lower and moderate income residents by increasing access to favorable loan
terms to purchase or improve their homes.
FORECLOSURES
With low interest rates, “creative” financing (e.g., zero down, interest only, adjustable loans),
and predatory lending practices (e.g. aggressive marketing, hidden fees, negative
amortization), many households nationwide purchased homes that were beyond their
financial means between 2000 and 2005. Under the false assumptions that refinancing to
lower interest rates would always be an option and home prices would continue to rise at
double‐digit rates, many households were (and still are) unprepared for the hikes in interest
rates, expiration of short‐term fixed rates, and decline in sales prices that set off in 2006.
Suddenly faced with significantly inflated mortgage payments, and mortgage loans that are
larger than the worth of the homes, foreclosure was the only option available to many
households.
7
  HMDA data for 2013 was not available at the writing of this Housing Element.
                                                            11‐69

                                      San Ramon General Plan 2035
In July 2014, 866 homes in San Ramon were listed as foreclosures.8 These homes were
listed at various stages of foreclosure (from pre‐foreclosures to auctions) and ranged in price
from $86,250 to $2,184,074. The high prices of these homes facing foreclosure indicate that
the impact of foreclosure extends not only to lower and moderate income households, but
also households with higher incomes. With implosion of the mortgage lending market, many
households had difficulty obtaining new mortgage loans or refinancing, even for above
moderate income households. The housing crisis reached its bottom in 2009 and like the rest
of the United States, San Ramon experienced an uneven recovery through 2013. While
housing prices are increasing, they have not yet reached their previous highs before the
crisis. Throughout this period, lenders restricted access to affordable mortgage rates to all but
those with extremely high credit scores and a 20 percent down payment. In 2013, these
restrictions began to loosen and this trend is projected to continue providing more ownership
opportunities as the housing recovery continues.
                                   Table 11‐31: Disposition of Home Loans – 2012
                                            Home Purchase
                                   Government‐                                                  Home
                                      Backed              Conventional          Refinances  Improvement
         Disposition               #          %           #            %        #         %  #       %
   Approved, Originated           156       69%         1,046         74%     7,255     74% 93      66%
   Approved, Not
                                   16        7%           85          6%       387       4%  5      4%
   Accepted
   Denied                         26        12%          119          8%       971      10% 32      23%
   Withdrawn                      22        10%          124          9%       731       8%  8      6%
   Incomplete                      6         3%           42          3%       396       4%  3      2%
   Total                         226       100%         1,416        100%     9,740    100% 141    100%
   Note:
   Due to rounding errors, totals may add to slightly more or less than 100%.
   Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data, 2012.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
A community’s environmental setting affects the feasibility and cost of developing housing.
Environmental issues range from the availability of water to the suitability of land for
development due to potential exposure to seismic, flooding, wildfire and other hazards. If not
properly recognized and accommodated in residential design, these environmental features
could potentially endanger lives and property. This section summarizes these potential
constraints in San Ramon.
8
  http://www.all‐foreclosure.com/, accessed 7/1/14.
                                                           11‐70

                                              Housing
GEOLOGIC AND SEISMIC HAZARDS
Soils within the San Ramon Planning Area are primarily clays with high shrink‐swell potential,
which also have high and severe erosion hazards on slopes where bare soil is exposed.
Slopes range from level and gently sloping along the valley floor, to slopes exceeding 75
percent in hilly areas and where rock outcrops occur. The clays and silts included in the
Planning Area would not be likely to liquefy in the event of a large earthquake, but may be
subject to other seismically induced ground failures such as ground lurching. Much of the
Tassajara Valley and Bollinger Canyon areas are steeply sloped, with existing and potential
new landslides posing concerns for potential new development in these areas.
The active Calaveras fault zone that runs parallel to and just west of Interstate 680 is the
primary earthquake concern within San Ramon. Severe ground shaking in the Planning Area
has accompanied numerous large‐magnitude historic earthquakes in the region, and it is
likely that a similar pattern of seismicity will persist in the future. An Alquist‐Priolo Earthquake
Fault Zone has been established in conjunction with the fault, which prohibits construction of
any new structures intended for human occupancy within 50 feet of the mapped fault trace
unless current geotechnical investigation demonstrates that there are no active fault segments
beneath the site of the new structure. Additionally, the Bollinger and Dublin faults (both
classified as inactive), and the Mt. Diablo fold‐and‐thrust belt, would be susceptible to the
effects of ground shaking and related secondary ground failures from rupture on the nearby
active Calaveras Fault.
STORM FLOODING HAZARDS
According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), a majority of Contra
Costa County’s creeks and shoreline lie within the 100‐year flood plain. The potential for a
100‐year flood, which represents a one percent chance each year, exists along small
segments of San Ramon Creek, Alamo Creek, San Catanio Creek, Bollinger Creek, and
South San Ramon Creek. Developments adjacent to these creek areas could be vulnerable to
flooding. Flood plain areas are generally not suitable for residential development.
WILDLAND/URBAN INTERFACE FIRE HAZARDS
Urban and wildland fires pose a threat to residents and property within the San Ramon
Planning Area. This risk is the result of a variety of factors, including: type of vegetation and
ground cover in the Planning Area, combustibility of certain building materials, ground slope,
adequacy of access to fire suppression services, water supply, water pressure, and weather
conditions. Fire hazards in San Ramon are usually created by increases in the number of
homes adjoining open space, as much of the threat of wildland fires is due to open
grasslands abutting residential developments. Many neighborhoods within the City are located
in remote regions and are surrounded by grasslands. As San Ramon continues to expand,
more of these urban‐rural interface areas are created. This situation creates extreme fire
hazards, and San Ramon is committed to planning development, with the help of fire
protection agencies, that minimizes the risk of fire to the greatest extent possible.
WATER SUPPLY
San Ramon has two water suppliers: East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) and Dublin
San Ramon Services District (DSRSD).
                                                  11‐71

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
EBMUD acts as the City’s water supplier, providing water service to the City from its San
Ramon Pressure Zone. EBMUD provides water to all households with the exception of Gale
Ranch Phase 2, 3 and 4, and all of Windemere in the Dougherty Valley. 90% of EBMUD’s
water supply source is from the Mokelumne River. After other entitlements are satisfied
during an average year, EBMUD currently obtains approximately 220 mgd from the
Mokelumne River.
EBMUD published their Water Supply Management Program 2040 in 2012. The plan meets
the need for water in the district through 2040. The 2035 General Plan includes a number of
development policies that promote water conservation. The Growth Management Element
establishes performance standards for infrastructure and new development must receive
written verification, prior to project approval that adequate water supply will be available to
serve the project.
The DSRSD is the provider of potable water for the Dougherty Valley, except for that portion
under EBMUD’s jurisdiction. The California Superior Court has validated the capability of
DSRSD through Zone 7 to provide water to serve the build out of Dougherty Valley.
DSRSD currently purchases treated potable water from Alameda County Zone 7. This water
is then retailed to DSRSD customers through a system owned and operated by DSRSD. The
water that is wholesaled to DSRSD by Zone 7 is obtained from a combination of the local
groundwater basin and a contract with the State of California for State Water Project (SWP)
water entitlement.
Zone 7 has entered into a contract to buy a permanent supply of up to 7,000‐acre feet of
SWP water entitlement. Approximately 4,400‐acre feet of water are needed in Dougherty
Valley at project buildout (exclusive of the Coyote Creek area which will be served by
EBMUD). The amount of SWP water entitlement that has been purchased is greater than the
water demand for the Dougherty Valley in order to address the following issues:
       The amount of SWP water delivered is projected to be less than the actual water
        entitlement obtained because of droughts and new environmental restrictions on the
        SWP water supply delivered through Delta pumping facilities.
       Losses that may occur in the water system between the location of the SWP facilities
        and the location of the user in Dougherty Valley.
       Losses that may occur in groundwater storage facilities.
       Additionally, should further pumping restrictions be placed on Delta pumping facilities
        and 7,000 acre feet prove to be an insufficient quantity to serve the Dougherty
        Valley, DSRSD has the option to increase the amount of transferred SWP water by as
        much as 5,000 acre feet per year, thereby assuring that Dougherty Valley will not
        impact existing supplies.
SEWER SERVICES
Wastewater in San Ramon is collected by the San Ramon Interceptor and the Larwin
Pumping Station, both of which are operated by the Central Contra Costa Sanitary District
(Central San). Central San indicates that a planned capacity expansion of the interceptor is
                                               11‐72

                                                       Housing
scheduled to occur at the end of the decade. This capacity expansion would be designed to
accommodate planned growth at the time design occurs, which the agency anticipates to be
2018. The City also has installed a Dougherty Valley Tunnel and Trunk Sewer project. These
facility upgrades would satisfy planned growth in San Ramon.
Wastewater treatment service in most areas of San Ramon, including the Faria, City Center,
Valley Vista, and Old Ranch Summit housing opportunity sites, is provided by Central San.
The Dublin San Ramon Services District (DSRSD) provides wastewater treatment service to
a smaller portion of San Ramon, including the Dougherty Valley housing opportunity site.
Central San has a treatment capacity of 54 million gallons per day (mgd) and currently treats
approximately 45 mgd.9 Central San currently operates under capacity. DSRSD currently
treats 10.5 mgd and has a daily capacity to treat 17 mgd.10 Therefore, DSRSD also operates
under capacity. Wastewater generated by the Housing Element, as well as with other planned
growth in the Central San service area, has been planned for and approved by the Central
San’s and DSRSD’s long‐range planning projections.
HABITAT PROTECTION
Significant biological resources exist in the rural portions of the San Ramon Planning Area.
The Land Use Element of the General Plan requires the preparation of a Natural
Communities Conservation Plan under a proposed San Ramon Habitat Protection Program if
significant floral and/or faunal resources would be affected by residential development in
rural areas. The purpose of the San Ramon Habitat Protection Program is the long‐term
protection, enhancement, and management of sensitive habitat and to ensure that any
mitigation for development impacts is adequate. Under the Program, habitat mitigation areas
will be established in order to offset any loss of habitat resulting from rural residential
development if impacts of development cannot be avoided by project re‐design.
11.4 HOUSING RESOURCES
The extent of housing needs in a community often exceeds the resources available. The City
of San Ramon must pull together limited resources and use them efficiently in order to
address the current and projected housing needs of its residents. This section of the Housing
Element provides an overview of resources available to the City.
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
Projected Housing Needs
State Housing Element law requires that a local jurisdiction accommodate a share of the
region’s projected housing needs for the planning period. This share, called the Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), is important because State law mandates that
jurisdictions provide sufficient land to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities for all
economic segments of the community. Compliance with this requirement is measured by the
9
   Central Contra Costa County Sanitary District website, http://www.centralsan.org/index.cfm?navid=1, accessed July 1,
   2014.
10
   Dublin San Ramon Services District website, http://www.dsrsd.com/aboutDSRSD/facts.html, accessed July 1, 2014.
                                                          11‐73

                                       San Ramon General Plan 2035
jurisdiction’s ability in providing adequate land to accommodate the RHNA. ABAG, as the
regional planning agency, is responsible for allocating the RHNA to individual jurisdictions
within the region.
The RHNA is distributed by income category. For the 2015 Housing Element update, the City
of San Ramon is allocated a RHNA of 1,417 units as follows:
           Extremely Low/Very Low Income (up to 50 percent of AMI): 516 units (36 percent)11
           Low Income (51 to 80 percent of AMI): 279 units (20 percent)
           Moderate Income (81 to 120 percent of AMI): 282 units (20 percent)
           Above Moderate Income (more than 120 percent of AMI): 340 units (24 percent)
This income distribution includes an “impaction correction” factor to allocate a higher
proportion of lower income households to San Ramon in order to balance the regional income
distribution across the region. The City must ensure the availability of residential sites at
adequate densities and appropriate development standards to accommodate these units.
HOUSING OPPORTUNITY SITES
Table 11‐32 and Figure 11‐8 illustrates opportunity sites identified for development or
redevelopment of housing. Each site is comprised of a group of contiguous parcels that
should be treated as an opportunity site as a whole to allow for a comprehensive planning
approach. These sites are selected because they have potential for development/
redevelopment on all or portions of the site (integrating with existing uses on site), based on
recent development on site or in surrounding areas, existing marginal uses on site, and/or
discussions with property owners and management companies. Specifically, recent
redevelopment on a portion of the site often acts as a catalyst for redeveloping the entire site.
Sites providing the City with opportunities for housing construction total approximately 997
acres. Potential exists within these multi‐family and mixed use projects for construction of
significant workforce and senior housing supply, located near the City’s shopping centers and
transit lines. Using average housing density assumptions, buildout of the General Plan
projects approximately 1,992 single‐family units and 5,206 multi‐family and mixed‐use units
on these sites. Each site is evaluated by staff individually to determine a realistic
development potential, based on average density assumptions, unless otherwise specified in
the specific plans, and discounting portions of the site where existing uses are expected to
remain. For mixed use sites, the density of 14 du/ac already accounts for nonresidential uses
on site. This density factor is based on past development projects and is reasonable because
even on mixed use sites, portions of the site may be developed with alone multi‐family
residential development. Detailed, parcel‐specific sites inventory is presented in Appendix 11‐E.
11
   The City has a RHNA allocation of 516 very low income units (inclusive of extremely low income units). While the RHNA did
   not separately define housing needs for extremely low income households, the very low‐income allocation can be split
   evenly between very low‐ and extremely low‐income households. The City’s RHNA of 516 very low income units have been
   allocated accordingly. However, for purposes of identifying adequate sites for the RHNA, State law does not mandate the
   separate accounting for the extremely low income category.
                                                             11‐74



                                             Housing
State law requires that the City demonstrate an adequate supply of land with appropriate
development standards and densities to facilitate and encourage the development of housing
that meets the City’s RHNA.
As shown in Table 11‐32, development on opportunity housing sites can yield 7,198
additional units. Most mixed use sites will be developed at an average density of 14 units per
acre. With this density and the incentives offered for mixed‐use developments, housing
affordable to moderate income households can be facilitated. Incentives available to mixed
use developments include financial support from the Commercial Linkage Fee Program, and
efficient parking use.
Dougherty Valley provides for the development of 11,000 housing units. The Settlement
Agreement specifies that 25 percent of these units must be affordable to very low, low, and
moderate income households as follows:
        275 Very Low Income (10% of 25%)
        688 Low Income (25% of 25%)
        1,788 Moderate Income (65% of 25%)
Remaining capacity at Dougherty Valley provides for 2,018 units (Sites 26 and 27).
In addition, Sites 17 and 21 are designated Multifamily Residential ‐ Very High Density,
offering a permitted density range of 30 to 50 units per acre. This General Plan designation
was created to facilitate affordable housing for lower income households.
In estimating the development potential on the Housing Opportunity Sites, the City uses the
following factors:
        14 units per acre in most mixed use sites based on average realized density in past
         projects, in consideration of environmental constraints, and addition of a new housing
         program to establish a density range of 14 to 30 units per acre in the Mixed Use
         zone;
        Increased density at mixed use sites in North Camino Ramon Specific Plan and City
         Center Mixed Use based on fiscal analysis conducted for each project, proximity to
         transit and transportation infrastructure, and consultation/participation of project
         property owners;
        Approved development capacity per the Dougherty Valley Specific Plan, Northwest
         Specific Plan, and Westside Specific Plan;
        Pre‐application analyses and meetings with site developers and owners;
        A site’s designation as a Priority Development Area (PDA) by ABAG.
Based on these factors, each site/zone was evaluated to determine the realistic capacity as
presented in the sites inventory detailed in Table 11‐32 and Appendix 11‐E.
                                               11‐77

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
In 2016, the voter‐sponsored “Faria Preserve Development Reduction, Open Space
Protection, and Workforce Housing Endowment Initiative” (“Initiative”) was adopted to allow a
reduction in the overall density and maximum number of dwelling units in the Faria Preserve
from 740 to 618 by reducing the maximum number of dwelling units within Neighborhood V
from 302 to 180 (with a maximum density of 18 units per acre). This reduction in residential
development density would be accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within
Neighborhood V from higher density rental apartment units to lower density, market‐rate,
age‐targeted, for‐sale attached, units; and (2) instead of constructing affordable housing on‐
site, allowing the developer to contribute into a workforce housing endowment fund for the
purpose of facilitating affordable housing in San Ramon.
This reduction in density and unit count in the NWSP such that the total unit count within
Neighborhood V decreases from 302 apartment units to a maximum of 180 market‐rate,
age‐targeted, for‐sale units would be allowed to occur so long as the developer elects to
contribute into a fund established by the City for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing,
instead of constructing affordable housing on‐site. Specifically, the developer would be
required to provide a fee to the City in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) per
unit developed within Neighborhood V. The maximum amount of this fee for the developer of
Neighborhood V is Nine Million Dollars ($9M) (180 units x $50,000). The fee shall be paid
on a pro rata basis over the number of market‐rate for‐sale units built within Neighborhood V,
and the payments shall commence no sooner than the date of the first close of escrow of
each market‐rate for‐sale residential unit within Neighborhood V.
The City may use the above‐referenced funds, in its discretion, to fund a variety of programs
intended to facilitate affordable housing. By way of example only, these programs could
include, among others, partnering with non‐profit developers to transfer and/or construct
deed‐restricted affordable units; purchase and rehabilitation of existing developments for
deed‐restricted affordable housing; preservation and replacement options to preserve existing
affordable housing stock; purchasing affordability covenants; and/or providing financial
support for rental subsidies, down payment assistance, and housing rehabilitation loan
services and grant program for eligible households. The foregoing list of potential measures is
intended to be illustrative only, and is not intended to constrain the City’s discretion in
determining the appropriate way to allocate this funding so long as such funding is used for
the purpose of facilitating affordable housing.
                                               11‐78

                                                           Housing
                                            Table 11‐32: Housing Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                  Total
                                                                                                                 Housing
                         Planning                          Existing Zoning General Plan Total Single ‐ Multi‐   (Average
Site #       Location    Subarea     Existing Land Use       Designation    Designation Acres Family   Family   Density)
                                   Office, Storage, and    Crow Canyon                                             155
   1*  Purdue/Omega    Crow Canyon                                         Mixed Use    16.8     —      155
                                   Auto Repairs            Specific Plan                                      (22 du/ac)
                                   Office, Vacant,                                                                 344
       Deerwood/                                           Crow Canyon
  2*                   Crow Canyon Retail, and                             Mixed Use    15.6     —      344
       Omega                                               Specific Plan                                      (22 du/ac)
                                   Commercial Services
                                                                                                                   236
    *  Deerwood/Old                Mixed Use and           Crow Canyon
  3                    Crow Canyon                                         Mixed Use     8.8     —      236       (26.8
       Crow Canyon                 Storage                 Specific Plan
                                                                                                                 du/ac)
       Ryan Industrial             Office and              Planned                                                 103
  4*                   Crow Canyon                                         Mixed Use     7.3     —      103
       Court                       Commercial Services Development                                            ( 14 du/ac)
                                   Office, Retail,
                                   Commercial Services                                                             149
                                                           North Camino
    *  Camino                      ‐ Auto‐Oriented,
  5                    Crow Canyon                         Ramon Specific Mixed Use     47.9     —      149
       Ramon/Fostoria              Commercial Services
                                                           Plan Area
                                   ‐ Other, Storage, and                                                      (20 du/ac)
                                   Civic and Institutional
                                   Office, Shopping                                                                293
                                   Center, Commercial
                                                           North Camino
       Camino Ramon/               Services ‐ Other and
  6*                   Crow Canyon                         Ramon Specific Mixed Use     89.1     —      293
       The Commons                 Restaurants, Light                                                         (20 du/ac)
                                                           Plan Area
                                   Industrial, Wholesale,
                                   Warehouse
                                                              11‐79

                                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                           Table 11‐32 (cont.): Housing Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                   Total
                                                                                                                  Housing
                            Planning                         Existing Zoning General Plan Total Single ‐ Multi‐  (Average
Site #       Location       Subarea     Existing Land Use       Designation   Designation Acres Family   Family   Density)
                                      Office, Commercial
                                      Services – Other,
                                                                                                                    300
                                      Mixed Use, Medium North Camino
    *  Camino Ramon/
  7                      Crow Canyon High Density            Ramon Specific Mixed Use     61.8     —      300
       Norris Canyon
                                      Residential, Light     Plan Area
                                      Industrial, Wholesale,                                                    (20 du/ac)
                                      Warehouse, Storage
                                      Office, Commercial                                                            382
                                      Services – Other,
                                                             North Camino
       Camino Ramon/                  Light Industrial,
  8*                     Bishop Ranch                        Ramon Specific Mixed Use     65.5     —      382
       Executive Parkway              Wholesale,                                                                (20 du/ac)
                                                             Plan Area
                                      Warehouse,
                                      Undeveloped
                                                                                                                    487
       Bollinger Canyon/              Office and             City Center
   9                     Bishop Ranch                                        Mixed Use    25.9     —      487      (18.8
       Camino Ramon                   Undeveloped Land       Mixed Use
                                                                                                                  du/ac)
       Bishop                                                                                                       413
  10   Ranch/Camino      Bishop Ranch Office                 Mixed Use       Mixed Use    29.5     —      413
       Ramon                                                                                                    (14 du/ac)
                                      Commercial Services                                                           324
  11*  Diablo Plaza      Crow Canyon ‐ Other, Shopping       Mixed Use       Mixed Use    23.1     —      324
                                      Center                                                                    (14 du/ac)
                                                                 11‐80

                                                            Housing
                                           Table 11‐32 (cont.): Housing Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                   Total
                                                                                                                  Housing
                           Planning                          Existing Zoning General Plan Total Single ‐ Multi‐  (Average
Site #       Location      Subarea     Existing Land Use       Designation    Designation Acres Family   Family   Density)
       Bishop Ranch                                                                                                278
  12                    Bishop Ranch Shopping Center        Mixed Use        Mixed Use    19.8     —      278
       Plaza                                                                                                    (14 du/ac)
                                     Visitor Services,
                                     Office, Shopping                                                              364
                                     Center, Commercial
                        Southern San
  13   Marketplace                   Services ‐ Auto‐       Mixed Use        Mixed Use     26      —      364
                        Ramon
                                     Oriented, Commercial
                                     Services ‐ Other, and                                                      (14 du/ac)
                                     Mixed Use
                                     Shopping Center,                                                               150
       Country Club     Southern San Retail, and
 14*                                                        Mixed Use        Mixed Use    10.7     —      150
       Village          Ramon        Commercial Services
                                     ‐ Other                                                                    (14 du/ac)
                                                                                                                    180
 15*   Gateway          Westside     Shopping Center        Mixed Use        Mixed Use    12.8     —      180   (14 du/ac)
                                                            Mixed                                                    52
                        Southern San Office and
 16*   Alcosta/Fircrest                                     Use/Senior       Mixed Use     3.7     —       52
                        Ramon        Undeveloped Land                                                           (14 du/ac)
                                                            Housing
                                                                11‐81

                                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                         Table 11‐32 (cont.): Housing Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                    Total
                                                                                                                  Housing
                         Planning                          Existing Zoning   General Plan Total Single ‐ Multi‐  (Average
Site #       Location    Subarea     Existing Land Use       Designation     Designation  Acres Family   Family   Density)
                                                          Multiple Family ‐                                          63
    *                  Southern San                                         Multi‐Family
 17    Alcosta/Kimball              Retail and Vacant     Very High                        1.4     —       63      (45.0
                       Ramon                                                VH
                                                          Density                                                 du/ac)
                                    Open                  Westside          Hillside                                  6
  18   Laborer's       Westside                                                            7.6      6      —
                                    Space/Agriculture     Specific Plan     Residential                         (0.8 du/ac)
                                    Open Space/           Westside          Single Family                             15
  19   Laborer's       Westside                                                            2.7     15      —
                                    Agriculture           Specific Plan     ‐ Low Med                           (5.6 du/ac)
                       Bollinger    Open Space/           Northwest         Hillside                                 43
  20   Chu Residential                                                                     16     43       —
                       Canyon       Agriculture           Specific Plan     Residential                         (2.7 du/ac)
                                                                            Multi‐Family                            406
    *                  Bollinger    Open Space/           Northwest         High and
 21    Faria                                                                               17      —      406      (23.9
                       Canyon       Agriculture           Specific Plan     Very High
                                                                            Density                               du/ac)
                       Bollinger    Open Space/           Northwest         Hillside                                 121
  22   Faria                                                                              22.3    121      —
                       Canyon       Agriculture           Specific Plan     Residential                         (5.4 du/ac)
                       Bollinger    Open Space/           Northwest         Medium                                  213
  23   Faria                                                                              23.2    135      78
                       Canyon       Agriculture           Specific Plan     Density                             (9.2 du/ac)
                                                              11‐82

                                                                                Housing
                                                         Table 11‐32 (cont.): Housing Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                                                                  Total
                                                                                                                                                                 Housing
                                      Planning                                  Existing Zoning    General Plan         Total     Single ‐       Multi‐         (Average
Site #          Location              Subarea         Existing Land Use           Designation       Designation         Acres     Family         Family         Density)
                                                    Open Space/                Westside            Hillside                                                         66
  24      Geldermann                Westside                                                                             105         66            —
                                                    Agriculture                Specific Plan       Residential                                                (0.6 du/ac)
                                                                               (Pre)                                                                                37
                                                    Rural Residential,         Agricultural and
                                                    Open                       Rural
          Central Bollinger         Bollinger                                                      Rural
  25                                                Space/Agriculture,         Residential in a                         184.6        37            —
          Canyon                    Canyon                                                         Conservation                                               (0.2 du/ac)
                                                    and Parks and              Resource
                                                    Recreation                 Conservation
                                                                               Overlay Dist.
                                                    Vacant, Single                                                                                                1,569
                                                                                                   Single Family
                                                    Family Low Medium          Dougherty
                                    Dougherty                                                      Low Medium
  26      Dougherty Valley                          Density Residential,       Valley Specific                           125       1,569           —
                                    Valley                                                         and Medium                                                  (6 du/ac)
                                                    and Medium Density         Plan
                                                                                                   Density
                                                    Residential
                                                                               Dougherty                                                                           449
      *                             Dougherty       Vacant, Mixed Use,
  27      Dougherty Valley                                                     Valley Specific     Mixed Use             27.5        —            449             (16.3
                                    Valley          and Commercial
                                                                               Plan                                                                              du/ac)
                                                                      Grand Total Housing Opportunity Sites              997       1,992         5,206            7,198
Note:
Asterisk denotes priority sites for workforce housing. In addition, the asterisk for Site #21 denotes the ability to allow a reduction in the overall density and maximum
 number of dwelling units in the Faria Preserve from 740 to 618 by reducing the maximum number of dwelling units within Neighborhood V from 302 to 180 units
 (with a maximum density of 18 units per acre). This reduction in residential development density would be accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within
 Neighborhood V from higher density rental units to lower density, age‐targeted, market‐rate for‐sale attached units; and (2) instead of constructing affordable
 housing on‐site, allowing the developer to contribute into a workforce housing endowment fund for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in San Ramon.
                                                                                   11‐83

San Ramon General Plan 2035
           11‐84

                                              Housing
CREDITS TOWARD THE RHNA
The RHNA for the 2015‐2023 Housing Element cycle in the ABAG region uses January 1,
2014 as the baseline for projecting housing needs. As such, housing units constructed,
issued building permits, or approved since January 1, 2014 can be credited toward the
RHNA.
Several housing projects have already been approved on the Opportunity Sites. These
projects totaled 3,333 housing units and are detailed below:
       Dougherty Valley (Sites 26 and 27): 11,000 units have been approved for the
        Dougherty Valley Specific Plan. A total of 8,982 units have been permitted through
        the end of 2013. As of January 1, 2014, 2,018 units have been approved but not
        permitted, including 449 affordable units remaining to be permitted (20 very low
        income, 82 low income, and 347 moderate income units) pursuant to the Settlement
        Agreement with Contra Costa County. These units are being provided at various
        densities and include both single‐family and multi‐family units.
       Faria (Sites 21, 22, and 23): This site has been approved for a maximum total of
        484 multi‐family and 256 single‐family units, which maximum may be reduced
        through the developer’s election to participate in the alternative workforce housing
        program established in the NWSP. A reduction in the overall density and maximum
        number of dwelling units in the Faria Preserve from 740 to 618 (and specifically by
        reducing the maximum number of dwelling units within Neighborhood V of the NWSP
        from 302 to 180 units (with a maximum density of 18 units per acre)) would be
        accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within Neighborhood V from higher
        density rental units to lower density, age‐targeted, market‐rate, for‐sale attached
        units; and (2) instead of constructing affordable housing on‐site, allowing the
        developer to contribute into the workforce housing endowment fund for the purpose of
        facilitating affordable housing in San Ramon.
        No City subsidies were provided to the project. Selection of tenants/homebuyers will
        utilize the City’s priority access system.
       City Center (Site 9): This site has been approved for 487 units, inclusive of 73 units
        that must be affordable to moderate income households for 55 years following initial
        occupancy. No subsidies were provided for this project. The commitment for the
        project is 15 percent must‐build of the 487 total units, and an in lieu fee payment of
        10 percent which fulfills the project’s 25 percent inclusionary housing requirement.
        Selection of homebuyers will utilize the City’s priority access system.
       Park Central (Site 7): This 116‐unit project is partially built out with 40 units
        remaining. A total of 12 units were required to fulfill the inclusionary requirements for
        moderate income households. Three of these moderate income units have already
        been constructed, leaving nine units that must be restricted for‐sale to moderate
        income households.
       ACRE Townhomes (Site 4): This site is an in‐fill development project approved for
        48 market rate townhome units. The project will contribute approximately $195,000 in
        in‐lieu fees to the City’s Affordable Housing In‐Lieu Fee Fund of which a minimum of
                                                11‐85

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
          $84,000 will be spent assisting income‐qualified first‐time homebuyers towards the
          purchase of a townhome.
All of these affordable units were created as a result of the City’s inclusionary housing policy.
While the City of San Ramon has not adopted an inclusionary housing ordinance, by policy,
the City strives to negotiate for the inclusion of affordable units in most housing
developments. These units are required to be affordable to the targeted income groups
pursuant to the development agreements.
With the units approved, the City has already fulfilled the majority of its RHNA for the 2015‐
2023 Housing Element. Overall, the City has a remaining RHNA of 549 units (434 very low
and 115 low income units). Table 11‐33 summarizes the City’s progress toward the RHNA.
                                    Table 11‐33: Credits Toward RHNA
                                                                           Above
  Project                    Very Low              Low       Moderate    Moderate       Total
  Dougherty Valley               20               82           347         1,569        2,018
  Faria*                         62               82            69          527          740
  City Center                    0                0             73          414          487
  Park Central                   0                0             9            31           40
  ACRE Townhomes                  0               0             0            48           48
  Total                          82              164           498         2,589        3,333
  RHNA                          516             279            282          340         1,417
  Remaining RHNA                434              115          (216)       (2,249)        549
Note:
Asterisk denotes that a reduction in the overall maximum number of dwelling units in the
Faria Preserve from 740 to 618 (by reducing the maximum number of dwelling units within
Neighborhood V of the NWSP from 302 to 180 units (with a maximum density of 18 units per
acre)) would be accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within Neighborhood V from
higher density rental units to lower density, age‐targeted, market‐rate, for‐sale units; and (2)
instead of constructing affordable housing on‐site, allowing the developer to contribute into
the workforce housing endowment fund for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in
San Ramon.
SUITABILITY OF SITES
Not all of the sites identified in Table 11‐32 are entirely vacant sites. Some sites are currently
undeveloped and others are used as open space/agricultural purposes. Some sites are
occupied by a variety of existing uses. Particularly, some Mixed Use and Multi‐Family
Residential sites are occupied by existing uses such as lower density residential uses, older
commercial retail and office uses, vacant buildings and parcels. However, given the City’s
                                                    11‐86

                                            Housing
recent development trends, similar sites have been redeveloped in the City in recent years.
As being demonstrated by the approved projects on the Housing Opportunity Sites,
redevelopment of existing uses is feasible and there is a clear trend of recycling these
properties to higher and better uses. Virtually all Opportunity Sites with project approvals are
on underutilized sites.
CORRELATION BETWEEN AFFORDABILITY AND DENSITY
In San Ramon, the City has been able to achieve affordable housing for lower income
households at various densities, ranging from medium to high residential densities. Valley
Vista, a senior multi‐family project was approved at 22.8 units per acre and all units (except
the caretaker unit) are available to lower income households. Lower income housing units at
Dougherty Valley are primarily multi‐family units in a Planned Development zone at 16.3 units
per acre. The Faria site was approved for 23.9 units per acre and included 213 lower and
moderate income units.
A reduction in the overall density and maximum number of dwelling units in the Faria
Preserve from 740 to 618 (by reducing the maximum number of dwelling units within
Neighborhood V of the NWSP from 302 to 180 units (with a maximum density of 18 units per
acre)) would be accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within Neighborhood V from
higher density rental units to lower density, age‐targeted, market‐rate, for‐sale units; and (2)
instead of constructing affordable housing on‐site, allowing the developer to contribute into
the workforce housing endowment fund for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in
San Ramon.
ADEQUACY OF SITES INVENTORY
For purposes of this Housing Element, the City believes that with the various incentives it
offers (density bonuses, relaxed development standards, and financial incentives combined),
affordable housing for lower income households can be achieved at a density of 20 units per
acre or above. Housing Opportunity Sites 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 17 and 21 meet this density
threshold (except as to portions of Site 21 which may be developed at a slightly lower density
of 18 units per acre subject to developer’s contribution to the City’s workforce housing
endowment fund) and have been identified by the City as sites for workforce housing. These
sites alone, total a capacity of 2,328 units at realistic capacity based on requirements of the
specific plans, adequate to meet the City’s remaining RHNA of 549 lower income units.
The City’s sites inventory offers significant excess capacity beyond its RHNA requirements,
primarily in the mixed‐use areas. These sites (Sites 4 and 10 through 16) provide a total
capacity for an additional 1,864 multi‐family units. The City has a 25‐percent affordable
housing guideline and has been achieving a significant number of affordable units via this
policy. While these mixed use sites provide for additional capacity for affordable housing
based on this 25‐percent guideline, the City does not rely on these sites to meet the
remaining lower income RHNA for this Housing Element cycle. Additional capacity is also
available for moderate and above moderate income housing on lower density sites (Sites 9,
18, 19, 20, 24, and 25).
                                               11‐87

                                        San Ramon General Plan 2035
COMPARISON OF SITES INVENTORY WITH RHNA
As presented in the sections above and summarized below in Table 11‐34, San Ramon’s new
construction need (RHNA) for the 2015‐2023 period is 1,417 new units. There are 3,333
units approved or under construction, and the City has identified sites that can accommodate
an additional 3,865 net new units, thereby exceeding the City’s RHNA requirements.
                       Table 11‐34: Comparison of Sites Inventory with 2015‐2023 RHNA
                                                                                                Above
                                   Very Low                Low              Moderate           Moderate              Total
 2015‐2023 RHNA                         516                279                 282               340                1,417
 Units Approved/Under
                                         82                164                 498              2,589               3,333
 Construction
 Remaining RHNA*†                       434                115                (216)            (2,249)               549
 Minimum Housing
                                                  966                           —                 —                 3,865
 Opportunity Sites Yield
 Minimum Capacity
                                                  417                          216              2,249               2,882
 Surplus
 Notes:
 *
   The total remaining RHNA is a sum of the remaining RHNA for moderate‐, low‐, and very low‐income units. The City
   has already exceeded its RHNA for above moderate‐income units through units that are approved or under
   construction.
 † As a result of the adopted Faria Preserve Development Reduction, Open Space Protection, and Workforce Housing
   Endowment Initiative, a portion of Site 21 will be developed at a maximum of 18 dwelling units per acre. This reduction
   in residential development density would be accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within Neighborhood V
   from higher density rental units to lower density, age‐targeted, market‐rate, for‐sale attached units; and (2) instead of
   constructing affordable housing on‐site, allowing the developer to contribute into the workforce housing endowment
   fund for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in San Ramon.
   The City may use the funds contributed by the developer into the workforce housing endowment fund, in its discretion,
   to fund a variety of programs intended to facilitate affordable housing. These could include, among others, partnering
   with non‐profit developers to transfer and/or construct deed‐restricted affordable units; purchase and rehabilitation of
   existing developments for deed‐restricted affordable housing; preservation and replacement options to preserve existing
   affordable housing stock; purchasing affordability covenants; and/or providing financial support for rental subsidies,
   down payment assistance, and housing rehabilitation loan services and grant program for eligible households. The
   foregoing list of potential measures is intended to be illustrative only, and not intended to constrain the City’s discretion
   in determining the appropriate way to allocate this funding so long as such funding is used for the purpose of facilitating
   affordable housing.
AVAILABILITY OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES
The Housing Opportunity Sites identified in this Housing Element are provided in the City’s
General Plan and various specific plans. The residential development potential estimated is
                                                              11‐88

                                             Housing
within the capacity of the City’s infrastructure and service systems. Specifically, adequate
water and sewer capacity is available to serve the development potential anticipated on these
sites.
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
As a small city, San Ramon has limited access to financial resources for affordable housing.
The following list presents the realistic funding available to the City.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN‐LIEU FEE
The City of San Ramon has not adopted an inclusionary housing ordinance. However, as a
policy, the City negotiates for the inclusion of affordable units in residential development
either on site or as an in‐lieu payment of fees. As of July 2014, the City has a balance of
$58,789 in In‐Lieu fees. Such funding is typically used to finance affordable housing
construction off site.
A reduction in the overall density and maximum number of dwelling units in the Faria
Preserve from 740 to 618 (by reducing the maximum number of dwelling units within
Neighborhood V of the NWSP from 302 to 180 units (with a maximum density of 18 units per
acre)) would be accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within Neighborhood V from
higher density rental units to lower density, age‐targeted, market‐rate, for‐sale units; and (2)
instead of constructing affordable housing on‐site, allowing the developer to contribute into
the workforce housing endowment fund for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in
San Ramon.
IN‐LIEU FEE ON COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
The City will collect an in‐lieu fee from commercial development on a case‐by‐case basis to
expand affordable housing opportunities in the City. As of July 2014, no fee has been
established yet.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
CDBG is the largest federal housing‐related program for affordable housing. It is a “pass‐
through” program that allows local governments to use federal funds to alleviate poverty and
blight. Cities with populations of over 50,000 receive CDBG funds directly from HUD, while
smaller cities usually use county‐administered CDBG funds. HUD makes allocations based
on a formula that takes population, poverty, and housing distress into account. CDBG funds
are used for a variety of housing efforts including activities aimed at reducing costs for private
development (helping fund site acquisition, improvement, and other soft costs); housing
acquisition and rehabilitation through short and long‐term loans, grants or loan guarantees;
direct payment of rent or mortgage and housing counseling services; and fair housing
activities. CDBG funds are best used in combination with other subsidy sources or to provide
pre‐development funding to initiate housing development.
While San Ramon’s population has reached 50,000, the City has not yet petitioned to
become an entitlement community. Currently, CDBG funds are still administered and
allocated by Contra Costa County to fund program and service priorities that are established
                                                11‐89

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
and implemented through the Five‐Year Contra Costa County Consolidated Plan. The County
receives an allocation of $2.9 million, of which 45 percent is targeted for housing.
HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIP ACT
HOME, like CDBG, is a formula‐based block grant program. HOME funds must be spent only
on housing, and are intended to provide incentives for the acquisition, construction, and
rehabilitation of affordable rental and home ownership. HOME requires local governments to
provide matching funds, though the matching ratio depends on the specific uses to which
HOME funds are to be put. The federal‐to‐local matching ratio for tenant assistance is
currently four‐to‐one, while the match for rental construction is two‐to‐one. HOME funds in
San Ramon are applied for and allocated on a competitive basis. The current annual budget
for HOME funds is $1.8 million for Contra Costa County.
SECTION 8 RENTAL ASSISTANCE
Section 8 is rental assistance provided to a household which bridges the gap between 30
percent of the household's gross monthly income and the fair market rent of a unit. Although
this long‐standing federal assistance program is not expected to increase in size or scope, it
remains an important program for affordable housing by helping to balance household income
and housing costs. Section 8 assistance in San Ramon is administered by the Contra Costa
County Housing Authority.
ADMINISTRATIVE RESOURCES
The Bay Area is fortunate to have a large number of successful non‐profit and for‐profit
housing developers who have produced thousands of high‐quality, well‐managed affordable
housing projects for lower and moderate income households. Collectively, they have
produced multi‐family developments, single‐family developments, rental and ownership
opportunities, sweat‐equity developments, mixed income projects, mixed use developments,
and housing that is specifically designed to meet the needs of seniors, disabled persons, farm
workers, female‐headed households, people with substance abuse problems, and/or
homeless persons.
The City solicits, evaluates, and utilizes the expertise of the affordable housing development
community to achieve its goals for affordable workforce and special needs housing through a
Request for Qualifications (RFQ) process. Active affordable housing developers in the region
include Resources for Community Development, Habitat for Humanity, Eden Housing, East
Bay Housing Organizations, Ecumenical Association for Housing, and BRIDGE Housing
Corporation.
11.5 HOUSING PLAN
Previous sections of the Housing Element establish the housing needs, opportunities, and
constraints in the City of San Ramon. The Housing Plan contains objectives and policies that
will be implemented to address a number of important housing‐related issues and achieve the
City’s overarching housing goal, which states:
         Ensure that decent, safe housing is available at a cost that is affordable to all
         current and future residents of this community. To this end, the City will strive
                                               11‐90

                                            Housing
       to maintain a reasonable balance between rental and ownership housing
       opportunities and to encourage a variety of individual choices of tenure, type,
       and location of housing throughout the community.
The section also contains quantified objectives for housing construction, rehabilitation, and
the preservation of affordable housing, with a program of actions that:
      Provides regulatory concessions and incentives and uses available local, state, and
       federal financial resources to support the development of affordable housing;
      Identifies adequate sites with appropriate zoning, development standards, services
       and facilities to encourage the development of a variety of housing types for all
       income levels;
      Assists in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of lower and
       moderate income households;
      Addresses and, where appropriate and legally possible, removes governmental
       constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing, including
       housing for all income levels and housing for persons with disabilities;
      Conserves and improves the condition of the existing affordable housing stock, which
       may include addressing ways to mitigate the loss of dwelling units demolished by
       public or private action;
      Promotes housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex,
       marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability; and
      Preserves assisted housing developments for lower‐income households.
Planning/Community Development Department staff regularly reviews Housing Element
programs, objectives, and progress towards accommodating the City’s share of the regional
housing need. An annual implementation report has been and will continue to be prepared
and provided to the California Office of Planning and Research (OPR) and HCD. Depending
on funding availability, the City will consider modifications to Housing Element programs as
necessary and appropriate to implement General Plan goals and policies.
GOALS AND POLICIES
This section of the Housing Element contains the goals and policies the City of San Ramon
intends to implement to address a number of important housing‐related issues. The following
four major issue areas are addressed by the goals and policies of this Element:
      Ensure that a broad range of housing types are provided to meet the needs of the
       existing and future residents;
      Ensure that housing and neighborhoods are maintained and preserved;
      Promote equal housing opportunity; and
      Promote energy conservation.
                                               11‐91

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
Each issue area and the supporting goals and policies are identified and discussed in the
following section.
VARIETY OF HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Housing needs vary depending on many factors, such as age, income, family type, household
size, and mobility. A well‐balanced community includes a variety of housing options.
Providing a range of housing opportunities helps ensure that households of all types and
sizes can find a home in San Ramon that suits their needs.
GUIDING POLICY
11.5‐G‐1    Provide a diversity of housing types and affordability levels within San Ramon to
            meet the needs of community residents.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
11.1‐I‐1    Identify sites appropriate for the development of a variety of housing types and
            price ranges to meet the needs of all socioeconomic segments of the community
            (including extremely low, very low, low, moderate, and above moderate income
            households).
11.1‐I‐2    Encourage the development of housing for special needs groups, including
            seniors, large families, persons with disabilities, and the homeless near public
            transportation services.
11.1‐I‐3    Facilitate the development of affordable housing throughout the community
            through use of financial and/or regulatory incentives, where feasible.
11.1‐I‐4    Negotiate with developers to ensure a portion of future residential development is
            affordable to extremely low, very low, low, and moderate income households.
11.1‐I‐5    Maintain a variety of housing types that complements the employment
            opportunities within the community and encourages a jobs/housing balance.
11.1‐I‐6    Encourage diversity of unit size and number of bedrooms within multi‐family
            housing developments (exempting senior projects) and strive to provide three‐
            and four‐bedroom units for large families.
            This policy will be implemented through guidelines published by the Housing
            Advisory Committee (HAC).
11.1‐I‐7    Offer financial and regulatory incentives to promote a combination of residential,
            retail, and office uses in areas designated for mixed use development.
11.1‐I‐8    Encourage construction of second dwelling units within single‐family residential
            neighborhoods.
11.1‐I‐9    Develop a workforce housing priority access system that identifies households
            best served with priority access to City housing programs.
                                               11‐92

                                           Housing
          The priority access system should consider groups such as public service
          employees, first responders, veterans of the armed forces, and residents and
          employed workers in San Ramon for priority access.
11.1‐I‐10 Continue to participate with Contra Costa County and non‐profit organizations to
          offer first‐time homeownership programs to current and prospective San Ramon
          residents and workers.
11.1‐I‐11 Ensure that non‐residential development contributes to the supply of housing
          affordable to lower‐income households, including extremely low‐income
          households.
11.1‐I‐12 Disperse below‐market rate (BMR) housing throughout residential neighborhoods,
          and ensure that affordable units are essentially indistinguishable from surrounding
          market‐rate units.
          This policy will be implemented through guidelines published by the Housing
          Advisory Committee (HAC).
11.1‐I‐13 Encourage developers to provide amenities for a diversity of households, including
          single heads of households, persons with disabilities, seniors, and extended
          families.
11.1‐I‐14 Utilize affordable housing agreements, when appropriate, to encourage a full
          range of housing types.
11.1‐I‐15 Work with neighboring jurisdictions in the Tri‐Valley area to develop affordable
          housing.
11.1‐I‐16 Continue to work with Contra Costa County to ensure that affordable housing is
          included in all Dougherty Valley Development Plans, in all lands within the Sphere
          of Influence/Planning Area.
11.1‐I‐17 Require the ongoing annexation of Dougherty Valley sites following the completion
          of prezoning and final subdivision mapping. Annexation may occur within three to
          18 months of the recordation of a final subdivision map.
11.1‐I‐18 Require commercial development to contribute to the supply of workforce housing
          through new construction, partnerships with non‐profit affordable housing
          providers, or payment of linkage fees; exempt mixed use development projects
          from this policy if they provide 25 percent affordable housing.
11.1‐I‐19 Convene the Housing Advisory Committee (HAC) regularly to ensure that housing
          policies and programs are implemented and to create and retain affordable
          housing in the City of San Ramon.
11.1‐I‐20 Apply for available State and federal funds, and encourage the use of private
          financing mechanisms, to assist in the production of affordable housing.
                                             11‐93

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
11.1‐I‐21    Encourage the development of accessible housing units such as single‐story
             dwelling units and renovation of existing housing stock to support persons with
             disabilities and seniors.
11.1‐I‐22    Encourage the construction of senior housing near commercial and mixed use
             centers to bring essential services within walking distance to residents.
11.1‐I‐23    Monitor and seek input on senior citizen housing issues so that the senior
             population of San Ramon has access to housing which meets their needs as the
             population ages.
11.1‐I‐24    Encourage development of workforce housing by non‐profit organizations primarily
             engaged in housing construction or management.
11.1‐I‐25    Seek opportunities to educate the public regarding the community, environmental,
             and economic benefits of workforce housing.
             Education opportunities should be sought in partnership with community groups,
             City committees and commissions, and affordable housing advocate groups to
             help the community understand who workforce housing serves and dispel
             common stereotypes associated with affordable units.
11.1‐I‐26    Encourage new residential developments to participate in crime prevention
             programs such as the Crime Free Multi‐Housing program as a means to reduce
             crime, enhance rental properties, and increase property values throughout the
             City.
HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
Housing and neighborhood preservation addresses two separate important issues: (1)
improving the condition of San Ramon’s residential stock and neighborhoods; and (2)
maintaining the supply of affordable housing. The first aspect of housing and neighborhood
preservation is to provide a safe and aesthetically pleasing living environment. Improving the
character of San Ramon’s neighborhoods also influences property values and overall quality
of life. The other aspect of housing and neighborhood preservation is ensuring that access to
affordable housing opportunities for lower and moderate income households is provided
throughout the community.
GUIDING POLICY
11.5‐G‐2     Create safe and aesthetically‐pleasing neighborhoods, and provide adequate
             housing to meet the needs of all household types and income groups.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
11.2‐I‐1     Promote increased awareness of the importance of property maintenance to long‐
             term housing quality and engage the community to preserve neighborhoods.
11.2‐I‐2     Enforce City ordinances that maintain the appearance and safety, and prevent
             deterioration, of residential neighborhoods.
                                                11‐94

                                             Housing
11.2‐I‐3    Provide rehabilitation incentives in the form of low‐interest loans to lower and
            moderate income homeowners.
11.2‐I‐4    Continue to permit manufactured housing in residential districts provided that units
            meet the same construction and design standards as conventional, single‐family
            housing and are placed on permanent foundations.
11.2‐I‐5    Ensure that units produced for lower and moderate income households are
            maintained at designated income levels for the term established in the
            entitlement.
11.2‐I‐6    Work to preserve the affordability of publicly assisted housing units and to
            discourage their conversion to market‐rate housing.
11.2‐I‐7    Ensure that the design, scale, and buffering of housing retains the character of
            the surrounding neighborhood.
11.2‐I‐8    Strive to prevent the conversion of affordable housing units to market‐rate
            housing.
EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING
Special circumstances may impede some persons and households from finding decent,
affordable housing. The City has a responsibility to ensure that all persons have access to
housing regardless of race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, age, gender, marital
status, familial status, disability, source of income, sexual orientation, or any other arbitrary
factor. To ensure that all groups have equal access to housing, the City will continue to
provide a variety of housing opportunities and remove impediments to fair housing.
GUIDING POLICY
11.5‐G‐3    Ensure all persons and household types have equal access to housing in San
            Ramon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
11.3‐I‐1    Collaborate with and support efforts of organizations dedicated to eliminating
            housing discrimination in San Ramon.
11.3‐I‐2    Participate in programs and provide incentives for projects that include housing for
            seniors, lower and moderate income households, and special needs groups.
11.3‐I‐3    Encourage the provision of housing with supportive services for special needs
            groups, such as the homeless, persons with disabilities, and victims of domestic
            violence.
11.3‐I‐4    Encourage the provision of housing to meet the needs of families of all sizes.
11.3‐I‐5    Support and provide funding to organizations that assist the homeless.
                                                11‐95

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Promoting energy conservation can have the dual benefit of reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and increasing the supply and affordability of housing. Efficiencies that result when
new residential development is compact, located near jobs, services, and public
transportation, maximizes solar orientation, and complies with State energy conservation
standards can reduce energy consumption. Conserving energy can also reduce the
percentage of household income devoted to housing related costs through utility bill savings.
GUIDING POLICY
11.5‐G‐4    Promote energy conserving practices in the location, construction, renovation, and
            maintenance of San Ramon’s housing units.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
11.4‐I‐1    Utilize the Urban Growth Boundary as a tool to focus the provision of diverse
            housing options within proximity to the local employment base, community
            services, and public transportation opportunities.
11.4‐I‐2    Promote a combination of residential, retail, and office uses in areas designated
            for mixed use.
11.4‐I‐3    Allow minor variations in building setbacks and/or solar orientation during Plan
            Review to increase energy efficiency of new housing units.
11.4‐I‐4    Enforce the State’s energy conservation standards for new residential construction
            and renovations to existing structures.
11.4‐I‐5    Encourage innovative designs to maximize passive energy efficiencies, while
            retaining compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.
11.4‐I‐6    Disseminate information and support efforts by public utilities to encourage home
            conservation practices.
HOUSING PROGRAMS
The goals and policies outlined in the prior section address San Ramon’s identified housing
needs, and are implemented through a series of housing programs offered primarily through
the City’s Planning/Community Development Department and Economic Development
Department. Housing programs define the specific actions the City will undertake to achieve
the stated goals and policies. The City’s housing programs for addressing community housing
needs is described according to the following five issue areas.
       Housing Conservation
       Housing Production
       Provision of Adequate Housing Sites
       Removal of Governmental Constraints
       Promotion of Equal Housing Opportunity
                                               11‐96

                                               Housing
The housing programs presented on the following pages include existing programs as well as
various revised and new programs that have been added to address the City’s unmet housing
needs.
CONSERVATION OF THE EXISTING SUPPLY OF HOUSING
Conserving and improving the housing stock is an important goal for the City of San Ramon.
The City supports neighborhood preservation and improvement through housing rehabilitation
and improvement programs, and code enforcement.
1.    Countywide Rehabilitation Loan Program
Many lower‐income homeowners lack sufficient financial resources to obtain private funding
for repairs. Owners of rental units occupied by lower‐income households often cannot
financially perform repairs to dwelling units from the rents they can charge. To encourage
private rehabilitation efforts, the City promotes the Countywide Rehabilitation Loan Program
funded through CDBG and HOME funds. Two types of loans are provided under the County
program for up to a maximum of $40,000; an amortized three percent loan payable over 15
years and a zero percent deferred loan that is due and payable upon the sale of the property.
The interest rate on the loan can be as low as three percent with a 20‐year term for qualified
applicants. Eligible home repair activities include bathroom/kitchen repairs, bedroom
additions to alleviate overcrowding, weatherization, electrical upgrades, foundation and
flooring repair, accessibility retrofitting, heating/air conditioning, plumbing repairs, and siding
and roofing repairs. Health and safety hazards are given top priority for consideration in the
program. Both single‐family homes and multi‐family dwellings are eligible for assistance.
   Responsible Agency:            City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                  Department, Planning Services Division
   Financing:                     CDBG; HOME
   Objectives/Timeframe:          Assist five (5) lower‐income households with rehabilitation
                                  loans within the planning period.
2.    City Rehabilitation Grant Program
The number of loans issued through the countywide program has dwindled over the years
due to a reduction in the availability of CDBG funds. As a result, the City has funded the
Home Rehabilitation Grant Program.
The Home Rehabilitation Grant Program provides up to $5,000 to median and lower income
households to perform needed health and safety home repairs such as roofing, plumbing,
electrical, general home repairs, windows, doors, handicapped accessibility modifications and
seismic strengthening. The grant is non‐repayable.
The City will continue to market the housing rehabilitation program available to residents.
Specifically, the City will continue to distribute a brochure that advertises these programs on the
City’s website, Planning/Community Development Department, and at affordable housing fairs.
                                                  11‐97

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Building and Safety Division
   Financing:                    CDBG; HOME; General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Provide 20 housing rehabilitation grants over the planning
                                 period.
3.    Green Building
The City encourages environmentally responsible and resource‐efficient design, construction,
operation, maintenance, renovation, and demolition of buildings. The City adopted the
California Green Building Standards code as of January 1, 2014.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Building and Safety Division
   Financing:                    General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Continue to implement the California Green Building Standards
                                 code.
4.    Code Enforcement and Abatement
The City’s Building and Safety Division of the Planning/Community Development Department
carries out code enforcement and inspection activities as a means to preserve and maintain
the appearance and safety, and prevent deterioration, of residential neighborhoods. City staff
investigates violations of property maintenance standards as defined in the Municipal Code as
well as other complaints. When violations are identified or cited on homes occupied by lower‐
income households, staff encourages property owners to seek assistance through the City’s
housing rehabilitation programs. The Planning/Community Development Department will
periodically review City ordinances to ensure that they are adequate to maintain the quality
and safety of local neighborhoods.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Building and Safety Division
   Financing:                    General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Continue to implement the Code Enforcement and Abatement
                                 Program. Perform annual review of City ordinances.
5.    Preservation of Existing Affordable Housing Stock
State law requires jurisdictions to provide in their housing elements a program to preserve
publicly assisted affordable housing projects at risk of conversion to market‐rate housing. As
of 2014, the City has a total of 2,075 assisted rental units in 13 developments in its
jurisdiction. Of these assisted units, 687 units in five developments are at‐risk of converting
to market‐rate during the 2015 to 2025 period. The five developments with at‐risk units are
Park Place, Cambrio, Bollinger Crest, Canyon Oaks and Mill Creek. Of the 36 units within
                                               11‐98

                                              Housing
Park Place, affordability covenants on 20 units expire in 2015. Another two units of the 85
units within Cambrio could convert to market rate as early as 2015 and affordability
covenants on 15 of the 65 units at Bollinger Crest could expire in 2015. In Canyon Oaks and
Mill Creek Apartments, all units in these moderate‐income apartment complexes (250 and
400, respectively) could convert to market rate in 2023. The City of San Ramon will work
with property owners, interest groups and the State and federal governments to implement
the following measures on an ongoing basis to conserve its affordable housing stock:
        Monitor Units at Risk: Monitor the status of Park Place, Cambrio, Bollinger Crest,
         Canyon Oaks, and Mill Creek since they will be at‐risk of converting to market rate
         within the planning period due to expiration of contractual obligations.
        Work with Potential Purchasers or Property Owners: Where feasible, provide
         technical assistance to public and non‐profit agencies interested in purchasing and/or
         managing units at risk. Work with existing property owners to explore options of
         preserving the at‐risk units.
        Tenant Education: California Legislature extended the noticing requirement of at‐risk
         units opting out of low‐income use restrictions to one year. Should a property owner
         pursue conversion of the units to market rate, the City will ensure that tenants were
         properly noticed and informed of resources available for assistance.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Planning Services Division; Housing Advisory
                                 Committee; Housing Authority of the County of Contra Costa
   Financing:                    CDBG; HOME
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Annually contact the property owners of at‐risk projects for
                                 their plans of action to preserve the 687 at‐risk units.
6.    Housing Choice Voucher
The Housing Choice Voucher Program extends rental subsidies to extremely low and very
low income households, including families, seniors, and the disabled. The program offers a
voucher that pays the difference between the current fair market rent (FMR) as established
by HUD and what a tenant can afford to pay (i.e. 30 percent of household income). The
voucher allows a tenant to choose housing that costs above the payment standard, providing
the tenant pays the extra cost. In San Ramon, the program is administered by the Housing
Authority of the County of Contra Costa. Given the continued need for rental assistance, the
City supports and encourages the provision of additional subsidies through the Housing
Choice Voucher Program. The City will continue to provide referrals to households and
homeowners interested in participating in this program.
   Responsible Agency:           Housing Authority of the County of Contra Costa; City of San
                                 Ramon, Housing Advisory Committee
   Financing:                    HUD Section 8
                                                11‐99

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
   Objectives/Timeframe:        Continue to assist extremely low and very low income
                                households during the planning period.
7.    Condominium Conversion Ordinance
The City's existing multi‐family rental housing stock represents a source of affordable housing
to many community residents. The conversion of these rental units into condominium
ownership could result in the displacement of existing tenants. The City has adopted a
Condominium Conversion ordinance to establish procedures and requirements for conversion
to preserve rental housing and provide for tenant protection. Additionally the Subdivision Map
Act establishes requirements for notice to tenants and right of tenants to exclusive contract
for purchase of their units to be converted to condominium ownership (State of California
Government Code Section 66427.1). This requirement intends to limit the number of
households displaced by the conversion of rental units to “for sale” units.
   Responsible Agency:          City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Division
   Financing:                   General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:        Continue to implement Condominium Conversion ordinance.
PRODUCTION OF HOUSING
The City of San Ramon implements various programs to encourage a diversity of housing
types. Part of this diversity is addressed through the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(RHNA) process, which encourages the construction of housing for all economic segments in
the community. Housing diversity is important to ensure that all households, regardless of
age, income level, and household type, have the opportunity to find housing suited to their
need and lifestyle. The following programs support the provision of additional housing
opportunities in San Ramon.
8.    Unit Size Diversity
Housing stock unit size diversity is important to meet the needs of larger families who may
not be able to afford adequately sized for‐sale housing units. According to the 2008‐2012
ACS, while 73 percent of occupied housing units in San Ramon had three or more bedrooms
(the minimum size considered large enough to avoid most overcrowding issues for large
households), only eight percent of these units were occupied by renters. To ensure the
expansion of the City’s multi‐family rental housing stock of adequate size for large families,
the City revised the Zoning Ordinance in 2012 to encourage housing size diversity. This
standard intends to encourage the development of rental housing units for larger families.
   Responsible Agency:          City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Division
   Financing:                   General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:        Continue to implement the Zoning Ordinance’s housing size
                                diversity standard.
                                               11‐100

                                               Housing
9.    First‐Time Homebuyer Downpayment Assistance Programs
The City will continue to participate with Contra Costa County, non‐profit organizations, and
other agencies to offer first‐time homeownership programs to current and prospective San
Ramon residents and workers. Programs available to San Ramon residents and workers
include:
        ACORN Housing
        CALHFA Loan Programs
        Contra Costa County American Dream Downpayment Initiative Program
        Contra Costa County Mortgage Credit Certificate Program
        Federal Home Loan Bank “WISE” and “IDEA” Program
Details of these programs and other homebuyer assistance resources are posted on the
City’s website, under Planning/Community Development. The City will continue to advertise
the availability of the program via its website and at the Permit Center, and at the Affordable
Housing Fairs.
   Responsible Agency:             City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                   Department, Planning Services Division
   Financing:                      CDBG; HOME
   Objectives/Timeframe:           Assist 10 households during the planning period. Continue to
                                   advertise the availability of the program via its website, the
                                   public counter, and newsletter.
10. Affordable Housing Development
Because of their limited income, some lower and moderate income households have to live in
overcrowded and/or substandard conditions. Non‐profit housing developers typically play a
key role in providing housing for working families and seniors. The City will take the following
actions to facilitate affordable housing development in San Ramon:
        Provide financial and regulatory incentives to non‐profit housing corporations, private
         developers, and public agencies to increase the supply of housing affordable to San
         Ramon’s and lower and moderate income households.
        Target a portion of local financial resources that meet the needs of extremely low,
         very low, and low income households.
        Identify a list of qualified housing developers with a track record of producing quality
         housing that includes affordable units and notify developers of potential projects and
         available funding resources.
        Provide information on potential sites and communicate with the development
         community on the City’s goal to provide quality housing affordable to lower income
         households.
        Provide priority project processing to affordable housing projects during Plan Review.
                                                 11‐101

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
   Responsible Agency:          City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Services Division; Housing Advisory
                                Committee
   Financing:                   CDBG; HOME
   Objectives/Timeframe:        Assist with the construction of 200 affordable units in the
                                planning period.
11. Affordable Housing Funding Sources
Effective implementation of Housing Element programs that create affordable housing
depends on a variety of County, State, Federal, and local funding sources. A number of
government programs provide direct subsidies, mortgage insurance, or low‐interest loans to
non‐profit housing developers. Agencies providing such assistance include HCD, the
California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA), and HUD. The City will contact HCD, CHFA,
and HUD at least annually to obtain information on upcoming funding cycles, eligibility, and
eligible uses. The City will also maintain a list of qualified housing developers active in the
City and region, notify developers of available funding resources, and make efforts to apply
for funding for which the City is eligible on an annual basis.
The City will pursue various financing strategies for development of affordable housing,
including land banking, tax credits, bonds, and mortgage credit certificates. The City will also,
through the Housing Advisory Committee and Tri‐Valley Affordable Housing Committee, work
with affordable housing developers to:
        Assist the organizations in securing funds;
        Provide technical assistance in preparing funding applications;
        Grant density bonuses and regulatory concession(s) as appropriate; and
        Apply for complementary programs that can help reduce land or site development
         costs for housing projects.
The City is currently preparing a Nexus Fee Study to review the City’s impact fee structure to
assure that fees are equitable and fair in relationship to the infrastructure needs in the
General Plan. The study is expected to be completed in 2015 and establish a housing in‐lieu
fee to fund affordable housing projects and programs.
   Responsible Agency:          City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Services Division; Housing Advisory
                                Committee
   Financing:                   CDBG; HOME; Tax Credits; Bonds
   Objectives/Timeframe:        Facilitate the construction of 50 new affordable housing units in
                                the planning period.
                                               11‐102

                                              Housing
12. Inclusionary Housing
The City implements an inclusionary housing policy to require that developments with more
than 10 units provide a minimum of 25 percent of total units at below market rates (BMR) for
a period of at least 50 years. Developers may satisfy this requirement through new
construction, donation of land, or payment of in‐lieu fees.
To facilitate residential development and enhance the feasibility of projects, the City will
develop an inclusionary housing ordinance to allow a project to use a combination of
construction, donation of land and in‐lieu fees equivalent to 25 percent of the development’s
total units while maintaining a 15 percent must‐build requirement.
Modifications are being explored that would give developers flexible options (e.g.,
construction, donation of land, partnering with the non‐profit community to develop affordable
housing on their behalf, and in‐lieu fee options). The above referenced parameters will be
used as guidelines for the negotiation of inclusionary unit requirements on a case‐by‐case
basis, allowing the flexibility to respond to market conditions.
   Responsible Agency:            City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                  Department, Planning Division; Housing Advisory Committee
   Financing:                     General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:          Initiate development of an inclusionary housing ordinance
                                  within one year of adoption of the Housing Element. Facilitate
                                  the construction of 250 housing units through the inclusionary
                                  housing ordinance and in‐lieu fee program throughout the
                                  planning period.
13.     In‐Lieu Fee for Commercial Development
The City has a policy of requiring commercial development to contribute to the supply of
workforce housing through new construction, partnerships with non‐profit affordable housing
providers, or payment of an in‐lieu fee.
To facilitate mixed use development, the City will modify the policy to exempt mixed use
developments from the in‐lieu fee requirement as these developments are already subject to
the Inclusionary Housing Policy.
   Responsible Agency:            City of San Ramon Planning/Community Development
                                  Department, Planning Division; Housing Advisory Committee;
                                  Economic Development Advisory Committee
   Financing:                     General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:          Initiate development of a commercial linkage fee within one
                                  year of adoption of the Housing Element. Exempt mixed use
                                  development from payment of in‐lieu fees if development
                                  meets the Inclusionary Housing Policy.
                                                 11‐103

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
14. Use of In‐Lieu Fees
Establish a specific program for use of housing in‐lieu fees—including timelines, milestones,
and identification of housing sites—in order to ensure the timely construction of affordable
housing units. Include limitations on development use of these fees to ensure that adequate
affordable housing is built at locations where it is needed in a timely fashion.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Planning Division;
   Financing:                    Affordable Housing In‐Lieu Fee and Commercial Linkage Fee
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Establish guidelines/program for using fees within one year of
                                 the adoption of the Housing Element.
15. Affordable Housing Fair
The City coordinates with the Tri‐Valley Affordable Housing Committee to organize a periodic
Affordable Housing Fair. The purpose of the Fair is to educate residents, developers, non‐
profit organizations, and decision‐makers about affordable housing sites and resources
available in the region. The City will continue to seek grants and partnerships with housing
providers, civic organizations, and neighboring cities to defray Fair costs.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Planning Division; Housing Advisory Committee;
                                 Tri‐Valley Affordable Housing Committee
   Financing:                    General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Coordinate eight affordable housing fairs throughout the
                                 planning period.
16. Energy Conservation
The City adopted an Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Element as part of the General Plan
2030 update and a Climate Action Plan (CAP) in 2011 to address climate change and
energy conservation. As part of the General Plan and CAP, a series of energy conservation
policies were established to reduce community related greenhouse gas emissions and
decrease energy consumption.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Planning Division, and Public Services
                                 Department in association with local utility providers.
   Financing:                    General Fund, public utility companies
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Implement residential energy conservation programs and
                                 standards. Ongoing.
                                                11‐104

                                              Housing
PROVISION OF ADEQUATE HOUSING SITES
Meeting the housing needs of all segments of the community requires the provision of
adequate sites for all types, size and prices of housing. The City’s General Plan and Zoning
Ordinance determine where housing may locate, thereby affecting the supply of land available
for residential development.
17.      Housing Opportunity Sites
The Planning/Community Development Department will publish RFQs for development of
opportunity sites and inform housing developers at Affordable Housing Fairs. The Housing
Advisory Committee will advise preparation of RFQs for opportunity sites.
   Responsible Agency:          City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Division; Housing Advisory Committee.
   Financing:                   General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:        Facilitate the development on Opportunity Sites by providing sites
                                information to interested developers. Within the planning period,
                                publish RFQ for housing opportunity sites in the former
                                Redevelopment area to assist with development of sites. Revise
                                Commercial Linkage Fee policy to exempt mixed use
                                development.        Maintain  an     adequate     inventory     of
                                residential/mixed use sites to accommodate the City’s remaining
                                RHNA of 549 units (434 very low and 115 low income units).
Removal of Governmental Constraints
Under State law, the Housing Element must address, and where legally possible, remove
governmental constraints affecting the maintenance, improvement, and development of
housing. The following programs are designed to mitigate government constraints on
residential development and facilitate development of housing affordable to lower‐ and
moderate‐income households, including families, seniors, and persons with special needs.
18. Mixed Use Zone
The Mixed Use Zone integrates a mix of non‐residential uses and residential uses at
intensities of up to 0.70 FAR. To further facilitate the development of affordable residential
units, the Zoning Ordinance will be amended to include a density range of 14 to 30 dwelling
units per acre in the Mixed Use zone (outside of Specific Plan areas). The new range
provides flexibility in mixed use development projects based on site conditions while ensuring
that the City’s goal for a compatible mix of uses can be accomplished.
   Responsible Agency:          City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Division
   Financing:                   General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:        Revise the Zoning Ordinance within one year of the adoption of
                                the Housing Element to amend the development standards in
                                                11‐105

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                 the Mixed Use (MU) zone, including establishing a density
                                 range of 14 to 30 dwelling units per acre.
19. Affordable Housing Incentives and Concessions
The City provides the following incentives to facilitate the provision of affordable housing in
San Ramon: 1) density bonuses; 2) reduced parking for studio and one‐bedroom units within
affordable multi‐family projects may be considered on a case‐by‐case basis; and 3) the
covered parking requirement may be waived for affordable multi‐family developments; and 4)
additional FAR is available for affordable and workforce housing in the Mixed Use zones.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Planning Division.
   Financing:                    General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Annually evaluate the City’s development standards, policies
                                 and procedures to ensure incentives offered by the City are
                                 adequate to respond to market conditions and therefore
                                 facilitate affordable housing.
20. Senior Group‐Care Housing
Although seniors comprised a relatively small proportion of San Ramon residents in the
2008‐2012 ACS period (eight percent), the City’s aging population indicates a future need
for senior group‐care housing. The City will continue to encourage development of individual
or group‐care housing affordable to the City’s senior population through reduced parking
requirements and other incentives. The City will also actively support tax break and deferment
legislation for qualifying elders.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Planning Division
   Financing:                    General Fund; CDBG; HOME
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Facilitate construction of 30 group‐care housing units for
                                 seniors within the planning period.
21. Second Dwelling Units
A second dwelling unit (SDU) is a second independent single‐family dwelling unit containing
its own sleeping quarters, kitchen and bathroom facilities, and entrance from the outside,
located on a single‐family lot. The SDU may either be attached to or detached from the
principal dwelling unit. SDUs can offer affordable rental housing for seniors, college students,
and single persons in many communities. These units typically rent for less than apartments
of comparable size and the primary homeowner receives supplementary income by renting
out their second unit, which can help many modest income and elderly homeowners remain
in or afford their homes. SDUs can also be integrated in new single‐family subdivisions (such
as carriage houses).
                                                 11‐106

                                            Housing
The City will facilitate and encourage construction of second dwelling units within single‐
family residential neighborhoods by revising the Zoning Ordinance to amend development
standards to further accommodate second dwelling units. The City will also publish and
distribute an informative brochure about second units.
   Responsible Agency:         City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                               Department, Planning Division; Housing Advisory Committee.
   Financing:                  General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:       Facilitate construction of 50 SDUs within the planning period.
                               Distribute the SDU brochure on the City website and at the
                               Planning/ Community Development Department. Revise
                               Zoning Ordinance within one year of the adoption of the
                               Housing Element to facilitate second unit development.
22. Priority Processing
The City will give priority processing to affordable housing projects during Plan Review, to
reduce development costs.
   Responsible Agency:         City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                               Department, Planning Division
   Financing:                  General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:       Facilitate the construction of 549 affordable lower income units
23. Development Fees
Annually, the City prepares a Fee Schedule establishing fees and various charges for
municipal services. As part of this annual review, the City will monitor and mitigate, as
necessary, all current and proposed residential development impact fees and exactions
(including new financing mechanisms to fund negative fiscal impacts identified in required
fiscal analyses and CFD assessments) for their impact upon certainty, and upfront and
ongoing costs of development, including transit‐oriented development, the development of
housing affordable to all income levels, housing for persons with special needs, and housing
for the elderly.
   Responsible Agency:         City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                               Department, Planning Division; City of San Ramon, Finance
                               Department.
   Financing:                  General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:       Annually evaluate the City’s Fee Schedule to monitor and
                               mitigate, as necessary, fees and exactions and their impact to
                               development. Outreach to development stakeholders will be
                               incorporated as part the Fee Schedule update process.
                                              11‐107

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
PROMOTION OF REGIONAL COORDINATION
Since many of the housing problems and issues facing San Ramon are regional in nature,
the City will take an active role in cooperating with other jurisdictions in the Tri‐Valley region.
Issues such as the lack of affordable housing, homelessness, housing opportunities for first‐
time homebuyers, and funding for affordable housing activities are major housing issues that
should be addressed at the local as well as regional level.
24. Regional Partnership for Affordable Housing
Recognizing the regional nature of issues relating to affordable housing and homelessness,
San Ramon will continue to participate in regional efforts and coordinate with neighboring
cities and non‐profit agencies. Specifically, the City will continue to actively participate in the
Tri‐Valley Affordable Housing Committee to coordinate the provision of social services and
housing assistance to meet the needs of lower and moderate income households in the
region. The City will also continue to support the Contra Costa County Urban County
Program, which provides CDBG funds to organizations that assist the homeless.
    Responsible Agency:         City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Division; Housing Advisory Committee;
                                Tri‐Valley Affordable Housing Committee
    Financing:                  HOME; CDBG
    Objectives/Timeframe:       Assist 150 lower and moderate income residents of the Tri‐
                                Valley through continued coordination with the Tri‐Valley
                                Affordable Housing Committee.
25. Transitional and Supportive Housing
The Zoning Ordinance defines both transitional and supportive housing, consistent with State
law, as a residential use permitted in any zoning district where a residential use is permitted.
Transitional and supportive housing are permitted outright in residential zoning districts if
there are six or fewer persons, but requires a use permit for seven or more persons. The City
will be amending its Zoning Ordinance for consistency with the 2035 General Plan Update.
As part of this process, the residential zone and definitions will be revised to permit these
uses outright without any size restrictions.
    Responsible Agency:         City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                Department, Planning Division
    Financing:                  General Fund
    Objectives/Timeframe:       Revise the Zoning Ordinance within one year of the adoption of
                                the Housing Element to amend the residential zoning districts
                                to allow transitional and supportive housing facilities where
                                residential uses are permitted.
                                               11‐108

                                             Housing
26. Person with Developmental Disabilities
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code a “Developmental disability”
means a disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can
be expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual
which includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also
include disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require
treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include
other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a
conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living
environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may
require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are
provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in
supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living
situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
In order to assist in the housing needs for persons with Developmental Disabilities, the City
will implement programs to coordinate housing activities and outreach with the Regional
Center of the East Bay (RCEB) and encourage housing providers to designate a portion of
new affordable housing developments for persons with disabilities, especially persons with
developmental disabilities, and pursue funding sources designated for persons with special
needs and disabilities.
   Responsible Agency:           City of San Ramon, Planning/Community Development
                                 Department, Planning Division
   Financing:                    General Fund
   Objectives/Timeframe:         Work with the Regional Center of the East Bay (RCEB) to
                                 implement an outreach program that informs families within the
                                 City on housing and services available for persons with
                                 developmental disabilities. The program could include the
                                 development of an informational brochure, including information
                                 on services on the City’s website, and providing housing‐
                                 related training for individuals/families through workshops.
                                 Development of outreach program to be completed within one
                                 year of the adoption of the Housing Element.
PROMOTION OF EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
To adequately meet the housing needs of all segments of the community, the Housing Plan
must include program(s) that promotes housing opportunities for all persons regardless of
race, religion, sex, family size, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, age, or physical
or mental disability.
27. Fair Housing Program
                                                11‐109

                                       San Ramon General Plan 2035
Fair housing is defined as a condition in which individuals of similar income levels in the
same housing market have a like range of choice available to them regardless of race, color,
ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, disability, marital status, familial status, or any other
arbitrary factor. The City contracts with the Contra Costa County Housing Services
Collaborative to provide fair housing services in coordination with the Housing Advisory
Committee and the Tri‐Valley Affordable Housing Committee. Fair housing services provided
to residents include disseminating information on State and Federal fair housing laws, listing
housing available to very low, low, and moderate‐income households, handling discrimination
complaints, and coordinating educational programs.
     Responsible Agency:                Contra Costa County Housing Services Collaboration; City of
                                        San Ramon, Planning/Community Development Department,
                                        Planning Division; Tri‐Valley Affordable Housing Committee;
                                        Housing Advisory Committee
     Financing:                         CDBG
     Objectives/Timeframe:              Promote fair housing practices and provide educational
                                        information on fair housing to the public through the distribution
                                        of brochures and flyers. Provide referral to appropriate
                                        agencies for services. Provide brochures and flyers at public
                                        counters and information on fair housing rights and services on
                                        the City website.
                                         Table 11‐35: Quantified Objectives
                                Extremely                                                     Above
           Project                 Low          Very Low       Low        Moderate          Moderate          Total
          1
   RHNA                            258             258         279           282               340            1,417
   Units to be
                                    60             172         254           558              2,649           3,693
   Constructed2
   Units to be
                                     5              5           10            —                 —               20
   Rehabilitated
   At‐Risk Units to be
                                    17             20           —            650                —              687
   Preserved
   Households to be
                                    —               —            5            5                 —               10
   Assisted
 Notes:
 1
    The City has a RHNA allocation of 516 very low income units (inclusive of extremely low income units). While the
    RHNA did not separately define housing needs for extremely low income households, the very low‐income
    allocation can be split evenly between very low‐ and extremely low‐income households. The City’s RHNA of 516
    very low income units has been allocated accordingly.
 2
    Units to be constructed equals housing units constructed or approved, plus 300 affordable housing that can be
    supported with public resources (50 units) and inclusionary housing (250 units). These 300 units are generally
    divided into 60 extremely low, 90 very low, 90 low, and 60 moderate income units.
                                                          11‐110

Housing
 11‐111


   Housing
Appendices

                                             Housing
                                Appendix 11‐A
               Service Providers Consulted
Satellite Affordable Housing Associates (SAHA)
1521 University Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94703
Eve Stewart, Director of Housing Development
Services Provided: Provides affordable, service‐enriched housing that promotes healthy and
dignified living for people with limited options. Work to construct affordable housing, manage
affordable housing properties and provide resident services at SAHA communities. Residents
at most SAHA communities have access to a wide variety of supportive services, activities,
and civic engagement programs. Resident services offered at their communities that house
elderly individuals are especially helpful in providing for residents to live as independently as
possible.
Population served: The population served is low‐income families, seniors and special needs
(disabled and developmentally disabled). All are below 60 percent AMI, with the average
income being 50 percent AMI. Serves seven counties in Northern California with more than
3,000 current residents. Their core area of focus is in Alameda and Contra Costa counties.
They have also started developing housing for people who are currently homeless, as well as
those who are at‐risk of becoming homeless. They have not done any projects in San
Ramon, and have completed only one project in the Tri‐Valley (Livermore) several years
ago.
Housing Needs: Identification of sites is really helpful as well as local funding for
development. Easing development standards can be very helpful because opportunity sites
generally have site constraints that make traditional development standards (setbacks,
easements and parking) difficult to meet. Developing housing in the Tri‐Valley can be difficult
due to the high cost of land and the need to build at high densities to achieve affordability.
More collaboration is needed with city staff and decision‐making bodies to work creatively to
provide affordable housing for all income levels.
Contra Costa Interfaith Housing (CCIH)
3164 Putnam Blvd. Suite C
Walnut Creek, CA 94597
Louise Bourassa, Executive Director
Services Provided: Raise funds to create affordable permanent supportive housing for
homeless families in CCC, supporting parents and their children to find stability, develop self‐
sufficiency, and thrive. They have a 28‐unit development in Pleasant Hill that provides
                                                                                               A‐1

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
permanent supportive housing specifically for homeless families with special needs in Contra
Costa County. They partner with various community groups, faith‐based groups, government
agencies and non‐profit homebuilders to provide residents with supportive services and
affordable housing options.
Population Served: Serving Contra Costa County residents, where 15,000 residents
experience an episode of homelessness every year, with 40% of these are children.
Residents have to be certified homeless (extremely low/very low income). Depending on
funding source of housing units, there are various eligibility requirements ranging from
currently homeless, member of household with disability, and designated lower income.
People stay as long as they need to.
Housing Needs: There is a severe shortage of permanent, affordable housing. Contra Costa
County rental housing costs are among the highest in the nation. There is a lack of housing
for special needs groups who are especially vulnerable to homelessness. They are funded by
grants and donations, and with the support of religious organizations. Needs more advocates
for permanent, supportive housing and help educating the public to remove the social stigmas
of homelessness. Needs political backing for affordable housing projects, support for nonprofit
builders, and loosen eligibility requirements so those with special needs can qualify for
housing. Access to transit, afterschool programs for children, and access to food resources is
important to their locational choice. If demand for their support services was needed, CCIH
would consider expanding their services to San Ramon.
Diablo Valley Foundation for the Aging
1936 Tice Valley Blvd.
Walnut Creek, CA 94595
25‐945‐8040
Bob Kain, Executive Director
Services Provided: A non‐profit providing community service to seniors in Contra Costa
County since 1975. They are focused on preventing inappropriate institutionalization of elders
by providing the necessary support to maintain them in the community. Services include
geriatric care management, personal assistant, respite center, professional private fiduciary
services.
Population Served: Elderly population only; no income qualifications for general
programming. AARP programs require income qualifications and are for low income people.
Provide respite care for frail seniors, dementia care patients, and physically disabled. Serves
primarily throughout Contra Costa County, but has provided services beyond county limits
too.
Housing Needs: Most of the people they serve live in their own homes and some of the
lower income people live in subsidized housing. They provide recommendations based on the
needs of their clients to help them identify residential care and living facilities. Seniors need
accessible, affordable units with a strong community network to avoid institutionalization.
There is a strong demand for senior assisted and independent living units, dementia care
A‐2

                                              Housing
facilities, and residential care facilities for the elderly as the senior population continues to
grow.
OnLok, Inc.
1333 Bush Street
San Francisco, CA 94109
Cassandra Chan, Director of Marketing and Enrollment
Services Provided: Providing integrated services to seniors and their families that keep
seniors living at home for as long as possible. Uses a model of care known as “PACE”—
Program of All‐Inclusive Care for the Elderly. Services include constructing and managing
senior housing, a comprehensive health plan providing long‐term care for seniors, assistance
with daily living tasks and activities, recreational service, transportation, and personal
assistance.
Population Served: Services are for seniors, most of whom qualify for Medicare/Medi‐Cal.
On‐Lok is currently providing services in San Francisco, Santa Clara, and Alameda Counties.
In the future, services could potentially expand to Contra Costa County as needs grow. Clients
need assistance at home with daily tasks such as cooking, bathing, and transportation to and
from medical appointments. Clients are in need of social workers, medical care, speech and
physical therapy, and nutritional services.
Housing Needs: Most seniors desire to stay in their homes where they are familiar with their
community. Seniors need housing close to services such as transit, community activities that
keeps them connected and active, and access to medical care.
Habitat for Humanity East Bay/Silicon Valley
2619 Broadway
Oakland, CA 94612
Hamid Taeb, Housing Director
Services Provided: A non‐profit homebuilder focused on developing sustainable and
affordable ownership housing through new construction, home renovation and home repair.
Provides first‐time affordable homeownership opportunities for lower income families with
children. Habitat clients provide sweat equity towards construction of their home and in turn,
mortgage payments made to Habitat are reinvested to help fund the construction of future
Habitat homes.
Population Served: Primarily serving families who make 30 to 80 percent of the AMI with a
maximum of 120 percent of AMI. Working to create affordable housing in Silicon Valley and
East Bay. Seeking opportunities to expand into San Ramon and Tri‐Valley where creating
affordable housing has traditionally been difficult due to high land prices and cost of
construction.
Housing Needs: Great need for affordable housing throughout the Bay Area, and especially
in the Tri‐Valley area. First‐time homebuyers need housing opportunities for home ownership.
                                                                                              A‐3

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
When looking for potential affordable housing sites, priority locations should be in close
proximity to transit and shopping areas, safe neighborhoods, and schools. Partnerships with
cities to promote affordable housing construction can come in many forms from monetary
funding, land donations, impact fee reductions/exemptions, expedited entitlement review, and
easing development standards. Habitat for Humanity is interested in working in San Ramon in
the future and is open to developing partnerships with market‐rate developers to create
affordable housing opportunities in future developments.
Independent Living Resources of Solano and Contra Costa County (ILR)
3727 Sunset Lane #103
Antioch, CA 94509
Michael Hopke, Independent Living Specialist
Services Provided: ILR is a non‐profit organization dedicated to helping people with any type
of disability live normal, independent lives. They work to fully incorporate those with
disabilities into the community and eliminate institutional, social, and attitudinal barriers. They
provide assistive services to persons with disabilities, educate the public about the needs and
abilities of the disabled community, and advocates for these special needs groups to
encourage autonomous living.
Population Served: Services provided by ILR are free of charge for persons with disabilities
and senior. Most clients come to them with lower incomes and need assistance with
landlord/tenant issues, mediation, shared housing, fair housing law, and instructions for
independent living skills.
Housing Needs: There is a shortage of accessible housing for the disabled and senior
populations in Contra Costa County. More affordable housing choices are needed especially
for special needs groups such as group homes and residential care facilities for the elderly.
Housing should be located to allow for independent living by their clients, such as close to
public transportation, community services, and shopping areas.
SHELTER, Inc.
837 Arnold Drive, #400
Martinez, CA 94553
Beth Williams, Director of Housing Services
Services Provided: SHELTER, Inc. is an independent, non‐profit organization founded in
1986 to alleviate Contra Costa County’s homeless crisis. They provide rental assistance,
case management, and housing counseling services. They also provide transitional housing
in combination with supportive services such as job training, and educational services to
address breaking the cycle of homelessness. SHELTER, Inc. operates a homeless family
shelter for those with immediate emergency housing needs.
Population Served: SHELTER, Inc. provides housing for nearly 250 low‐income households
including special needs groups like transition‐age youth, people with HIV/AIDS and those
A‐4

                                             Housing
with mental health disabilities. They serve low‐income residents of Contra Costa County by
providing resources that lead to self‐sufficiency.
Housing Needs: Due to the cost of rent in the Tri‐Valley, it is difficult for SHELTER, Inc. to
pay the market rate for rents in southern Contra Costa County. They are looking for
opportunities to expand their rental assistance program where the organization can work with
landlords to sublet housing to the homeless. They provide guaranteed rents to housing
owners and assume the liability as the Master Lease holder. Homeless families tend not to
need lots of square footage as they are used to living in smaller spaces. Having supportive
services near affordable housing addresses the needs of the whole person rather than just
individual parts of the problem. Aside from affordability, lower income persons need to have
connections to family and friends in the community they live in as well as access to public
transit and support services.
                                                                                           A‐5


                                                      Housing
                                     Appendix 11‐B
           Homeless Services and Facilities
EMERGENCY SHELTER
Emergency shelter is defined as a facility that provides overnight shelter and fulfills a client’s
basic needs (i.e. food, clothing, medical care) either on site or through off‐site services. The
permitted length of stay can vary from one day at a time to three months. As of December
2013, 12 facilities with approximately 394 emergency shelter beds were located in Contra
Costa County, with 291 beds for individuals and 103 for families.1 Functioning more as a type
of interim housing than as basic emergency shelters, these shelters provide extensive
services, including case management and wrap‐around services such as housing search
assistance. Meals, laundry facilities, mail, and telephones are also provided. During the
2010‐11 program year, 66 percent of the 1,452 shelter residents moved on to transitional or
permanent housing.2 Emergency Shelter facilities include A Safe Place (Oakland), Heather
House (Fairfield), Central County Shelter, Bay Area Rescue Mission (Richmond), Valley
Community Health, Rescue Mission (Solano), Calli House, and the West County Emergency
Homeless Facility.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING
Transitional housing is defined as a residence that provides housing for up to two years.
Residents of transitional housing are usually connected to supportive services designed to
assist the homeless in achieving greater economic independence and a permanent, stable
living situation. Approximately 342 transitional housing beds were located in Contra Costa
County as of December 2013.3 Of these beds, 96 were designated for individuals and 231
were intended for families. The nearest transitional housing facilities are at Diablo Valley
Ranch (Clayton), Mountain View House (Martinez), and Sunrise House (Concord), Appian
House, and Bissell Cottages.
PERMANENT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
Permanent supportive housing is defined as housing that is service‐enriched and linked with
on‐going supportive services (on‐site or off‐site) allowing formerly homeless clients to live at
the facility on an indefinite basis. Of the 977 permanent supportive housing beds within
Contra Costa County in 2013, 488 were set aside for individuals and 489 were designated
for families.1 Permanent supportive housing facilities are located countywide and include the
1
  U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2013 Continuum of Care Homeless Assistance Programs, Housing
  Inventory Count Report.
2
  Contra Costa’s Homeless Management Information System.
3
  Contra Costa Health Department, Department Mission.
                                                                                                            B‐1

                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
Idaho Apartments (El Cerrito), The Landings (Pittsburg), Sunset House (Pittsburg), East
Santa Fe Apartments (Pittsburg), Victoria Apartments (Concord), Mary McGovern House
(Concord), Barrett Apartments (Richmond), and Garden Park Apartments (Pleasant Hill).
HOMELESS PROGRAMS
The following discussion summarizes services and programs operated by the County and
other agencies or organizations.
Contra Costa County Programs: The following programs and services are provided through
the County of Costa County:
      Multi‐Service Centers: The County Health Services operates four Multi‐Service
       Centers (MSCs) throughout the region to coordinate a variety of services and provide
       accessibility for homeless individuals and families. The MSCs offer comprehensive
       services, operating as “one‐stop” sites for meals, temporary housing, respite for
       detoxification, and social services. Supportive services are offered on a drop‐in basis,
       and include case management, food, showers, clothing, employment training, housing
       counseling, transportation, health care, educational programs, life skills programs and
       information and referrals to substance abuse and mental health treatment.
      Shelter Plus Care Supportive Housing and the Health, Housing and Integrated
       Services Network (HHISN): Contra Costa County’s largest supportive housing
       programs are the Shelter Plus Care Programs. Over 300 households suffering from
       serious mental illness, chronic substance abuse, HIV/AIDS, and co‐occurring
       disorders are served annually.3 Housing is provided through scattered site units that
       are held by a master lease and subsidized through tenant housing subsidy vouchers.
       Linked to the housing is an integrated array of support services including health,
       mental health and substance abuse services as well as case management and
       access to other social services.
      Health Care for the Homeless: Contra Costa County provides comprehensive health
       coverage to all of its low income uninsured residents, many of whom are homeless.
       The County’s mobile Health Care for the Homeless program facilitates access to these
       mainstream health services by assisting homeless people in gaining access to health
       care and services.
      Synergy: The County’s Synergy program offers treatment‐on‐demand to homeless
       people in licensed alcohol and drug treatment programs, and provides linkages to
       other needed services, including health, mental health, and case management
       services. Synergy also outstations staff at the regional MSCs to provide screening and
       needs assessment, on‐site groups and individual treatment sessions, evening shelter‐
       based recovery meetings, and referrals to treatment. For those who complete
       treatment, Synergy offers assistance in locating housing and access to housing
       vouchers.
      Rubicon Programs: Rubicon Programs promotes the self‐sufficiency of unemployed
       and underemployed individuals who are disabled, homeless, and/or economically
       disadvantaged. This nationally recognized organization provides a variety of services
       including job preparation, placement, retention and career advancement services. In
B‐2

                                      Housing
  addition, Rubicon operates Training Programs in Bakery Production and Commercial
  Property Maintenance.
 Project HOPE: Initiated in 2001, Project HOPE consists of multi‐disciplinary outreach
  teams that work to link chronically homeless people suffering from mental illness, drug
  and alcohol addictions and co‐occurring disorders to housing and services. Services
  provided by the teams include assessments; services and linkages to primary health
  care, mental health and alcohol and other drug treatment; interventions; medication
  management; transportation; assistance in applying for health coverage and other
  benefits, including veterans benefits; peer support; housing services; and basic needs
  such as food and clothing. The project’s overall goal is placing individuals into
  permanent housing.
 Project Coming Home: Project Coming Home is a multi‐agency collaborative effort to
  provide integrated outreach, housing, treatment and support services to chronically
  homeless individuals. Project Coming Home conducts outreach to clients in
  encampments and other locations, creates homeless‐dedicated detox and residential
  treatment capacity, provides access to affordable, permanent housing through tenant‐
  based housing subsidies, and offers an integrated and individualized package of
  support services linked to the housing, thus providing the comprehensive assistance
  needed by this hard‐to‐serve population.
 SHELTER, Inc.: This organization provides an array of homeless prevention services
  to individuals and families in Contra Costa County, including: rental assistance, rental
  subsidies linked with case management (for up to one year), financial assistance with
  rent and mortgage arrears, assistance with move‐in costs, landlord/tenant
  counseling, and short‐term housing linked to support services and assistance in
  locating permanent housing.
 San Ramon Valley Ecumenical Homeless Ministry: This parochial organization
  provides emergency rental assistance for families that are at risk of homelessness
  who show ability to sustain housing after assistance is provided. The ministry provides
  short‐term rental assistance and case management services and appropriate early
  intervention.
 Hope Conference: Hope Conference is a last‐resort effort to help the working poor
  with rental assistance and transportation needs. Hope serves needy individuals and
  families, all of which are case managed or referred by faith congregations, homeless
  shelters, county or nonprofit organizations. It is primarily family focused and
  complements the work of other agencies and conferences and offers help as a last
  resort to prevent homelessness and loss of employment that would lead to
  homelessness.
                                                                                      B‐3


                                      Housing
                           Appendix 11‐C
       Review of Past Accomplishments
The following table summarizes the City’s accomplishments under the previous Housing
Element and indicates the continued appropriateness of the program for the 2015‐2023
Housing Element planning period.
                                                                                  C‐1


                                                                 Housing
                General                                Quantified                                                             Continued
                  Plan                                 Objectives                                                          Appropriateness in
    Program                      Description                                    2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                 2030                                                                                                     2015‐2023 Housing
                 Policy                                Timeframe                                                               Element
1. Countywide  11.2‐I‐3 Provide rehabilitation      5 households    The City continues to provide housing rehabilitation Program retained.
Rehabilitation          incentives in the form of                   loan services for single family homeowners under (See Policy 11.2‐I‐3)
Loan Program            low‐interest loans to lower Planning        the County umbrella CDBG program. Since 2009,
                        and moderate income         Period          three San Ramon households have been assisted
                        homeowners.                                 through this program due to a dwindling pool of
                                                                    CDBG funds.
2. City        11.2‐I‐3 Provide rehabilitation      5 exterior      The City continues to fund the Home Rehabilitation Program retained.
Rehabilitation          incentives in the form of   rehabilitation  Grant Program which began in 2006. Housing           (See Policy 11.2‐I‐3)
Loan and                low‐interest loans to lower grants, 50      rehabilitation grants have been awarded to 96
Grant Program           and moderate income         housing         income qualified households through 2014.
                        homeowners.                 rehabilitation   
                                                    grants, and 30  The Redevelopment Agency also funded a
                                                    housing         Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program in 2007
                                                    rehabilitation  which has since been discontinued due to lack of
                                                    loans to lower  funding. 11 loans were issued under the program.
                                                                     
                                                    and moderate    The City prepared a brochure that advertises the
                                                    income          Home Rehabilitation Grant program. The brochure
                                                    households      is available on the City’s website and the Building
                                                    Planning        and Safety Services Division.
                                                    Period
                                                                                                                                            C‐3

                                                 San Ramon General Plan 2035
               General                                Quantified                                                              Continued
                 Plan                                 Objectives                                                          Appropriateness in
    Program                       Description                                2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                2030                                                                                                     2015‐2023 Housing
                Policy                                Timeframe                                                                Element
3. Green      11.4‐I‐6 Disseminate information and None          The City supports the State Energy Commission by Program retained.
Building               support efforts by public                 providing local residents information on available     (See Policy 11.4‐I‐6)
                                                    FY 09/10
                       utilities to encourage home               energy conservation programs and how to receive
                       conservation practices.                   additional information from the Commission.
                                                                 Commission handouts and brochures are made
                                                                 available at the Permit Center front counter. The City
                                                                 informs residents of rebate incentives available
                                                                 during the pre‐application process and provides
                                                                 handouts at local events such as the annual Art and
                                                                 Wind Festival, affordable housing fairs, San Ramon’s
                                                                 Government Day, etc.
                                                                 The City has also created a webpage that provides
                                                                 residents information on Energy Incentive Programs
                                                                 from the State, free downloads of the Home Green
                                                                 Building guidelines for remodels and new
                                                                 construction, etc.
4. Code       11.2‐I‐1 Promote increased            None         The City has an active Code Enforcement Division Program retained
Enforcement            awareness of the                          that works to promote awareness of property            (See Policy 11.2‐I‐1
and Abatement          importance of property                    maintenance and preserve neighborhoods. The            and I‐2).
                       maintenance to long‐term                  Building and Safety Services Division administers
                       housing quality and engage                the City’s Rehabilitation Grant Program which
                       the community to preserve                 assists lower income households to complete
                       neighborhoods.                            necessary home repairs.
              11.2‐I‐2 Enforce City ordinances      Enforcement
                       that maintain the            Ongoing
                       appearance and safety,
                       and prevent deterioration,
                       of residential
                       neighborhoods.
C‐4

                                                                Housing
                 General                               Quantified                                                            Continued
                   Plan                               Objectives                                                          Appropriateness in
    Program                       Description                                  2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                  2030                                                                                                   2015‐2023 Housing
                  Policy                              Timeframe                                                               Element
5. Preservation 11.2‐I‐6 Work to preserve the       37 housing     Affordable agreements with Park Place                Program retained
of Existing              affordability of publicly  units          Apartments, Cambrio Townhomes and Bollinger          (See Policy 11.2‐I‐6
Affordable               assisted housing units and                Crest Apartments are in the process of expiring in and I‐8).
Housing Stock            to discourage their                       2015. The City has contacted all the property
                         conversion to market‐rate                 owners/management companies to discuss
                         housing.                                  conservation of these affordable units and there
                                                                   was no interest in expanding the affordability term.
                11.2‐I‐8 Strive to prevent the      Ongoing
                                                                   The City continues to monitor that tenants of the
                         conversion of affordable
                                                                   affordable units are given the proper noticing
                         housing units to market‐
                                                                   requirements and that the properties meet all State
                         rate housing.
                                                                   housing law requirements.
6. Housing      None                                None           The City of San Ramon continues to refer interested Program retained.
Choice                                                             households and homeowners to the Contra Costa
Voucher                                             Ongoing        County Housing Authority to be placed on a list for
                                                                   qualification. In addition, information on
                                                                   developments within the City that accept Section 8
                                                                   vouchers is provided in the Tri‐Valley Area
                                                                   Affordable Rental Housing Directory which is
                                                                   available online; hard copies of the Directory can
                                                                   also be obtained at the City's public counter.
                                                                                                                                           C‐5

                                                   San Ramon General Plan 2035
                General                                 Quantified                                                            Continued
                  Plan                                  Objectives                                                         Appropriateness in
    Program                      Description                                   2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                 2030                                                                                                     2015‐2023 Housing
                 Policy                                 Timeframe                                                              Element
7. Condominium 11.2‐I‐8 Strive to prevent the         None         The City has adopted a Condominium Conversion Program retained
Conversion              conversion of affordable                   ordinance in 2008 to establish procedures and         (See Policy 11.2‐I‐8)
Ordinance               housing units to market‐      Ongoing      requirements for conversion to preserve rental
                        rate housing.                              housing and provide for tenant protection.
                                                                   Additionally the Subdivision Map Act establishes
                                                                   requirements for notice to tenants and right of
                                                                   tenants to exclusive contract for purchase of their
                                                                   units to be converted to condominium ownership
                                                                   (State of California Government Code Section
                                                                   66427.1). This requirement intends to limit the
                                                                   number of households displaced by the conversion
                                                                   of rental units to “for sale” units.
8. Unit Size   11.1‐I‐6 Require diversity of unit     None         The 2012 Zoning Ordinance update incorporated a Program retained.
Diversity               size and number of                         goal to encourage high density and very high          (See Policy 11.1‐I‐6).
                        bedrooms within multi‐                     density residential to provide diverse types of
                        family housing                             dwelling units with specific attention to adding 3 or
                        developments (exempting                    more bedroom units. Planning staff continues to
                        senior projects) and strive                work with developers during the entitlement
                        to provide three‐ and four‐                process to design units to accommodate families
                        bedroom units for large                    of all sizes.
                        families. This policy will be
                        implemented through
                        guidelines published by the
                        Housing Advisory
                        Committee (HAC).
               11.3‐I‐4 Encourage the provision of FY 12/13
                        housing to meet the needs
                        of families of all sizes.
C‐6

                                                                 Housing
                General                                 Quantified                                                            Continued
                  Plan                                  Objectives                                                        Appropriateness in
    Program                         Description                                 2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                 2030                                                                                                    2015‐2023 Housing
                 Policy                                 Timeframe                                                              Element
9. First Time  11.1‐I‐10 Continue to participate with None          Launched regional down payment assistance           Program retained
Homebuyer                Contra Costa County and                    program in 2012 with Tri‐Valley cities which is     (See Policy 11.1‐I‐10).
Downpayment              non‐profit organizations to  Ongoing       administered through the non‐profit Tri‐Valley
Assistance               offer first‐time                           Housing Opportunity Center. The City continues to
Programs                 homeownership programs to                  provide referrals and information about Contra
                         current and prospective San                Costa County home ownership programs and
                         Ramon residents and                        affordable housing opportunities provided by non‐
                         workers.                                   profit organizations.
10. Affordable 11.1‐I‐1  Identify sites appropriate   None          Figure 11‐8 of the Housing Element identifies sites Program retained.
Housing                  for the development of a                   appropriate for development of a variety of housing (See Policy 11.1.I‐3)
Development              variety of housing types                   types. The map is used by Housing and Planning
                         and price ranges to meet                   staff to discuss with home builders the potential
                         the needs of all                           housing sites in San Ramon.
                         socioeconomic segments
                         of the community                           The City continues to work with developers to
                         (including extremely low,                  commit to long‐term affordability in order to
                         very low, low, moderate,                   prevent the conversion of affordable housing units
                         and above moderate                         to market‐rate. Since 2009, units within the
                         income households).                        following affordable housing developments have
               11.1‐I‐4  Negotiate with developers Ongoing          affordability covenants of at least 50 years after
                         to ensure a portion of                     initial occupancy:
                         future residential                         Valley Vista Senior: 104 units
                         development is affordable                  Faria Preserve: 213 units*
                         to extremely low, very low,                Highland Point: 293 units
                         low and moderate income
                         households.
                                                                                                                                            C‐7

                                                     San Ramon General Plan 2035
                  General                                  Quantified                                                             Continued
                    Plan                                  Objectives                                                           Appropriateness in
    Program                        Description                                     2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                   2030                                                                                                       2015‐2023 Housing
                   Policy                                 Timeframe                                                                Element
11. Affordable   11.1‐I‐3 Facilitate the development    200 units     Due to the dissolution of the Redevelopment            Program retained.
Housing                   of affordable housing                       Agency, there is limited city staff available to apply (See Policy 11.1.I‐3)
Funding                   throughout the community      Ongoing       for State and federal funding. However, Housing
Sources                   through use of financial                    and Planning staff works closely with developers to
                          and/or regulatory                           facilitate the development of affordable housing
                          incentives, where feasible.                 through the City’s inclusionary policy.
12. Inclusionary 11.1‐I‐4 Negotiate with developers to  250 housing   The Housing Advisory Committee began drafting          Program retained
Housing                   ensure a portion of future    units         an inclusionary zoning ordinance and structure for (See Policy 11.1‐I‐4).
                          residential development is                  in‐lieu fees in 2005. Options are being explored
                                                        Ordinance FY
                          affordable to extremely low,                that would give developers flexible options (e.g.,
                                                        15/16,
                          very low, low and moderate                  construction, donation of land, partnering with the
                                                        Construction
                          income households.                          non‐profit community to develop affordable
                                                        ongoing
                                                                      housing on their behalf, and in‐lieu fee options).
                                                                      Due to the current housing market conditions and
                                                                      recent court cases, the HAC has recommended to
                                                                      the Planning Commission that formal consideration
                                                                      of the ordinance be delayed until the housing
                                                                      market improves and court cases are resolved.
                                                                      Despite the lack of the formal ordinance,
                                                                      negotiation on a case by case basis has been
                                                                      successful in the creation of affordable units such
                                                                      as 10 percent of units at Park Central, 28 percent
                                                                      in the Faria Preserve Development,* 25 percent in
                                                                      the Dougherty Valley Specific Plan and 15 percent
                                                                      at City Center.
                                                                      To further facilitate the development of multi‐family
                                                                      affordable housing, a mixed use density range will
                                                                      be established in an upcoming Zoning Ordinance
                                                                      update.
C‐8

                                                                  Housing
                 General                                 Quantified                                                             Continued
                   Plan                                  Objectives                                                         Appropriateness in
    Program                         Description                                  2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                  2030                                                                                                     2015‐2023 Housing
                  Policy                                 Timeframe                                                               Element
13. In‐Lieu Fee 11.1‐I‐11 Ensure that non‐residential  None          The City has not developed a Linkage Fee             Program retained (See
for Commercial            development contributes to                 program due to the recent downturn in the            also Policy 11.1‐I‐11)
Development               the supply of housing        Ordinance     economy; however a fee study is being conducted
                          affordable to lower‐income   FY15/16,      currently and will include the linkage fee program.
                          households, including        Construction
                          extremely low‐income         ongoing
                          households.
14. Use of In‐  11.1‐I‐20 Apply for available State    None          The City has not developed an in‐lieu fee program Program retained.
Lieu Fees                 and federal funds, and                     due to the current housing market conditions and (See Policy 11.1‐I‐20)
                          encourage the use of         FY 15/16      recent court cases. HAC has recommended to the
                          private financing                          Planning Commission that formal consideration of
                          mechanisms, to assist in                   the an in‐lieu fee be delayed until the housing
                          the production of affordable               market improves and court cases are resolved.;
                          housing.                                   however a fee study is being conducted currently
                                                                     and will include the in‐lieu fee program.
15. Affordable  11.1‐I‐15 Work with neighboring        None          The City continues to work with neighboring          Program retained.
Housing Fair              jurisdictions in the Tri‐                  jurisdictions through the Tri‐Valley Affordable      (See Policy 11.1‐I‐15).
                          Valley area to develop       Ongoing       Housing Committee. In concert with neighboring
                          affordable housing.                        jurisdictions, we have developed an Affordable
                                                                     Housing guidebook to assist affordable households
                                                                     with finding housing within the Tri‐Valley. The City
                                                                     continues to work with the Tri‐Valley Housing
                                                                     Opportunity Center, a “one‐stop shop” to distribute
                                                                     information about affordable rental information and
                                                                     down payment assistance and work cooperatively
                                                                     with the Center to provide affordable housing fairs,
                                                                     property bus tours, seminars, etc.
                                                                                                                                               C‐9

                                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
              General                                Quantified                                                             Continued
                Plan                                 Objectives                                                          Appropriateness in
    Program                      Description                                2009‐2014 Accomplishments
               2030                                                                                                     2015‐2023 Housing
               Policy                                Timeframe                                                               Element
16. Green    11.4‐I‐6 Disseminate information and None          The City supports the State Energy Commission by Program completed
Building              support efforts by public                 providing local residents information on available     and deleted fro,
                      utilities to encourage home Ongoing       energy conservation programs and how to receive        2015‐2023 HE.
                      conservation practices.                   additional information from the Commission.
                                                                Commission handouts and brochures are made
                                                                available at the Permit Center front counter. The City
                                                                informs residents of rebate incentives available
                                                                during the pre‐application process and provides
                                                                handouts at local events such as the annual Art and
                                                                Wind Festival, affordable housing fairs, San Ramon’s
                                                                Government Day, etc.
                                                                The City has also created a webpage that provides
                                                                residents information on Energy Incentive
                                                                Programs from the State, free downloads of the
                                                                Home Green Building guidelines for remodels and
                                                                new construction, etc.
17. Energy   11.4‐I‐4 Enforce the State’s energy   None         The City adopted the 2014 California Building          Program retained.
Conservation          conservation standards for                Standards Code in January 2013 California              (See Policy 11.4‐I‐4).
                      new residential              Code Update  Building Codes, which are based on the
                      construction and             FY 13/14,    International Building Codes. The City continues to
                      renovations to existing      Ongoing      be in compliance with and enforce State energy
                      structures.                               conservation standards. All San Ramon Building
                                                                and Safety staff has attended State training on
                                                                new energy conservation standards.
C‐10

                                                               Housing
                General                               Quantified                                                            Continued
                  Plan                                Objectives                                                        Appropriateness in
    Program                      Description                                  2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                 2030                                                                                                  2015‐2023 Housing
                 Policy                               Timeframe                                                              Element
18. Housing    11.1‐I‐1 Identify sites appropriate  None          Figure 11‐8 of the Housing Element identifies sites Program retained
Opportunity             for the development of a                  appropriate for development of a variety of housing (See Policy 11.1‐I‐11).
Sites                   variety of housing types    Ongoing       types. The map is used by Housing and Planning
                        and price ranges to meet                  staff to discuss with home builders the potential
                        the needs of all                          housing sites in San Ramon.
                        socioeconomic segments
                        of the community
                        (including extremely low,
                        very low, low, moderate,
                        and above moderate
                        income households).
19. Affordable 11.3‐I‐2 Participate in programs and None          The City locally adopted the Density Bonus          Program retained
Housing                 provide incentives for                    Ordinance in 2014 to facilitate the development of (See Policy 11.3‐I‐2).
Incentives and          projects that include       Ongoing       housing for seniors and lower income households.
Concessions             housing for seniors, lower
                        and moderate income                       With each housing development providing
                        households, and special                   affordable units, the City works with the developer
                        needs groups.                             to determine qualification for Project incentives.
                                                                  For example, parking reductions were applied to
                                                                  the Valley Vista Senior Housing project.
20. Senior     11.3‐I‐2 Participate in programs and 30 units      The Valley Vista Senior Housing Project was the     Program retained
Group‐Care              provide incentives for                    recipient of $13.8 million in HUD 202 funding to    (See Policy 11.3‐I‐2).
Housing                 projects that include       Ongoing       assist in the development of 104 affordable units
                        housing for seniors, lower                (90 very low and 14 low income units)
                        and moderate income
                        households, and special                   During the past planning period, one additional
                        needs groups.                             Adult Residential Facility was added to bring a
                                                                  total of ten beds currently operating in San Ramon.
                                                                                                                                          C‐11

                                                    San Ramon General Plan 2035
                General                                  Quantified                                                                 Continued
                  Plan                                   Objectives                                                             Appropriateness in
    Program                      Description                                     2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                 2030                                                                                                          2015‐2023 Housing
                 Policy                                  Timeframe                                                                   Element
21. Second     11.1‐I‐8 Encourage construction of      50 units     Due to the downturn in the economy,                       Program retained
Dwelling Units          second dwelling units                       improvements such as second dwelling unit                 (See Policy 11.1‐I‐8).
                        within single‐family           Ongoing      construction have been inhibited.
                        residential neighborhoods.
                                                                    Since 2009, the City has issued building permits
                                                                    for six second dwelling units.
                                                                    In November 2012, the Zoning Ordinance was
                                                                    amended to facilitate the development of second
                                                                    dwelling units.
22.            11.3‐I‐3 Encourage the provision of None             In 2012, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to         Program amended
Transitional            housing with supportive                     permit transitional housing facilities serving six or few and will include
and Supportive          services for special needs     Ordinance FY persons in all residential districts by‐right.            Ordinance update in
Housing                 groups, such as homeless, 15/16             Transitional housing facilities serving seven or more     FY 15/16
                        persons with disabilities, and              persons are allowed within the RC, RH, MU, CCMU,
                        victims of domestic violence.               and CT zones with approval of a Use Permit.
23.            11.3‐I‐3 Encourage the provision of     None         In 2012, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to Program completed
Reasonable              housing with supportive                     allow reasonable accommodation through a non‐             and removed from
Accommodation           services for special needs     FY 09/10     discretionary review process for persons with             2015‐2023 HE.
                        groups, such as homeless,                   disabilities seeking equal access to housing under
                        persons with disabilities,                  the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair
                        and victims of domestic                     Employment and Housing Act. The Zoning
                        violence.                                   Ordinance establishes specific procedures and
                                                                    thresholds for reasonable accommodation requests
                                                                    with ministerial approval by the Zoning Administrator.
C‐12

                                                                Housing
               General                                 Quantified                                                              Continued
                 Plan                                  Objectives                                                          Appropriateness in
   Program                      Description                                     2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                2030                                                                                                      2015‐2023 Housing
                Policy                                 Timeframe                                                                Element
24. Emergency 11.3‐I‐3 Encourage the provision of    None          The City completed a Zoning Ordinance update in       Program completed
Shelters               housing with supportive                     November 2012. The update included provisions         and removed from
                       services for special needs                  to allow for supportive and transitional housing in   2015‐2023 HE.
                       groups, such as homeless,                   residential zones as well as to allow homeless
                       persons with disabilities,                  shelters by‐right in Thoroughfare Commercial
                       and victims of domestic                     zones.
                       violence.
              11.3‐I‐5 Support and provide           FY 09/10      The City continues to participate in the Contra Costa
                       funding to organizations                    County Urban County Program, which provides
                       that assist the homeless.                   federal funds to organizations that assist the
                                                                   homeless.
25. Single    11.3‐I‐2 Participate in programs and None            The Zoning Ordinance was amended in 2012 to           Program completed
Room                   provide incentives for                      facilitate the development of single room             and removed from
Occupancy     11.3‐I‐3 projects that include housing FY 09/10      occupancy units.                                      2015‐2023 HE.
(SRO) Units            for seniors, lower and
                       moderate income
                       households, and special
                       needs groups.
                       Encourage the provision of
                       housing with supportive
                       services for special needs
                       groups, such as homeless,
                       persons with disabilities,
                       and victims of domestic
                       violence.
                                                                                                                                           C‐13

                                                    San Ramon General Plan 2035
                 General                                  Quantified                                                            Continued
                   Plan                                   Objectives                                                        Appropriateness in
    Program                         Description                                  2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                  2030                                                                                                     2015‐2023 Housing
                  Policy                                  Timeframe                                                              Element
26. Priority    11.2‐I‐5  Ensure that units produced   1,155 units   The City continues to facilitate the development of  Program retained.
Processing                for lower and moderate                     affordable housing by giving priority processing to  (See Policy 11.2‐I‐5).
                          income households are        Ongoing       housing developments with affordable housing. For
                          maintained at designated                   project such as the Faria Preserve, Park Central and
                          income levels for the term                 ACRE Townhomes, public workshops with the
                          established in the                         Planning Commission and/or City Council were
                          entitlement.                               conducted to provide project applicants comments
                                                                     early in the development review process.
                                                                     The City continues to implement the Dougherty
                                                                     Valley Settlement Agreement and to expedite the
                                                                     review of affordable housing components of the
                                                                     Dougherty Valley project such as streamlining the
                                                                     Architectural Review of applications.
                                                                     To further facilitate the development of affordable
                                                                     housing, the City will consider additional
                                                                     opportunities to expedite the processing of
                                                                     affordable housing developments as part of the
                                                                     upcoming Zoning Ordinance update.
27. Regional    11.1‐I‐15 Work with neighboring        None          The City continues to work with neighboring          Program retained
Partnership for           jurisdictions in the Tri‐                  jurisdictions through the Tri‐Valley Affordable      (See Policy 11.1‐I‐15).
Affordable                Valley area to develop       Ongoing       Housing Committee. In concert with neighboring
Housing                   affordable housing.                        jurisdictions, we have developed an Affordable
                                                                     Housing guidebook to assist affordable households
                                                                     with finding housing within the Tri‐Valley. The City
                                                                     continues to work with the Tri‐Valley Housing
                                                                     Opportunity Center, a “one‐stop shop” to distribute
                                                                     information about affordable rental information and
                                                                     down payment assistance.
C‐14

                                                                   Housing
                 General                                  Quantified                                                              Continued
                   Plan                                   Objectives                                                           Appropriateness in
    Program                        Description                                   2009‐2014 Accomplishments
                  2030                                                                                                        2015‐2023 Housing
                  Policy                                  Timeframe                                                                Element
 28. Fair       11.3‐I‐1  Collaborate with and          None          The City utilizes the Contra Costa County fair         Program retained
 Housing                  support efforts of                          housing and landlord/tenant dispute resolution         (See Policy 11.3‐I‐1).
 Program                  organizations dedicated to    Ongoing       services and direct tenants via the City’s website and
                          eliminating discrimination in               at the Permit Center of the availability of services.
                          housing.
Note:
*A reduction in the overall maximum number of dwelling units in the Faria Preserve from 740 to 618 (by reducing the maximum
number of dwelling units within Neighborhood V from 302 to 180 (with a maximum density of 18 units per acre)) would be
accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within Neighborhood V from higher density rental units to lower density, age‐
targeted, market‐rate, for‐sale attached units; and (2) instead of constructing affordable housing on‐site, allowing the developer to
contribute into a workforce housing endowment fund for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in San Ramon.
This reduction in density and unit count in the NWSP such that the total unit count within Neighborhood V decreases from 302
apartment units to a maximum of 180 market‐rate, age‐targeted, for‐sale units would occur so long as the developer elects to
contribute into a fund established by the City for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing, instead of constructing affordable
housing on‐site. Specifically, the developer would pay a fee to the City in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) per
unit developed within Neighborhood V. The maximum amount of this fee for the developer of Neighborhood V is Nine Million
Dollars ($9M) (180 units x $50,000). The fee shall be paid on a pro rata basis over the number of market‐rate for‐sale units
built within Neighborhood V, and the payments shall commence no sooner than the date of the first close of escrow of each
market‐rate for‐sale residential unit within Neighborhood V.
The City may use the above‐referenced funds, in its discretion, to fund a variety of programs intended to facilitate affordable
housing. By way of example only, these programs could include, among others, partnering with non‐profit developers to transfer
and/or construct deed‐restricted affordable units; purchase and rehabilitation of existing developments for deed‐restricted
affordable housing; preservation and replacement options to preserve existing affordable housing stock; purchasing affordability
covenants; and/or providing financial support for rental subsidies, down payment assistance, and housing rehabilitation loan
services and grant program for eligible households. The foregoing list of potential measures is intended to be illustrative only, and
is not intended to constrain the City’s discretion in determining the appropriate way to allocate this funding so long as such funding
is used for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing.
                                                                                                                                               C‐15


                                              Housing
                                Appendix 11‐D
  Detailed Development Review Process
PRE‐APPLICATION PROJECT REVIEW
Pre‐Application review with an applicant of a conceptual development project may occur with
the Planning/Community Development Director, or Planning Services staff and/or other City
staff as determined to be appropriate. The Pre‐Application process provides an opportunity to
review the appropriate forms, discuss the process including the necessary committee and
commission meetings, projected timelines, any potential issues, and answer questions.
Development plan revisions may occur as a result of recommendations from City staff and a
subsequent Pre‐Application Review may be held and/or plan revisions may be incorporated
into a formal application submittal. If enough information is available, City staff may make a
preliminary determination on the environmental review process for the project application
pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
APPLICATION SUBMITTAL OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
Upon formal application submittal of a development project, the Planning/Community
Development Director and his/her designee immediately assigns a project planner to review
and process development applications. Upon application submittal, a 30‐day review begins to
determine if the application is complete. Within three days of submittal, a staff planner
prepares a referral and routes application and plans to applicable members and agency on
the Development Review Committee (DRC) distribution list (DRC includes all City
Departments and outside agencies such as PG&E, EBMUD, Fire Protection District, etc.).
Requested comments from internal and external agencies are typically returned within two
weeks. A Design Review Committee meeting is held for complex projects to discuss issues
early on in the review process.
REVIEW FOR COMPLETENESS
Based on staff review of the application and comments from the DRC, the staff planner
determines if a development application is complete. If the project application and plans are
complete, the staff planner sends a Deemed Complete letter to the applicant. If the project
application and plans are incomplete, the project planner sends a Deemed Incomplete letter
to the applicant that lists all deficiencies. A new 30‐day review begins upon re‐submittal by
the applicant.
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
The staff planner determines the environmental review process for the project application
pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) within 30 days of deeming an
application complete. The staff planner also determines if environmental review can be
conducted in‐house or whether portions or all of the environmental review should be
                                                                                           D‐1

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
contracted out to an environmental consulting firm. If consultants are used, the staff planner
prepares and coordinates applicable Requests for Proposal (RFPs) and all associated
contract documentation, fee collection from applicant, etc. The City also retains an on‐call
consultant list, eliminating the need for a lengthy RFP process. Environmental review may be
completed concurrently with the Architecture Review Board review.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
All applications for new residential development must be reviewed by the Architectural
Review Board (ARB). The staff planner schedules a project for consideration at an ARB
meeting within three to four weeks of deeming an application complete. ARB meetings are
held the 2nd Thursday of each month. The week prior to the scheduled ARB meeting, the
staff planner prepares and completes a staff report to be distributed with an ARB packet to
the ARB members. Typical reports discuss the project and any applicable ARB issues such
as site plan design, parking lot lay‐out, architectural building design and landscape plan
design with recommendation issue/items to be discussed by the ARB. At the ARB meeting,
members discuss the development project and offer design recommendations and/or
changes to be made by the applicant. ARB may request that project revisions be made and
come back to the ARB for Final Review. If no comments are given or comments are minor,
the ARB provides recommendations subject to final staff review and/or Planning Commission
review and approval. Upon receiving Final Architectural Review Board review, the
development application may proceed to the Planning Commission.
ADMINISTRATIVE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR REVIEW
Minor residential subdivisions (four lots or fewer), Development Plans, and Minor Use
Permits subject to a Development Plan may be approved administratively upon
recommendation of the ARB. Applications of a minor nature (e.g., single‐family residential
additions, architectural projections, etc.) can be processed administratively without ARB
review. Staff mails a Notice of Application to all property owners located within a 300‐foot
radius of the project, providing 10 days for anyone to comment on the proposed use. If no
comments are received, the Zoning Administrator renders a decision. If comments requesting
a public hearing for the project are received, a public hearing is scheduled before the Zoning
Administrator. An applicant or other interested party may file an appeal of the decision with
the City Clerk to the Planning Commission within 10 days of the adoption of the Zoning
Administrator Order either approving or denying the project. If no appeals are filed, the
applicant may proceed to Site Development Permit/Grading Permit and/or Building Permit
submittal and subsequently project construction.
PUBLIC HEARING ‐ ZONING ADMINISTRATOR (ZA)
If a request for a public hearing in response to the Notice of Application is received, or staff
cannot support the applicant’s request, a public hearing before the Zoning Administrator is
scheduled. Zoning Administrator Hearings are held the 2nd Thursday of each month. A Public
Hearing Notice of the Zoning Administrator meeting date is mailed out 10 days in advance to
all property owners properties located within a 300‐foot radius of the project. The week prior
to the scheduled Zoning Administrator meeting, the staff planner prepares and completes a
staff report for the Zoning Administrator. Typical reports discuss the project and any
applicable issues such as Zoning and General Plan consistency, land use compatibility,
neighborhood concerns, ARB issues, site plan and parking design, architectural building
D‐2

                                          Housing
design and landscape plan design with recommendation issues/items to be considered by
the Zoning Administrator.
At the Zoning Administrator meeting, public testimony is heard, project issues are discussed,
and recommendations and/or changes are presented by the staff and/or applicant. The
Zoning Administrator may request that the applicant revise the project and return for final
review and consideration. If comments are minor, the application may be conditionally
approved subject to final staff review. Upon a motion made by the Zoning Administrator
indicating intent to approve or deny a project, staff typically returns with a Zoning Order and
conditions of approval (if recommended for approval) at the next meeting. An applicant or
other interested party may file an appeal of the decision with the City Clerk to the Planning
Commission within 10 days of the adoption of the Zoning Administrator Order either
approving or denying the project. If no appeals are filed, the applicant may proceed to Site
Development Permit/Grading Permit and Building Permit submittal and subsequently project
construction.
PUBLIC HEARING ‐ PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW
Major residential subdivisions (five or more lots) and Use Permits require Planning
Commission review and approval. A project is scheduled for a Planning Commission meeting
upon incorporation of ARB recommendations, a completeness determination for the
application and plans, and completion of required environmental review work. Planning
Commission meetings are held the 1st and 3rd Tuesday of each month. A Public Hearing
Notice of Intent to Adopt an Initial Study/Negative Declaration (for non‐exempt projects) is
mailed 20 or 30 days (30 days when State or Federal Agencies are notified) in advance of
Planning Commission meeting to all properties located within a 300‐foot radius of the project.
A distance radius of 500 to 1,000 feet is often required for large or sensitive projects in San
Ramon to provide greater public outreach. If an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is
required, a Public Notice of Completion and Review is mailed out with a 45‐day review and
comment period. A special meeting to review and receive comments from the public on an
EIR, separate from the public hearing on the proposed project may occur by the Planning
Commission. A separate Public Notice of the Planning Commission meeting date is mailed 10
days in advance to all properties located within a 300‐foot radius of the project. A distance
radius of 500 to 1,000 feet is often required for large or sensitive projects in San Ramon to
provide greater public outreach.
Staff schedules a development project for review and comment with the necessary City
committees or commissions to review and provide recommendations on the project to the
Planning Commission. The week prior to the scheduled Planning Commission meeting, the
staff planner prepares and completes a staff report to be distributed with a Planning
Commission packet to the Commission members. Typical reports discuss the project and any
applicable Planning Commission issues such as Zoning and General Plan consistency,
environmental issues, land use compatibility, ARB issues, site plan and parking design,
architectural building design and landscape plan design, with recommendation issues/items
to be discussed and considered by the Planning Commission.
At the Planning Commission meeting, Commissioners receive public testimony, discuss the
development project and issues, and offer recommendations and/or changes to be made by
the applicant. The Commission may request that project revisions or further analysis be made
                                                                                             D‐3

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
prior to final review and consideration. If comments are minor, the Planning Commission may
provide recommendations subject to final staff and/or ARB review and approval. Upon
motion of the Planning Commission of their intent to approve or deny a project, staff will
typically return with a resolution and conditions of approval or denial at the next meeting.
An applicant or other interested party may file an appeal of the decision with the City Clerk to
the City Council within 10 days of the adoption of the Planning Commission resolution either
approving or denying the project. If no appeals are filed and if no City Council actions are
required of the development project, the applicant may proceed to final architectural approval,
if necessary, Site Development Permit/Grading Permit and/or Building Permit submittal and
subsequently project construction.
Conditions for Use Permit: The following findings are required for approval of any Use
Permit in San Ramon:
        The proposed use is allowed within the applicable zone and complies with all other
         applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and the Municipal Code;
        The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific
         plan;
        The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed activity are
         compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity;
        The site is physically suitable for the type, density, and intensity of use being
         proposed, including access, utilities, and the absence of physical constraints; and
        Granting the permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of
         the persons residing or working in the subject neighborhood, or materially detrimental
         or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the property
         is located.
In approving a Use Permit, the Planning Commission may impose conditions (e.g., the
placement, height, nature and extent of the use; buffers, landscaping and maintenance, off‐
site improvements, performance guarantees, screening, surfacing, time limits, etc.), including
conditions that establish standards for development that are more restrictive than the
applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and deemed reasonable and necessary to
ensure that the approval will comply with the findings. Conditions would be similar to those for
other similar uses in the same zones.
CITY COUNCIL REVIEW
Projects that have been appealed or involve a Zone changes or General Plan Amendment
require City Council review and approval. The City Council meetings are held the 2nd and 4th
Tuesdays of each month. A Public Hearing Notice of the City Council meeting date is mailed
out 10 days in advance of City Council meeting to all property owners located within a 300‐
foot radius of the project. A distance radius of 500 to 1,000 feet is often required for large or
sensitive projects in San Ramon to provide greater public outreach.
The week prior to the scheduled City Council meeting, the staff planner prepares and
completes a staff report to be distributed with a City Council packet to the Council members.
D‐4

                                             Housing
Copies of all Planning Commission staff reports, meeting minutes and information are also
provided to the City Council. Typical reports focus on the Planning Commission issues or
appeal issues with recommendation issue/items to be discussed and considered by the City
Council.
At the City Council meeting, Council members will hear public testimony, discuss the
development project and issues, offer recommendations, or require changes to be made by
the applicant. The Council may request the applicant to revise the project and return for final
review and consideration. If comments are minor, the Council may provide recommendations
subject to final staff, ARB and/or Planning Commission review and approval. Upon motion of
the City Council of their intent to approve or deny a project, staff will typically return at the next
meeting with a resolution and conditions of approval or upholding the Planning Commission
decision or denying the appeal, as applicable. Typically, upon the City Council adoption of the
resolution the action becomes effective immediately or within 30 days if a Zone change or a
General Plan Amendment is involved. The decision of the City Council is final.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT/GRADING PERMIT
After City Council approval, an applicant submits required site development (utility
infrastructure plans) and grading plans to the Engineering Services Department for review
and approval. Issuance of the Site Development and/or Grading Permits may occur prior to
or concurrent with Building Permit issuance. Typically, Assurance Bonds are required of each
project to guarantee that a developer fully completes the work per the approved plans once
construction begins. These bonds ensure that a project will not be left by the developer in a
partial or incomplete construction phase.
Engineering Services inspectors monitor and inspect site development to ensure that all
underground utility installations and grading activity is completed in accordance with the
approved plans. Although much of this work may be completed prior to Building Permit
issuance, site development and grading permits are not finalized until the completion of
above‐ground construction improvements (i.e. buildings and structures). At the time of final
site inspection, all required improvements are verified as completed prior to final approval and
release of applicable bonds.
BUILDING PERMIT SUBMITTAL/CONSTRUCTION PROCESS
Prior to or concurrent with the submittal of a Building Permit, an applicant is required to
submit an annotated list of the Conditions of Approval documenting the status of each of the
required conditions. Upon submittal of a Building Permit application with construction plans
and information, the Building and Safety Services Division routes the construction plans and
information to all applicable internal departments.
Plan check review by the Building and Safety Services Division and/or internal departments
takes place within 10 days of submittal. Any deficiencies in the plans are listed in writing and
provided to the applicant. The applicant may resubmit for subsequent building plan check
after making necessary revisions or corrections. The Building Permit is issued and
construction of the building structures may begin only after the construction plans are
accepted by the Building and Safety Services Division and/or internal departments.
                                                                                                   D‐5

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
Building and Safety Services Division inspectors monitor and inspect specific stages of
project construction, including but not limited to, building foundation, plumbing, mechanical,
and framing. Building inspectors ensure that the building construction is completed in
accordance with the approved construction plans and applicable Building Codes. When
building construction is complete, the applicant calls for a Final Building Inspection, at which
time all applicable departments inspect the project and prepare a written list of items to be
corrected, if any. Upon receiving final building inspection approval, the building receives a
Certificate of Occupancy (CO) or clearance for the internal tenant improvements (TIs) to
begin.
D‐6

                                          Housing
                             Appendix 11‐E
     Detailed Residential Sites Inventory
The following provides a parcel‐specific account of the Housing Opportunity Sites presented
in the Housing Element.
                                                                                         E‐1


                                                                        Housing
                                                                                                        Realistic                   Infra‐     Environ‐
                                  Planning        Current Zoning        General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing    structure     mental
  Site     APN       Location     Subarea          Designation           Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use     Capacity    Constraints
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     3.4  Per Specific Recreational Yes        None
       041      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan         —Roller
                                                                                                                    Skating Rink
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     1.8  Per Specific Auto Repair Yes         None
       058      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.8  Per Specific Mini‐Storage Yes        None
       060      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.8  Per Specific Mini‐Storage Yes        None
       061      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.2  Per Specific Religious    Yes        None
       062      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan         Assembly
1
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.9  Per Specific Office/Ware Yes         None
       073      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan         house
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.65 Per Specific Office       Yes        None
       083      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.7  Per Specific Mini‐Storage Yes        None
       086      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.3  Per Specific Auto Repair Yes         None
       087      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan
       208‐250‐ North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50     0.6  Per Specific Office       Yes        None
       088      Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac             Plan
                                                                                                                                                       E‐3

                                                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                             Realistic                   Infra‐     Environ‐
                                      Planning         Current Zoning       General Plan   Allowable            Unit       Existing    structure     mental
 Site      APN           Location     Subarea            Designation         Designation     Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use     Capacity    Constraints
      208‐260‐      North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      5.75 Per Specific Mini‐Storage Yes        None
      055           Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac              Plan
      208‐660‐      North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.1  Per Specific Office       Yes        None
      001           Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac              Plan
      208‐660‐      North of Purdue Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.8  Per Specific Office       Yes        None
      007           Road                        Residential Overlay                      du/ac              Plan
      Site #1 Total                                                                      Average 22   16.8  155 per
                                                                                         du/ac              Specific
                                                                                                            Plan
      208‐260‐      Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.7  Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      036           Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Service—
                    Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)                    Landscape
                    Road Core                                                                                            Materials
      208‐260‐      Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      2.2  Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      052           Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Service—
                    Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)                    Landscape
                    Road Core                                                                                            Materials
2
      208‐260‐      Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.3  Per Specific Auto Repair Yes         None
      053           Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan
                    Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
                    Road Core
      208‐260‐      Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      1.9  Per Specific Warehouse Yes           None
      056           Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan
                    Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
                    Road Core
E‐4

                                                                       Housing
                                                                                                        Realistic                  Infra‐      Environ‐
                                 Planning         Current Zoning       General Plan   Allowable            Unit       Existing   structure      mental
 Site     APN       Location     Subarea            Designation         Designation     Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use    Capacity    Constraints
      208‐271‐ Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.95 Per Specific Retail—     Yes        Creek along rear
      003      Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Produce                of property
               Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)                    Stand
               Road Core
      208‐271‐ Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.2  Per Specific Undeveloped Yes        Creek runs north
      018      Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan                                of property
               Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
               Road Core
      208‐271‐ Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.2  Per Specific Vacant and Yes         None
      019      Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Undeveloped
               Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
               Road Core
      208‐271‐ Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      1.1  Per Specific Religious   Yes        Creek along rear
      021      Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Assembly               of property
2
               Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
               Road Core
      208‐271‐ Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      1.0  Per Specific Office and  Yes        None
      022      Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Religious
               Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)                    Assembly
               Road Core
      208‐271‐ Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.17 Per Specific Animal      Yes        None
      025      Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Services
               Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
               Road Core
      208‐271‐ Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      2.6  Per Specific Retail—     Yes        Creek culverted
      041      Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Restaurant             on property;
               Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)                    and Vacant             creek daylights
               Road Core                                                                                                                   south of property
                                                                                                                                                        E‐5

                                                            San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                             Realistic                   Infra‐     Environ‐
                                      Planning         Current Zoning       General Plan   Allowable            Unit       Existing    structure     mental
 Site      APN           Location     Subarea            Designation         Designation     Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use     Capacity    Constraints
      208‐451‐      Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.75 Per Specific Undeveloped Yes         None
      001           Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan
                    Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
                    Road Core
      208‐451‐      Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      0.75 Per Specific Vacant       Yes        None
      002           Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan
                    Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)
2                   Road Core
      208‐452‐      Intersection of Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      2.8  Per Specific Retail—      Yes        None
      005           Deerwood                    Village Center Mixed Use                 du/ac (0.40        Plan         Shopping
                    Road/Omega                                                           to 1.25 FAR)                    Center
                    Road Core
      Site #2 Total                                                                      Average 22   15.6  344 per
                                                                                         du/ac              Specific
                                                                                                            Plan
      208‐260‐      Deerwood/Old    Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      2.9  Per Specific Mini‐Storage Yes        None
      037           Crow Canyon                 Residential Overlay                      du/ac              Plan
      208‐260‐      Deerwood/Old    Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      2.5  Per Specific Warehouse Yes           None
      054           Crow Canyon                 Residential Overlay                      du/ac              Plan
3
      208‐260‐      Deerwood/Old    Crow Canyon Crow Canyon Specific Plan— Mixed Use     22 to 50      3.4  Per Specific Warehouse Yes           None
      056           Crow Canyon                 Residential Overlay                      du/ac              Plan
      Site #3 Total                                                                      Average 26.8  8.8  236 per
                                                                                         du/ac              Specific
                                                                                                            Plan
E‐6

                                                                 Housing
                                                                                                  Realistic                 Infra‐     Environ‐
                                 Planning        Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit      Existing    structure     mental
 Site     APN      Location      Subarea          Designation     Designation    Density   Acres  Capacity   Land Use     Capacity   Constraints
      208‐280‐ Ryan Industrial Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.1  16         Meeting      Yes        None
      009      Court                                                          du/ac (up to                  Facility,
                                                                              0.7 FAR)                      Business
                                                                                                            Support,
                                                                                                            Office and
                                                                                                            Commercial
                                                                                                            Services
      208‐280‐ Ryan Industrial Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.0  14         Office       Yes        None
      014      Court                                                          du/ac (up to
                                                                              0.7 FAR)
      208‐280‐ Ryan Industrial Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.9  13         Office and   Yes        None
      015      Court                                                          du/ac (up to                  Studio Use
                                                                              0.7 FAR)
4     208‐280‐ Ryan Industrial Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.3  18         Office       Yes        None
      016      Court                                                          du/ac (up to
                                                                              0.7 FAR)
      208‐280‐ Ryan Industrial Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.5  21         Residential  Yes        None
      017      Court                                                          du/ac (up to                  and
                                                                              0.7 FAR)                      Live/Work
                                                                                                            Units—
                                                                                                            Under
                                                                                                            Construction
      208‐280‐ Ryan Industrial Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.5  21         Residential  Yes        None
      018      Court                                                          du/ac (up to                  and
                                                                              0.7 FAR)                      Live/Work
                                                                                                            Units—
                                                                                                            Under
                                                                                                            Construction
                                                                                                                                               E‐7

                                                           San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                      Realistic                  Infra‐     Environ‐
                                     Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing   structure     mental
 Site      APN         Location      Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use    Capacity    Constraints
      Site #4 Total                                                                Average 14   7.3  103
                                                                                   du/ac
      218‐111‐001 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.7  Per Specific Commercial Yes         None
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
                                                                                                                  Auto Repair
      218‐111‐003 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     2.7  Per Specific Commercial Yes         None
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
                                                                                                                  School
                                                                                                                  Corporation
                                                                                                                  Yard
      218‐111‐004 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.7  Per Specific Commercial Yes         None
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
                                                                                                                  School
                                                                                                                  Corporation
5                                                                                                                 Yard
      218‐111‐008 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.0  Per Specific Commercial Yes         None
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
                                                                                                                  Carwash
      218‐111‐012 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.4  Per Specific Commercial Yes         None
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
                                                                                                                  Auto Repair
      218‐111‐013 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.2  Per Specific Undeveloped Yes        None
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      218‐111‐016 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.9  Per Specific Commercial Yes         None
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
                                                                                                                  Auto Repair
E‐8

                                                                    Housing
                                                                                                    Realistic                   Infra‐     Environ‐
                                   Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing    structure     mental
 Site    APN          Location     Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use     Capacity    Constraints
      218‐111‐018 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     2.5  Per Specific Mini‐Storage Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      218‐111‐019 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.4  Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
                                                                                                                Auto Repair
      218‐111‐020 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.0  Per Specific Retail—      Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping
                                                                                                                Center
      218‐111‐021 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.9  Per Specific Retail—      Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping
                                                                                                                Center
      218‐112‐001 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.9  Per Specific Financial    Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Services
5     218‐112‐004 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.4  Per Specific Office,      Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Commercial
                                                                                                                Service and
                                                                                                                Studio
      218‐112‐005 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     2.0  Per Specific Office,      Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Commercial
                                                                                                                Service and
                                                                                                                Studio
      218‐112‐011 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.7  Per Specific Office       Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      218‐112‐012 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     3.2  Per Specific Office       Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
                                                                                                                                                   E‐9

                                                         San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                    Realistic                 Infra‐      Environ‐
                                   Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing  structure      mental
 Site    APN          Location     Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use   Capacity     Constraints
      218‐112‐013 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     3.8  Per Specific Hotel      Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      218‐112‐014 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     2.9  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Office
                                                                                                                Supplies
      218‐102‐011 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     3.0  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping
                                                                                                                Center
      218‐102‐012 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.4  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping
                                                                                                                Center
5
      218‐102‐013 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.0  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        None
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping
                                                                                                                Center
      218‐101‐004 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     5.2  Per Specific Office     Yes        Adjacent to
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                               freeway.
                                                                                                                                      Possible noise
                                                                                                                                      and air quality
                                                                                                                                      issues.
      218‐101‐007 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.5  Per Specific Service    Yes        Adjacent to
                  Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Station               freeway.
                                                                                                                                      Possible noise
                                                                                                                                      and air quality
                                                                                                                                      issues.
E‐10

                                                                      Housing
                                                                                                      Realistic                 Infra‐      Environ‐
                                     Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing  structure      mental
 Site      APN          Location     Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use   Capacity     Constraints
      218‐101‐008 Camino           Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     7.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        Adjacent to
                    Ramon/Fostoria             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                               freeway.
                                                                                                                                        Possible noise
                                                                                                                                        and air quality
                                                                                                                                        issues.
      Site #5 Total                                                                Average 20  47.9* 149 per the
                                                                                   du/ac             Specific
                                                                                                     Plan
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     2.1  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      033           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                                  Center
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.6  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      036           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                                  Center
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.5  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      037           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                                  Center
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.9  Per Specific Office     Yes        Adjacent to
      046           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                               freeway
6
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.9  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      047           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     3.3  Per Specific Office     Yes        Adjacent to
      052           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                               freeway
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.1  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      053           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                                  Center
      213‐010‐      Camino Ramon/  Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.5  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      054           The Commons                Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                                  Center
                                                                                                                                                      E‐11

                                                     San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                Realistic                 Infra‐      Environ‐
                               Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing  structure      mental
 Site     APN      Location    Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use   Capacity    Constraints
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.3  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      055      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     3.9  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      057      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1    Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      058      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.4  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      059      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.9  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      060      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
6     213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     3.9  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      064      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.2  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      065      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.3  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      039      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.1  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      066      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
      213‐010‐ Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.8  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      067      The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                            Center
E‐12

                                                                   Housing
                                                                                                   Realistic                 Infra‐      Environ‐
                                  Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing  structure      mental
 Site     APN         Location    Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use   Capacity    Constraints
      213‐010‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.1  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      068         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                               Center
      213‐010‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.9  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      069         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                               Center
      213‐010‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.7  Per Specific Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
      070         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Shopping              arterial road
                                                                                                               Center
      213‐131‐001 Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     5.6  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
                  The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      001         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
6     213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      002         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      003         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      004         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      005         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐131‐006 Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
                  The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      007         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
                                                                                                                                                  E‐13

                                                        San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                   Realistic                 Infra‐     Environ‐
                                  Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing  structure     mental
 Site     APN         Location    Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use   Capacity    Constraints
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      008         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      009         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      010         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐011 Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
                  The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      012         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      013         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
6
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      014         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      015         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      016         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      017         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐131‐018 Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.2  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
                  The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      019         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
E‐14

                                                                   Housing
                                                                                                   Realistic                 Infra‐      Environ‐
                                  Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing  structure      mental
 Site     APN         Location    Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use   Capacity     Constraints
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      020         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      021         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.2  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      022         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      023         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      024         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      025         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
6
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      026         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      027         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      028         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.1  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      029         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐270‐    Camino Ramon/ Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     9.4  Per Specific Office     Yes        None
      030         The Commons               Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐131‐001 Camino Ramon/ Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     7.6  Per Specific Office     Yes        Adjacent to
                  The Commons   Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                               freeway
                                                                                                                                                 E‐15

                                                         San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                    Realistic                  Infra‐      Environ‐
                                   Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit        Existing  structure      mental
 Site      APN          Location   Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use    Capacity    Constraints
      213‐131‐006 Camino Ramon/  Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50    16.5  Per Specific Fitness     Yes        None
                    The Commons  Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Center
      213‐131‐007 Camino Ramon/  Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     7.4  Per Specific Light       Yes        None
                    The Commons  Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Industrial/
                                                                                                                Warehouse
      213‐131‐008 Camino Ramon/  Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     3.7  Per Specific Medical     Yes        None
6                   The Commons  Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Office
      213‐131‐009 Camino Ramon/  Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     5.8  Per Specific Light       Yes        None
                    The Commons  Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Industrial/
                                                                                                                Warehouse
                                                                                                 *
      Site #6 Total                                                              Average 20  89.1  293 per the
                                                                                 du/ac             Specific
                                                                                                   Plan
      213‐011‐002 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.7  Per Specific Parking Lot Yes        Adjacent to
                    Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                                arterial road
                    Canyon
      213‐011‐003 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50    10.7  Per Specific Office and  Yes        None
                    Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Learning
                    Canyon                                                                                      Center
7
      213‐011‐005 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.9  Per Specific Office and  Yes        Adjacent to
                    Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Financial              arterial road
                    Canyon                                                                                      Institution
      213‐011‐006 Camino         Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.6  Per Specific Parking Lot Yes        Adjacent to
                    Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                                arterial road
                    Canyon
E‐16

                                                               Housing
                                                                                               Realistic                   Infra‐     Environ‐
                              Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing    structure     mental
 Site     APN      Location   Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use     Capacity   Constraints
      213‐020‐ Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.8  Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      015      Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
               Canyon                                                                                      Building
                                                                                                           Materials
      213‐020‐ Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.7  Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      016      Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
               Canyon                                                                                      Auto Repair,
                                                                                                           Office, and
                                                                                                           Building
                                                                                                           Materials
      213‐020‐ Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.7  Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      017      Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Service—
               Canyon                                                                                      Office and
                                                                                                           Building
7                                                                                                          Materials
      213‐020‐ Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.1  Per Specific Light        Yes        None
      031      Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Industrial/
               Canyon                                                                                      Office
      213‐020‐ Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.1  Per Specific Light        Yes        None
      032      Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Industrial/
               Canyon                                                                                      Office
      213‐020‐ Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     1.2  Per Specific Light        Yes        None
      033      Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Industrial/
               Canyon                                                                                      Office
      213‐020‐ Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     0.6  Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      038      Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         —Auto
               Canyon                                                                                      Repair and
                                                                                                           Studio
                                                                                                                                             E‐17

                                                       San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                  Realistic                   Infra‐      Environ‐
                                 Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing    structure      mental
 Site     APN         Location   Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use     Capacity    Constraints
      213‐020‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      0.6 Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      039         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         —Auto
                  Canyon                                                                                      Repair and
                                                                                                              Studio
      213‐020‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      4.3 Per Specific Post Office  Yes        None
      045         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
                  Canyon
      213‐020‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      4.6 Per Specific Office and   Yes        None
      046         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Religious
                  Canyon                                                                                      Assembly
      213‐020‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      1.3 Per Specific Parking Lot Yes         Adjacent to
      053         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan                                 arterial roadway
                  Canyon
      213‐020‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      2.7 Per Specific Parking Lot Yes         None
7
      054         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
                  Canyon
      213‐020‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      3.5 Per Specific Office,      Yes        None
      056         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Warehouse,
                  Canyon                                                                                      and Storage
      213‐131‐003 Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50     11.1 Per Specific Medical      Yes        None
                  Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Office
                  Canyon
      213‐930‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      0.6 Per Specific Multi‐Family Yes        None
      001         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Residential
                  Canyon
      213‐930‐    Camino       Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      1.2 Per Specific Multi‐Family Yes        None
      002         Ramon/Norris             Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Residential
                  Canyon
E‐18

                                                                         Housing
                                                                                                         Realistic                   Infra‐      Environ‐
                                        Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable           Unit       Existing    structure      mental
 Site      APN            Location      Subarea            Designation    Designation    Density  Acres  Capacity     Land Use     Capacity     Constraints
      213‐930‐      Camino            Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      0.9 Per Specific Multi‐Family Yes        None
      003           Ramon/Norris                  Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Residential
                    Canyon
      213‐930‐      Camino            Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      0.5 Per Specific Multi‐Family Yes        None
      004           Ramon/Norris                  Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Residential
                    Canyon
7
      213‐930‐      Camino            Crow Canyon North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      1.1 Per Specific Commercial Yes          None
      005           Ramon/Norris                  Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Office
                    Canyon
      Site #7 Total                                                                   Average 20  61.8* 300 per the
                                                                                      du/ac             Specific
                                                                                                        Plan
      213‐133‐      Camino Ramon/     Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50    31.0  Per Specific Office       Yes        None
      048           Executive Parkway Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan
      213‐133‐051 Camino Ramon/       Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50    29.9  Per Specific Warehouse Yes           None
                    Executive Parkway Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         and
                                                                                                                     Undeveloped
8
      213‐133‐      Camino Ramon/     Bishop      North Camino Ramon    Mixed Use     20 to 50      2.8 Per Specific Animal       Yes        Adjacent to
      070           Executive Parkway Ranch       Specific Plan                       du/ac             Plan         Services                freeway
      Site #8 Total                                                                   Average 20  65.5* 382 per the
                                                                                      du/ac             Specific
                                                                                                        Plan
      213‐133‐      Bollinger         Bishop      City Center Mixed Use Mixed Use     up to 1.35  14.6  274          Office       Yes        None
      063           Canyon/Camino     Ranch                                           FAR
                    Ramon
9
      213‐133‐      Bollinger         Bishop      City Center Mixed Use Mixed Use     up to 1.35   11.3 213          Undeveloped Yes         None
      086           Canyon/Camino     Ranch                                           FAR
                    Ramon
                                                                                                                                                         E‐19

                                                       San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                    Realistic               Infra‐     Environ‐
                                    Planning       Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable            Unit     Existing  structure     mental
 Site      APN           Location   Subarea         Designation     Designation    Density   Acres  Capacity   Land Use   Capacity    Constraints
      Site #9 Total                                                             Average 18.8 25.9  487
                                                                                du/ac
      213‐133‐071 Bishop          Bishop     Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.3  18         Transit    Yes        None
                    Ranch/Camino  Ranch                                         du/ac (up to                  Center
                    Ramon                                                       0.7 FAR)
      213‐133‐      Bishop        Bishop     Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      3.4  48         Parking    Yes        None
      080           Ranch/Camino  Ranch                                         du/ac (up to                  Structure
                    Ramon                                                       0.7 FAR)
      213‐133‐081 Bishop          Bishop     Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      4.0  56         Office     Yes        None
                    Ranch/Camino  Ranch                                         du/ac (up to
                    Ramon                                                       0.7 FAR)
10
      213‐133‐      Bishop        Bishop     Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      6.0  84         Office     Yes        None
      082           Ranch/Camino  Ranch                                         du/ac (up to
                    Ramon                                                       0.7 FAR)
      213‐133‐      Bishop        Bishop     Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      6.3  89         Office     Yes        None
      083           Ranch/Camino  Ranch                                         du/ac (up to
                    Ramon                                                       0.7 FAR)
      213‐133‐      Bishop        Bishop     Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      3.4  48         Office     Yes        None
      084           Ranch/Camino  Ranch                                         du/ac (up to
                    Ramon                                                       0.7 FAR)
E‐20

                                                                Housing
                                                                                                  Realistic               Infra‐     Environ‐
                                Planning        Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable            Unit      Existing  structure     mental
 Site      APN       Location   Subarea          Designation     Designation    Density   Acres   Capacity   Land Use   Capacity    Constraints
      213‐133‐  Bishop        Bishop      Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      5.0  70          Parking    Yes        None
      085       Ranch/Camino  Ranch                                          du/ac (up to                   Structure
                Ramon                                                        0.7 FAR)
      Site #10                                                               Average 14   29.5  413
      Total                                                                  du/ac
      209‐030‐  Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      5.2  73          Retail—    Yes        None
      080                                                                    du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                             0.7 FAR)                       Center
      209‐030‐  Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      2.5  35          Movie      Yes        None
      093                                                                    du/ac (up to                   Theater
                                                                             0.7 FAR)
      209‐030‐  Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      3.7  52          Office and Yes        None
      096                                                                    du/ac (up to                   Retail—
                                                                             0.7 FAR)                       Shopping
                                                                                                            Center
       209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.5  7           Retail—    Yes        None
11
      001                                                                    du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                             0.7 FAR)                       Center
       209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.4  6           Retail—    Yes        None
      002                                                                    du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                             0.7 FAR)                       Center
       209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.8  11          Retail—    Yes        None
      003                                                                    du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                             0.7 FAR)                       Center
       209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.0  14          Retail—    Yes        None
      004                                                                    du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                             0.7 FAR)                       Center
                                                                                                                                            E‐21

                                                      San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                   Realistic               Infra‐      Environ‐
                                 Planning         Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable            Unit     Existing  structure      mental
  Site      APN       Location   Subarea           Designation     Designation    Density   Acres  Capacity   Land Use   Capacity    Constraints
        209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use             Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.6  22         Retail—    Yes        None
       011                                                                     du/ac (up to                  Shopping
                                                                               0.7 FAR)                      Center
        209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use             Mixed Use     14 to 30      2.4  33         Retail—    Yes        None
       012                                                                     du/ac (up to                  Shopping
                                                                               0.7 FAR)                      Center
        209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use             Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.4  19         Retail—    Yes        None
11     013                                                                     du/ac (up to                  Shopping
                                                                               0.7 FAR)                      Center
        209‐780‐ Diablo Plaza  Crow Canyon Mixed Use             Mixed Use     14 to 30      3.6  50         Retail—    Yes        None
       014                                                                     du/ac (up to                  Shopping
                                                                               0.7 FAR)                      Center
       Site # 11                                                               Average 14   23.1  324
       Total                                                                   du/ac
       213‐133‐  Bishop Ranch  Bishop       Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30     10.6  149        Retail—    Yes        None
       074       Plaza         Ranch                                           du/ac (up to                  Shopping
                                                                               0.7 FAR)                      Center
       213‐133‐  Bishop Ranch  Bishop       Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      9.2  129        Retail—    Yes        None
12     088       Plaza         Ranch                                           du/ac (up to                  Shopping
                                                                               0.7 FAR)                      Center
       Site #12                                                                Average 14   19.8  278
       Total                                                                   du/ac
       213‐701‐  Marketplace   Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30     12.4  171        Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
 13    002                     Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                  Shopping              arterial road
                                                                               0.7 FAR)                      Center
E‐22

                                                              Housing
                                                                                                Realistic                Infra‐      Environ‐
                            Planning          Current Zoning  General Plan   Allowable            Unit      Existing   structure      mental
Site      APN     Location   Subarea           Designation     Designation    Density   Acres   Capacity   Land Use    Capacity    Constraints
     213‐701‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.7  9           Library     Yes        Adjacent to
     003                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                                          arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)
     213‐701‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      3.6  48          Retail—     Yes        Adjacent to
     004                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                   Shopping               arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)                       Center
     213‐702‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      2.8  38          Hotel       Yes        Adjacent to
     002                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                                          arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)
     213‐702‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1    13          Gas Station Yes        Adjacent to
     003                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                                          arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)
     213‐702‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.1  14          Office      Yes        Adjacent to
13   004                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                                          arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)
     213‐702‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      1    13          Preschool   Yes        Adjacent to
     006                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                                          arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)
     213‐702‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      4    56          Retail—     Yes        Adjacent to
     007                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                   Shopping               arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)                       Center
     213‐702‐ Marketplace  Southern San Mixed Use            Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.2  2           Retail—     Yes        Adjacent to
     008                   Ramon                                           du/ac (up to                   Shopping               arterial road
                                                                           0.7 FAR)                       Center
     Site #13                                                              Average 14   26    364
     Total                                                                 du/ac
                                                                                                                                              E‐23

                                                          San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                            Realistic               Infra‐      Environ‐
                                    Planning          Current Zoning      General Plan   Allowable            Unit      Existing  structure      mental
 Site      APN          Location     Subarea           Designation         Designation    Density   Acres   Capacity   Land Use   Capacity    Constraints
      210‐520‐    Country Club     Southern San Mixed Use                Mixed Use     14 to 30      2.5  35          Retail—    Yes        None
      051         Village          Ramon                                               du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                                       0.7 FAR)                       Center
      210‐520‐    Country Club     Southern San Mixed Use                Mixed Use     14 to 30      4.9  68          Retail—    Yes        None
      052         Village          Ramon                                               du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                                       0.7 FAR)                       Center
      210‐520‐    Country Club     Southern San Mixed Use                Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.7  10          Retail—    Yes        None
      053         Village          Ramon                                               du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                                       0.7 FAR)                       Center
      210‐520‐    Country Club     Southern San Mixed Use                Mixed Use     14 to 30      1.22 17          Retail—    Yes        None
14    054         Village          Ramon                                               du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                                       0.7 FAR)                       Center
      210‐520‐    Country Club     Southern San Mixed Use                Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.7  10          Retail—    Yes        None
      055         Village          Ramon                                               du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                                       0.7 FAR)                       Center
      210‐520‐    Country Club     Southern San Mixed Use                Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.8  10          Retail—    Yes        None
      056         Village          Ramon                                               du/ac (up to                   Shopping
                                                                                       0.7 FAR)                       Center
      Site #14                                                                         Average 14   10.7  150
      Total                                                                            du/ac
      211‐040‐015 Gateway          Westside     Mixed Use                Mixed Use     14 to 30     12.8  180         Retail—    Yes        Adjacent to
                                                                                       du/ac (up to                   Shopping              arterial road
15                                                                                     0.7 FAR)                       Center
      Site #15                                                                         Average 14   12.8  150
      Total                                                                            du/ac
      210‐260‐    Alcosta/Fircrest Southern San Mixed Use/Senior Housing Mixed Use     14 to 30      0.8  11          Office     Yes        Limited to senior
16    054                          Ramon                                               du/ac (up to                                         housing
                                                                                       0.7 FAR)
E‐24

                                                                          Housing
                                                                                                               Realistic                Infra‐         Environ‐
                                 Planning           Current Zoning        General Plan     Allowable             Unit       Existing  structure         mental
 Site      APN      Location      Subarea             Designation           Designation     Density    Acres   Capacity   Land Use    Capacity      Constraints
      210‐260‐ Alcosta/Fircrest Southern San Mixed Use/Senior Housing    Mixed Use       14 to 30       0.6  8           Office      Yes          Limited to senior
      055                       Ramon                                                    du/ac (up to                                             housing
                                                                                         0.7 FAR)
      210‐260‐ Alcosta/Fircrest Southern San Mixed Use/Senior Housing    Mixed Use       14 to 30       0.4  6           Office      Yes          Limited to senior
      056                       Ramon                                                    du/ac (up to                                             housing
                                                                                         0.7 FAR)
      210‐260‐ Alcosta/Fircrest Southern San Mixed Use/Senior Housing    Mixed Use       14 to 30       1    14          Office      Yes          Limited to senior
16
      057                       Ramon                                                    du/ac (up to                                             housing
                                                                                         0.7 FAR)
      210‐260‐ Alcosta/Fircrest Southern San Mixed Use/Senior Housing    Mixed Use       14 to 30       0.9  13          Undeveloped Yes          Limited to senior
      058                       Ramon                                                    du/ac (up to                                             housing
                                                                                         0.7 FAR)
      Site #16                                                                           Average 14     3.7  52
      Total                                                                              du/ac
      210‐520‐ Alcosta/Kimball  Southern San Multiple Family ‐ Very High Multi‐Family VH 30 to 50       1.4  63          Retail—     Yes          Corner lot
      031                       Ramon        Density                                     du/ac                           Floral Shop
                                                                                                                         and
17                                                                                                                       Vacant—
                                                                                                                         First
                                                                                                                         Interstate
                                                                                                                         Bank
      211‐040‐ Laborer's        Westside     Westside Specific Plan      Hillside        up to 2 du/ac  7.6  6           Open        None, but    Over 500'
      030                                                                Residential                                     Space/      within Urban Elevation,
18
                                                                                                                         Agriculture Growth       Hillside
                                                                                                                                     Boundary
      211‐040‐ Laborer's        Westside     Westside Specific Plan      Single Family ‐ 3 to 6 du/ac   2.7  15          Open        None, but    Over 500'
      030                                                                Low Med                                         Space/      within Urban Elevation
19
                                                                                                                         Agriculture Growth
                                                                                                                                     Boundary
                                                                                                                                                              E‐25

                                                      San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                           Realistic                  Infra‐         Environ‐
                                   Planning       Current Zoning     General Plan       Allowable             Unit       Existing   structure         mental
 Site      APN         Location     Subarea        Designation         Designation       Density    Acres  Capacity     Land Use    Capacity      Constraints
      208‐240‐    Chu Residential Bollinger Northwest Specific Plan Hillside          up to 2 du/ac 16    43 per       Open        Condition of Over 500'
      039                         Canyon                            Residential                           Specific     Space/      map          Elevation,
20
                                                                                                          Plan         Agriculture approval     Hillside, Creeks,
                                                                                                                                                Sensitive Habitat
      Various     Faria           Bollinger Northwest Specific Plan Multi‐Family High 14 to 50            Per Specific Open        Yes,         Over 500'
      APNs                        Canyon                            and Very High     du/ac               Plan         Space/      Condition of Elevation,
                                                                                                                       Agriculture map          Hillside, Creeks,
21                                                                                                                                 approval     Sensitive Habitat
      Site #21                                                                        Average 23.9  17    406 per
      Total                                                                           du/ac               Specific
                                                                                                          Plan
      Various     Faria           Bollinger Northwest Specific Plan Hillside          up to 2 du/ac       Per Specific Open        Yes,         Over 500'
      APNs                        Canyon                            Residential                           Plan         Space/      Condition of Elevation,
                                                                                                                       Agriculture map          Hillside, Creeks,
22                                                                                                                                 approval     Sensitive Habitat
      Site #22                                                                        Average 5.4   22.3  121 per
      Total                                                                           du/ac               Specific
                                                                                                          Plan
      Various     Faria           Bollinger Northwest Specific Plan Medium Density 6 to 14 du/ac          Per Specific Open        Yes,         Over 500'
      APNs                        Canyon                                                                  Plan         Space/      Condition of Elevation,
                                                                                                                       Agriculture map          Hillside, Creeks,
23                                                                                                                                 approval     Sensitive Habitat
      Site #23                                                                        Average 9.2   23.2  213 per
      Total                                                                           du/ac               Specific
                                                                                                          Plan
      211‐010‐032 Geldermann      Westside  Westside Specific Plan  Hillside          up to 2 du/ac 36    23           Open        None, but    Over 500'
                                                                    Residential                                        Space/      within Urban Elevation,
24
                                                                                                                       Agriculture Growth       Hillside, Creeks,
                                                                                                                                   Boundary     Sensitive Habitat
E‐26

                                                                                Housing
                                                                                                                        Realistic                 Infra‐         Environ‐
                                        Planning       Current Zoning           General Plan    Allowable                 Unit      Existing    structure         mental
 Site      APN           Location        Subarea         Designation              Designation    Density      Acres     Capacity   Land Use     Capacity      Constraints
      211‐010‐034 Geldermann           Westside  Westside Specific Plan        Hillside       up to 2 du/ac   26       16         Open         None, but    Over 500'
                                                                               Residential                                        Space/       within Urban Elevation,
                                                                                                                                  Agriculture  Growth       Hillside, Creeks,
                                                                                                                                               Boundary     Sensitive Habitat
      211‐010‐035 Geldermann           Westside  Westside Specific Plan        Hillside       up to 2 du/ac   20       13         Open         None, but    Over 500'
                                                                               Residential                                        Space/       within Urban Elevation,
                                                                                                                                  Agriculture  Growth       Hillside, Creeks,
24                                                                                                                                             Boundary     Sensitive Habitat
      211‐020‐016 Geldermann           Westside  Westside Specific Plan        Hillside       up to 2 du/ac   23       14         Open         None, but    Over 500'
                                                                               Residential                                        Space/       within Urban Elevation,
                                                                                                                                  Agriculture  Growth       Hillside, Creeks,
                                                                                                                                               Boundary     Sensitive Habitat
      Site #24                                                                                Average 0.6    105       66
      Total                                                                                   du/ac
      Various        Central Bollinger Bollinger (Pre) Agricultural and Rural  Rural          up to 2 du/ac  184.6     37         Rural        None and     Over 500'
      APNs (79       Canyon            Canyon    Residential in a Resource     Conservation                 (develop‐             Residential, outside      Elevation,
      parcels along                              Conservation Overlay District                              able area)            Open         Urban        Hillside, Creeks,
      Bollinger                                                                                                                   Space/       Growth       Sensitive
      Canyon                                                                                                                      Agriculture, Boundary     Habitat,
25    Road within                                                                                                                 and Parks                 Williamson Act
      Sphere of                                                                                                                   and                       on some
      Influence, but                                                                                                              Recreation
      outside urban
      growth
      boundary
                                                                                                                                                                        E‐27

                                                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                                                                                                            Realistic                 Infra‐       Environ‐
                                        Planning          Current Zoning           General Plan       Allowable               Unit      Existing    structure       mental
  Site     APN          Location        Subarea             Designation            Designation          Density     Acres   Capacity   Land Use     Capacity    Constraints
       Various     Dougherty Valley   Dougherty     Dougherty Valley Specific    Single Family     Average 6       125    1,569 per   Vacant,      Yes        Over 500'
       APNs                           Valley        Plan                         Low Medium and du/ac                     Specific    Single                  Elevation,
                                                                                 Medium Density                           Plan        Family Low              Hillside, Creeks,
                                                                                                                                      Medium                  Sensitive Habitat
26                                                                                                                                    Density
                                                                                                                                      Residential,
                                                                                                                                      and Medium
                                                                                                                                      Density
                                                                                                                                      Residential
       Various     Dougherty Valley   Dougherty     Dougherty Valley Specific    Mixed Use         Average 16.3     27.5  449 per     Vacant,      Yes        Over 500'
       APNs                           Valley        Plan                                           du/ac                  Specific    Mixed Use,              Elevation,
27
                                                                                                                          Plan        and                     Hillside, Creeks,
                                                                                                                                      Commercial              Sensitive Habitat
                                                                                       Total               997 acres                           7,198 units
 Note:
 * Acreage of HOS parcels may not add to total HOS acreage due to rounding of acreage to nearest tenth.
E‐28

                                            Housing
DETAILED INFORMATION ON OPPORTUNITY SITES’ EXISTING USES
Non‐Vacant Sites
Site 1: All 13 parcels that make up Site 1 are located in the Crow Canyon Specific Plan Area
(2006). An extensive analysis of the opportunities within the Crow Canyon Specific Plan
area was published in an “Existing Conditions and Constraints” Report (2003) for the
Specific Plan. In the Report, it details what the redevelopment potential of Site 1 is and
how/why residential would be viable on the site. For more information on the residential
opportunities for this site, refer to the Report. Parcel 208‐250‐041 is the site of an indoor
roller‐skating rink which was constructed in 1976. The current property owner is interested in
redevelopment of the site and has met with the City to discuss the potential for a residential
use. The owner believes that due to the proximity to the recently approved Northwest Specific
Plan, a residential use on the parcel would make a good transition between the two Specific
Plan areas. Parcel 208‐250‐058 is the site of an auto repair business whose building was
constructed in 1994, but has a 13% lot coverage. Parcel 208‐250‐060, ‐061, & ‐062 are all
under the same property ownership. The buildings on parcels 208‐250‐060 & ‐061 were
constructed in 1996 and are used for self‐storage businesses. Parcel ‐062, which was built
in 1980, fronts San Ramon Valley Boulevard and is used as a religious assembly facility. The
buildings at parcel 208‐250‐073 & ‐083 were constructed in 1982/1983 with a variety of
office and warehouse businesses. Approximately 0.7 acre of the site is undeveloped. Parcel
208‐250‐086 is a mini‐storage business whose buildings were constructed in 1999. Parcel
208‐250‐087 is the site is an auto repair business and was constructed in 1997. Parcel
208‐250‐088 was redeveloped in 2008 and is the office location of a construction
contractor business. Parcel 208‐260‐055 was redeveloped in 2000 as a mini‐storage
business. The buildings on parcels 208‐660‐001 & ‐007 were constructed in 1985 and are
used as office buildings. According to some economic development specialists, most
strip/small‐scale commercial uses have a life span of 15‐20 years.
Site 2: All 14 parcels that make up this site are located in the Crow Canyon Specific Plan
Area (2006). An extensive analysis of the opportunities within the Crow Canyon Specific
Plan area was published in an “Existing Conditions and Constraints” Report (2003) for the
Specific Plan. In the Report, it details what the redevelopment potential of Site 2 is and
how/why residential would be viable on the site. For more information on the residential
opportunities for this site, refer to the Report. Parcels 208‐260‐036 & ‐052 are the
locations of an outdoor landscape contractor’s supply center. The building was constructed in
1961, but the current property owners do not foresee relocating in the new future. The
building at parcel 208‐260‐053 was built in 1960 and is used as an auto‐repair shop. The
parcel is landlocked by the landscape contractor’s supply center and would be difficult to
redevelopment without the support of the adjacent owner. Parcel 208‐260‐056 was
originally built in the early 1960s and is currently used for warehouse and light industrial
businesses. The corner portion of this parcel fronts the core area of the Crow Canyon
Specific Plan and is underutilized. Through a meeting with the current property owner, they
have expressed an interest in its redevelopment. Parcel 208‐271‐003 is the location of an
old produce stand that does not have a permanent structure on‐site. The produce stand has
expanded over the years and can serve as an amenity to future residential development.
Entitlements for parcels 208‐271‐018 & ‐019 have been approved recently for a
restaurant/office use. The phasing‐in of this mix of land uses along with the redevelopment
of parcels 208‐271‐003, ‐025, & ‐041 has generated interest in redevelopment of the
                                                                                          E‐29

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
surrounding underdeveloped parcels. The building on parcel 208‐271‐021 was originally
constructed in 1980 and was a recently remodeled for a religious assembly use. Parking
requirements currently limit the site’s ability to be utilized for intensive commercial uses. The
building at parcel 208‐271‐022 was built in 1980 and is owned by a religious assembly
group. The building is used for office and religious assembly purposes. The property owners
have met with the City and expressed their willingness to redevelop the site so long as their
meeting facility could be accommodated. The building at parcel 208‐271‐041 was
constructed in 1957 and has been vacant on and off for the past several years. The site’s
current lot coverage is 5%. A restaurant currently operates within the building, but the site is
underutilized with a large paved area. The property owner has enlisted the help of several
developers to prepare plans to redevelop the site. A concept review for a mixed use
development on this parcel with 175 multi‐family residential units was presented to the
Planning Commission in 2014. Parcels 208‐451‐001 & ‐002 are vacant/undeveloped
parcels that were owned by the City of San Ramon’s Redevelopment Agency until the
dissolution of the Agency in 2012. The properties were purchased as “catalyst sites” for spur
the implementation of the Crow Canyon Specific Plan. The properties are currently influx
waiting for a determination by the Successor Agency on the future ownership of the parcels.
Three buildings make up the San Ramon Square Shopping Center at parcel 208‐452‐005
which was constructed in 1980. Through the development of the Crow Canyon Specific Plan,
the owners met with the City and are interested in redevelopment.
Site 3: An extensive analysis of the opportunities within the Crow Canyon Specific Plan area
was published in an “Existing Conditions and Constraints” Report (2003) for the Specific
Plan. In the Report, it details what the redevelopment potential of site number 3 is and
how/why residential would be viable on the site. For more information on the residential
opportunities for this site, refer to the Report. Mini‐storage was originally constructed on
parcel 208‐260‐037 in 2002. No changes anticipated for this location at this time. Parcels
208‐260‐054 & portions of ‐056 were originally built in the early 1960s and are currently
used for warehouse and light industrial businesses. The parcels are underutilized and through
a meeting with the current property owner, they have expressed an interest in its
redevelopment. The Crow Canyon Specific Plan, which was adopted in 2006, would allow for
the development of residential units within this area. The two parcels are called out in the
Specific Plan as the core area for redevelopment and residential use.
Site 4: The six parcels on Ryan Industrial Court were built in the 1970s and early 1980s. The
parcels are home to primarily professional office, meeting facilities, and studios uses. In
2014, two of the six parcels were entitled for 48 for‐sale townhomes and live/work units.
The site borders the Crow Canyon Specific Plan Area on the east and is surrounded on the
north and west by high‐density residential and mixed‐uses. These properties would work well
as a transitional property between existing uses and the Crow Canyon Specific Plan Area.
The parcels are zoned Mixed‐Use to facilitate residential development.
Site 5: All parcels are located within the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan Area which is
designated a Priority Development Area by the Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG). The North Camino Ramon Specific Plan was completed in 2012 and encourages a
combination of retail and residential development within the area. Parcel 218‐111‐001 was
originally constructed in the 1950s was a variety of independent auto repair‐related
businesses. Parcels 218‐111‐003 & ‐004 are owned by the San Ramon Valley Unified
E‐30

                                            Housing
School District and serves as the District’s Corporation Yard. The buildings were constructed
in the early 1960s. The “Venture School” vacated a portion of the building in 2007. In
meetings with the District, they have expressed interest in relocating the Corporation Yard,
but must find a new location within the district for this use. Parcels 218‐111‐008, ‐012, ‐013,
‐016, ‐018 & ‐019 are within the “Trident Plaza” Center. The Center is primarily an auto‐
service center and is subdivided into 7 parcels with 5 individual property owners. The building
at parcel 218‐111‐018 was built in 1970 while the remaining buildings were constructed in the
mid‐1990s. The property borders an existing high‐density residential development to the
north, and a 34‐unit Iron Horse Crossing condominium complex across from the Center in
the Town of Danville. Recent residential construction in the neighborhood and direct frontage
to an arterial road makes this site highly viable for redevelopment. Parcels in the Magnolia
Square Shopping Center and the retail, office, and financial institution buildings fronting Crow
Canyon Road (parcels 218‐111‐020, ‐021, 218‐112‐001, ‐004, ‐005, ‐011 to ‐014, 218‐
102‐011 to ‐013) were built in the early 1980s to 1990s and represent an opportunity for infill
development to accommodate residential development close to transit and shopping
opportunities. Property owners were contacted during the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan
process and were open to the rezoning of their parcels to accommodate mixed use. Parcels
218‐101‐004, ‐007, and ‐008 are adjacent to the freeway with existing office buildings on
site, but have large surface parking lots that are underutilized.
Site 6: All parcels are located within the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan Area which is
designated a Priority Development Area by the Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG). The North Camino Ramon Specific Plan was completed in 2012 and encourages a
combination of retail and residential development within the area. The office buildings on
parcels 213‐010‐046, ‐047, 059 and ‐060 are all owned under the same ownership group
and built in the early 1980s. A number of vacancies in the building have led to inquiries
related to the redevelopment of the sites. The buildings on parcels 213‐010‐033, ‐036, ‐
037, ‐054, ‐055, ‐057, ‐058, ‐064, and ‐065 were all constructed in the 1980s with
underutilized surface parking and contains a variety of restaurants and an anchor grocery
store. The site is situated along Crow Canyon Road and Camino Ramon and has visibility
along I‐680. Parcels 213‐010‐039 and 213‐010‐066 to ‐070 are under the same
ownership within the Crow Canyon Commons Shopping Center. The single‐story buildings
were built between 1980 and 1981, with the exception of parcel 213‐010‐039 which was
redeveloped in 2007. The parcels are occupied by small stand‐alone buildings that include
restaurants and savings & loans businesses. A new traffic signal leading into this
development was constructed in 2007 to accommodate the potential for additional traffic
circulation into the Center. The current investors of the Shopping Center acquired the
buildings in late 2005 and since acquired parcels ‐039 and ‐066. The City has discussed
with the owner, a premier retail and mixed‐use developer, the site’s redevelopment
opportunities. While the owner has no immediate plans at the present to redevelop the site,
they are open to the possibilities that could accompany the development of the approved City
Center project. Parcels 213‐270‐001 through ‐030 are condominium office buildings under
multiple ownerships; assembly of the parcels may be difficult, however, roadway network
improvements through these parcels can facilitate mixed used development surrounding these
parcels. Parcels 213‐131‐006, ‐007, and ‐009 currently contain light industrial and fitness
centers in large warehouse buildings built in the 1980s and early 1990s. Property owners
were contacted during the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan process and were open to the
rezoning of their parcels to accommodate mixed use.
                                                                                             E‐31

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
Site 7: All parcels are located within the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan Area which is
designated a Priority Development Area by the Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG). The North Camino Ramon Specific Plan was completed in 2012 and encourages a
combination of retail and residential development within the area. The buildings on parcel
213‐131‐003 were built in 1981/1982 within the Bishop Ranch Business Park with primarily
professional medical office uses. Current lot coverage is 30%. Location is at the corner of
Camino Ramon and Norris Canyon Road and borders the Iron Horse Regional Trail. During
the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan process, the City met with the Business Park property
owner. They are supportive of the Plan’s mixed use principles and its redevelopment
opportunities within the Business Park, including this site. Parcels 213‐011‐002 and ‐003 is
the site of the PG&E Learning Center and serves as a training center for PG&E employees
and already includes accommodations for overnight stays and on‐site meal service. There are
large portions of the parking lot that is underutilized. Parcels 213‐011‐005 and ‐006 contain
an office building with surface parking at the corner of a major arterial road. Redevelopment
on a portion of the parcels may be possible due to the proximity to services and amenities on
Crow Canyon Road. In 2011, the Park Central (aka St. James Mixed Use Development) was
approved for 116 ownership residential condominiums and a commercial building as part of
their mixed use development. The site was formerly used as a cement plant and was
subdivided into parcel 213‐930‐001 to ‐005. With this recent residential development built at
a density of 22 du per acre, it has the potential to spur higher density residential development
in this area. Parcels along Alcosta Boulevard (213‐020‐031 to ‐033, ‐038, ‐039, ‐045, ‐
046, ‐053, and ‐054) were built in the late 1970s/early 1980s and have a mix of uses with
ongoing vacancies through the light industrial buildings. The two office buildings closer to
Crow Canyon Road have large, surface parking lots that is lower than the arterial roadway
which provides a buffer for potential mixed use development. Property owners were contacted
during the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan process and were open to the rezoning of their
parcels to accommodate mixed use.
Site 8: All parcels are located within the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan Area which is
designated a Priority Development Area by the Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG). The North Camino Ramon Plan was completed in 2012 and encourages a
combination of retail and residential development within the area. Parcel 213‐133‐051
include an auto parts warehouse building and an undeveloped, vacant parcel with frontage
along Norris Canyon Road; adjacent to existing office and light industrial uses. The building
utilizes just 19% of the 29.9 acre parcel. Parcel 213‐133‐048 contains three office buildings
built in the mid‐1980s. During the North Camino Ramon Specific Plan process, the City met
with the Business Park property owner in which the buildings are located. They are
supportive of the Plan’s mixed use principles and its redevelopment opportunities within the
Business Park. A veterinary service is located on parcel 213‐133‐070, which is adjacent to
the freeway, but can provide services that are necessary to those that live in mixed use zone.
Site 9: This site is in the City Center Priority Development Area as designated by the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) and is the location of the approved City
Center project which is partially undeveloped but has four existing professional office
buildings which were built in 1983. The project would demolish the existing structures and
replace with a variety of retail, office and a 487‐unit multi‐family housing development.
E‐32

                                             Housing
Site 10: This site is in the City Center Priority Development Area as designated by the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) and within the Bishop Ranch Business Park.
Parcel 213‐133‐071 is owned by the City and is the location of the Bishop Ranch Transit
Center. The City is currently working on relocating the Transit Center within the North Camino
Ramon Plan Area, allowing an opportunity to redevelop the property. Parcels 213‐133‐080
and ‐085 are parking structures that serve the Bishop Ranch Business Park. Parcels 213‐
133‐081 through ‐084 are office buildings that were constructed in the late 1990s with
surface parking fronting Camino Ramon that has potential for infill.
Site 11: Parcels 209‐030‐080, 209‐780‐001, ‐002, ‐003, ‐004, ‐011, ‐012, ‐013, & ‐014
make up the Diablo Plaza Shopping Center which was constructed in the mid‐1980s at the
major intersection of Crow Canyon Road and San Ramon Valley Boulevard. There are a
number of vacant storefronts. Additionally, the Center provides in‐fill development
opportunities on its underutilized surface parking area. Parcel 209‐030‐093 is the location of
the Crow Canyon Cinema movie theater and was constructed in 1985. Parcel 209‐030‐096
was developed in 1990 and has a variety of ground level restaurants/services, and second
floor office businesses. The site presents infill opportunities based on its proximity to Crow
Canyon Road and San Ramon Valley Boulevard and its compatibility to the adjacent
apartment complex and neighborhood‐serving businesses.
Site 12: This site is in the City Center Priority Development Area as designated by the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). Parcel 213‐133‐074 is the location of the
Shops at Bishop Ranch Shopping Center with a 24% lot coverage which was originally
constructed in 2001 and is anchored by a grocery store. Parcel 213‐133‐088 is home to a
major retail store which was built in 1987 with a 31% lot coverage. A developer met with the
City to discuss a development proposal within the reciprocal parking lot area between the two
parcels which would be required to include a residential component due to the mixed‐use
zoning designation of the property. This site is adjacent to Bollinger Canyon Road and I‐680
and is within walking distance to neighborhood‐serving businesses, a business park, and
transit center. While this opportunity site is not a required site to meet the City’s RHNA
obligation, the site’s location adjacent to the approved City Center project creates a potential
for it to be redeveloped into a transit‐oriented development that would include housing.
Site 13: This site is in the City Center Priority Development Area as designated by the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). This site is comprised of nine parcels under
the ownership of eight individual property owners. Parcel 213‐701‐002 & 213‐701‐004
make up the Marketplace Shopping Center which was built in 1988 with a 23% lot coverage.
The Center is anchored by a grocery store and a variety of restaurant businesses. Parcel
213‐701‐003 is a library site owned by the City of San Ramon. Parcels 213‐703‐002, ‐
003, ‐004, ‐006, ‐007, & ‐008 were all built in the late 1980s/early 1990s and make up
another shopping complex. The Complex has an approximately 32% lot coverage and is
made up of a retail hardware store, an extended stay hotel, gas station, professional offices
and personal services businesses. A major tenant in the complex is considering relocating.
The site is adjacent to the Iron Horse Regional Trail, Bollinger Canyon Road, and the
approved City Center Mixed Use Project. Since the rezone of the site from a commercial to a
mixed use zone in August 2006, the City has met with at least one of the site’s property
management companies to discuss additional development opportunities. The company
recognized that the City Center project would be the impetus for redevelopment of the
                                                                                           E‐33

                                San Ramon General Plan 2035
neighborhood and would be interested in working with the City on future mixed‐use
development opportunities.
Site 14: This site is located along Alcosta Boulevard and the Iron Horse Regional Trail and is
comprised of six parcels that make up the Country Club Village Shopping Center. The Center
was originally developed in 1995 with excess and underutilized surface parking. Lot coverage
is approximately 24%. In recent years, there have been a number of leased spaces with a
high turnover rate, signaling a potential for redevelopment opportunities. In 2008, the major
grocery anchor of the Center closed down, leaving a 50,000 sq. ft. vacant space available
for several months. The City met with the property management company to discuss use and
development options including the possibilities of adding a residential component to the site.
Since that meeting, the grocery space has been subleased to a different grocer. While this
opportunity site is not a required site to meet the City’s RHNA obligation, adding residential
units to the Center would bring greater viability to the businesses on site.
Site 15: The site in the Westside Specific Plan area and is the location of the Gateway
Shopping Center. The Center was constructed in 1995 with underutilized surface parking. Lot
coverage is approximately 24% and is located along San Ramon Valley Boulevard with
visibility along I‐680. It is anticipated that the Westside Specific Plan will be updated in the
near future to further facilitate residential development in and around this opportunity site. The
redevelopment of a commercial shopping center across the street into a mixed‐use project
which included a townhome component is likely to spur further interest in neighborhood
redevelopment. While this opportunity site is not a required site to meet the City’s RHNA
obligation, adding residential units to the Center would bring greater viability to the
businesses on site.
Site 16: The site is comprised of five parcels—four office buildings on four of the parcels and
one parcel that is undeveloped and was rezoned in 2006 from limited office to mixed‐use
with a senior housing overlay. The buildings were built in the early 1970s and are currently
used as a mixture of professional offices and learning studios. The site is located along
Alcosta Boulevard and is adjacent to the Sunny Glen Senior Community area. The site is
within walking distance to neighborhood‐serving businesses, bus transit, and senior center. A
residential land developer recently acquired one of the five parcels for a senior housing
development project.
Site 17: The property has one existing building on two parcels—one parcel is vacant and one
has a 300 sq.‐ft. building used as a floral shop. Since rezoning of the property in August
2006 to Very High Density Residential, the property was purchased by a local residential
housing developer and subsequently purchased by the City’s Redevelopment Agency. Due to
the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, the property is currently influx waiting for a
determination by the Successor Agency. The property is located adjacent to neighborhood‐
serving businesses, bus service, and Interstate 680. An intensive residential development
would fit in appropriately with the bordering medium‐ and high‐density residential complexes.
Vacant Sites
Site 18: The site is undeveloped, vacant land within the City’s Westside Specific Plan area.
The City re‐designated these properties to a “Hillside Residential” land use in 2002 at the
request of the property owner and has since met with them to discuss their development
E‐34

                                            Housing
plans. A residential development application was filed in 2011 called the Iron Gate Ranch,
however due to the downturn in the economy, the application was withdrawn.
Site 19: The site is undeveloped, vacant land within the City’s Westside Specific Plan area
and is designated a “Single‐Family—Low/Medium Density” land use. The City met with the
property owners to discuss their residential development plans. A residential development
application was filed in 2011 called the Iron Gate Ranch, however due to the downturn in the
economy, the application was withdrawn.
Site 20: The Chu property is within the Northwest Specific Plan which was approved in 2006.
Based on the plan, the undeveloped, vacant site could accommodate 43 units.
Sites 21, 22, and 23: The Faria Preserve Development within the Northwest Specific Plan
was approved in 2006 for the development of 786 dwelling units on undeveloped, vacant
farmland. In 2014, a development plan amendment was approved by the City for 740 units,
with 28% of the units dedicated for affordable households. In 2016, the voter‐sponsored
“Faria Preserve Development Reduction, Open Space Protection, and Workforce Housing
Endowment Initiative” (“Initiative”) was adopted to allow a reduction in the overall density and
maximum number of dwelling units in the Faria Preserve from 740 to 618 by reducing the
maximum number of dwelling units within Neighborhood V from 302 to 180 (with a maximum
density of 18 units per acre). This reduction in residential development density would be
accomplished by (1) changing the housing type within Neighborhood V from higher density
rental units to lower density, for‐sale attached, units; and (2) instead of constructing
affordable housing on‐site, allowing the developer to contribute into a workforce housing
endowment fund for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing in San Ramon.
This reduction in density and unit count in the NWSP such that the total unit count within
Neighborhood V decreases from 302 apartment units to a maximum of 180 market‐rate,
age‐targeted, for‐sale units would be allowed to occur so long as the developer elects to
contribute into a fund established by the City for the purpose of facilitating affordable housing,
instead of constructing affordable housing on‐site. Specifically, the developer would pay a
fee to the City in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) per unit developed within
Neighborhood V. The maximum amount of this fee for the developer of Neighborhood V is
Nine Million Dollars ($9M) (180 units x $50,000). The fee shall be paid on a pro rata basis
over the number of market‐rate for‐sale units built within Neighborhood V, and the payments
shall commence no sooner than the date of the first close of escrow of each market‐rate for‐
sale residential unit within Neighborhood V.
The City may use the above‐referenced funds, in its discretion, to fund a variety of programs
intended to facilitate affordable housing. By way of example only, these programs could
include, among others, partnering with non‐profit developers to transfer and/or construct
deed‐restricted affordable units; purchase and rehabilitation of existing developments for
deed‐restricted affordable housing; preservation and replacement options to preserve existing
affordable housing stock; purchasing affordability covenants; and/or providing financial
support for rental subsidies, down payment assistance, and housing rehabilitation loan
services and grant program for eligible households. The foregoing list of potential measures is
intended to be illustrative only, and is not intended to constrain the City’s discretion in
                                                                                              E‐35

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
determining the appropriate way to allocate this funding so long as such funding is used for
the purpose of facilitating affordable housing.
Site 24: Four parcels make up the Geldermann site (site no. 24), all of which is currently
undeveloped, vacant land within the City’s Westside Specific Plan area. The City re‐
designated these properties to a “Hillside Residential” land use in 2002 at the request of the
property owner and has since met with them to discuss their residential development plans.
Site 25: Site encompasses approximately 79 rural parcels of low‐intensity uses that border
Bollinger Canyon Road north of the current City limit line.
Sites 26 and 27: The Dougherty Valley area was originally used as agricultural/vacant
farmland prior to the approval of the Dougherty Valley Specific Plan in the early 1990s. Of
the total 11,000 units approved for the project, approximately 2,000 units remain to be built,
all of which is vacant.
E‐36

                                                  12
          Air QualiQ              ty an d Greeenho                        ouse G        Gas
The Air
      A Quality anda Greenho     ouse Gas Element
                                            E           is a newer com    mponent of th he General Plan.
The City
      C of San Ramon
                  R         recoggnizes that this region coontinues to eexperience p   poor air quality on
too many
     m      days each
                  e      year an nd that the combined
                                             c             acctivities of thhe communitty and the region
contribute to the generation of  o greenhouse gas emisssions potenntially linked to global climate
chang ge impacts. The Air Qua   ality and Greenhouse Gaas Element eestablishes a central placce for
policies to addresss the wide range of air quality issuees facing thee City of San      n Ramon an nd the
region, including its role in reducing green  nhouse gas emissions.
Globa al climate change
                  c          is an issue that the State of California has dete         ermined to b be of
statewwide concern that mandates local acction throughhout all of C       California. Wiith the enacttment
of Asssembly Bill 32 (AB 32     2), the California Global Warming S         Solutions Acct of 2006, local
goverrnments are  e tasked with addressing greenhoouse gas em               mission souurces under their
purvieew that poteentially contrribute to clim
                                             mate changee. The Geneeral Plan pro       ovides an avvenue
for lo
     ocal governm ment actions to reduce greenhouse
                                             g                gas emissioons associatted with new  w and
existing developm ment. The CityC is being proactive inn addressingg air quality and greenh         house
gas emissions
      e           by preparing and implem    menting this General Pllan Elementt and the re         elated
Climaate Action Pllan.
The Air
      A Quality and Greenhouse Gas Ele       ement providdes a platform     m within the General Plaan for
local action to ad ddress regio onal, State and
                                             a federal aair quality annd climate cchange conccerns.
Locall governmen  nt will play a role in the successful implementattion of AB 32. The Califfornia
Air Resources
    R            Booard (ARB) recognized the importaance of locall action and recommend             ded a
greennhouse gas reduction goal for local governmennts of 15 peercent below             w 2009 leve els by
2020 0. The propo osed reductio  on will ensurre that municipal and coommunity‐wide emission       ns are
consistent with thhe State’s red duction targe
                                             ets.
12.1 CONNE CTIONS WITH          W        OTH ER GENE RAL PLAN               N ELEMEN   NTS
The AirA Quality and Greenh     house Gas Element proovides a bridge that intter‐connectss with
other General PlanP       Elements. Air quality is imppacted by many aspe              ects of our built
enviroonment and  d the lifestyyle choices we make. The impactts and interrrelationshipss are
charaacterized as the land use   e, transporta
                                             ation, air quaality, econom   mic developmment, and climate
chang ge connectioon.
This connection
       c          iss based on the
                                 t idea thatt the design,, density, and pattern of land uses im     mpact
the trransportation
                  n system tha  at serves thoose land usees, and the trransportation    n system, in turn,
impaccts the amount people drive d     and opptions for using less pollluting and energy‐consu      uming
mode es of transpoortation such h as walking, bicycling, aand transit. T    The policies of the Landd Use
Element with con   nnections to air quality are those supporting coompact deve          elopment, deensity
                                                   12‐1

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
near transit, pedestrian orientation, and design supportive of walking and bicycling. The
Traffic and Circulation Element lays out the policies for developing the transportation system
in a way that is consistent with and accommodates the growth planned in the Land Use
Element. Traffic and Circulation Element policies, with air quality benefits, include those that
promote the development of a multi‐modal transportation system and prevent excessive traffic
congestion. More specifically, policies in the Traffic and Circulation Element encourage
“Complete Streets” designs that provide direct pedestrian connections, complete sidewalks,
safe and comfortable bicycle paths, and routes connecting frequently accessed destinations
with residences to help increase use of transit, walking, and bicycling. The Economic
Development Element encourages Transportation Demand Management and transit as a
means to solve workforce transportation issues that affect economic development, but also
impacts air quality and the traffic circulation system. The Housing Element provides policies
and programs that support energy conservation in new and renovated housing, which
translates into greenhouse gas reductions. The Growth Management, Public Facilities and
Utilities Elements contain policies that promote reduced pollutant and greenhouse gas
emissions through energy savings related to water conservation and reclaimed water use.
12.2 HEALTH‐BASED AIR QUALITY
AIR QUALITY ISSUES IN THE BAY AREA AND SAN RAMON
The following is an overview of air quality issues affecting this region. Air quality in San
Ramon and the rest of the Bay Area has improved markedly since the regulation of air
pollutant emissions began over 50 years ago. Although the air is cleaner, it still exceeds state
and federal health‐based standards on occasion for some pollutants. The federal health‐
based standards are called the National Ambient Air Quality Standards or (“federal
standards”). State standards are called the California Ambient Air Quality Standards or
(“California standards”). Information regarding the federal and state standards and the
pollutants of concern in the Bay Area is provided below.
There are federal standards for six common air pollutants, called criteria air pollutants, which
were identified in the federal Clean Air Act of 1970. The six criteria pollutants are:
     •   Ozone (O3)
     •   Particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5)
     •   Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
     •   Carbon monoxide (CO)
     •   Lead
     •   Sulfur dioxide (SO2)
The federal standards were set to protect public health, including the health of sensitive
individuals; thus, the standards are revised as more medical research becomes available
regarding the health effects of the criteria pollutants. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for the federal standards.
                                                12‐2

                             Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
The California standards have been set for the 10 air pollutants designated in the California
Clean Air Act. In addition to the pollutants listed above with federal standards, California has
adopted standards for the following pollutants:
    •   Visibility‐reducing particles
    •   Sulfates
    •   Hydrogen sulfide (H2S)
    •   Vinyl chloride
Although California air quality standards are often more stringent than federal standards, the
regulatory focus is often placed on achieving the federal standards. The primary reason for
the focus on federal standards is that the federal Clean Air Act contains plan submittal and
attainment deadlines that, if not met, result in sanctions and other federally enforceable
requirements. The California Clean Air Act requires the implementation of all feasible controls
and attainment of air quality standards at the earliest practicable date, but contains no
penalties or sanctions. The Bay Area has attained all of the federal standards except for the
new 8‐hour ozone and PM2.5 standards, so its focus has turned to meeting the more stringent
state mandates.
The agency with jurisdiction over air quality in this area is the Bay Area Air Quality
Management District (BAAQMD). The BAAQMD is responsible for controlling and permitting
industrial pollution sources and widespread, area‐wide sources, and for adopting local air
quality plans and rules. The BAAQMD adopted a number of plans to attain state and federal
standards over the years. The 1999 and 2001 Ozone Attainment Plans were adopted to
attain the one‐hour federal ozone standard. The 1994 Clean Air Plan, and updates in 1997
and 2000 were adopted to attain the state one‐hour ozone standard. The 2005 Ozone
Strategy fulfills planning requirements for the state one‐hour ozone standard and transport
mitigation requirements. The BAAQMD recently adopted the 2010 Clean Air Plan that
updates the 2005 Ozone Strategy and considers the impacts of ozone control measures on
particulate matter (PM), air toxics, and greenhouse gases in a single, integrated plan.
Although the Bay Area exceeds the new federal standards for fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
and 8‐hour ozone, no new plans are currently required to demonstrate attainment of the
standards.
As shown in Table 12‐1, the Bay Area is designated “nonattainment” for the state 1‐hour
ozone standard, the state PM10 standard, and the state PM2.5 standard. The Bay Area is also
designated “nonattainment” for the federal 8‐hour ozone standard and the federal 24‐hour
PM2.5 standard. This means that Bay Area residents experience unhealthy air quality at times.
                                                12‐3

                                      San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                  Table 12‐1: Bay Area Air Basin Attainment Status
        Pollutant                 Averaging Time                     State Status               Federal Status
  Ozone                                1‐hour                       Nonattainment              Not Applicable1
                                       8‐hour                       Nonattainment              Nonattainment2
  Carbon monoxide                1‐hour and 8‐hour                    Attainment                 Attainment3
  Nitrogen dioxide                     1‐hour                         Attainment                 Unclassified4
                                       Annual                     No state standard               Attainment
  Sulfur dioxide                  24‐hour; 1‐hour                     Attainment                  Attainment
  PM10                                24‐hour                       Nonattainment                Unclassified
                                       Annual                       Nonattainment           No federal standard5
  PM2.5                               24‐hour                     No state standard            Nonattainment6
                                       Annual                       Nonattainment                 Attainment
  Notes:
  1
    The national 1‐hour ozone standard was revoked by EPA on June 15, 2005.
  2
    Final designations effective July 20, 2012.
  3
    In April 1998, the Bay Area was redesignated to attainment for the national 8‐hour carbon monoxide standard.
  4
    EPA set a new one‐hour standard for nitrogen dioxide (NO2) at a level of 100 parts per billion (ppb) on January
    25, 2010, which will become effective April 12, 2010. EPA expects to identify or designate areas not meeting the
    new standard, based on the existing community‐wide monitoring network, by January 2012.
  5
    EPA revoked the annual PM10 standard on September 21, 2006.
  6
    EPA designated the Bay Area nonattainment of the 24‐hour PM2.5 standard on December 22, 2008, and the
    designation will go into effect 90 days after publication in the Federal Register.
  Source: Bay Area Air Quality Management District, Air Quality Standards and Attainment Status, 2014.
Air pollution readings are recorded at monitoring stations around the Bay Area to provide
information to the public regarding the current air quality and to determine if violations of air
quality standards have occurred. The closest monitoring station to San Ramon is located in
Livermore approximately 11 miles to the east‐southeast. While the data is not specific to the
City of San Ramon, air quality conditions are expected to be similar for adjacent communities
and may suggest local air quality concerns. The Livermore monitoring station stopped
monitoring Particulate Matter 10 (PM10) in 2008. No other stations close to San Ramon have
the same meteorological conditions and would therefore not be representative of emissions in
San Ramon. The maximum recorded concentrations at the Livermore monitoring station and
the number of days that state and federal air quality standards were exceeded during 2011
through 2013 are provided in Table 12‐2.
                                                             12‐4

                                 Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
                           Table 12‐2: Ambient Air Monitoring Data (2011–2013)
       Air Pollutant, Averaging Time (Units)                2011               2012              2013
 Ozone (Livermore)
 Max 1 Hour (ppm)                                          0.115              0.102              0.096
     Days > CAAQS (0.09 ppm)                                  3                  2                 3
 Max 8 Hour (ppm)                                          0.084             0.090               0.077
     Days > CAAQS (0.07 ppm)                                  2                  3                 1
     Days > NAAQS (0.08 ppm)                                  9                  4                 2
 Particulate Matter (PM2.5) (Livermore)
 Mean (μg/m3)                                                7.8                6.6               8.4
 24 Hour (μg/m3)                                            45.4               31.1               40.1
     Days > NAAQS (35 μg/m3)                                  2                  0                 4
 Abbreviations:
 > = exceed       ppm = parts per million   μg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter     max = maximum
 CAAQS = California Ambient Air Quality Standard
 NAAQS = National Ambient Air Quality Mean = Annual Arithmetic Mean
 Source: ARB Air Quality Data/Statistics/Top 4 Summary, 2013.
FEDERAL, STATE, REGIONAL, AND LOCAL RESPONSIBILITIES
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for international, national,
and interstate air pollution issues and policies. The EPA sets national vehicle and stationary
source emission standards, oversees approval of all State Implementation Plans, and
provides research and guidance in air pollution programs.
The California Air Resources Board (ARB) is the state agency with primary authority over
State air quality regulation and is responsible for developing and periodically updating the
California standards. The ARB is responsible for the California State Implementation Plan
required to demonstrate attainment and continued compliance with federal standards.
Because of California’s severe air quality challenges, the federal Clean Air Act authorizes
California to adopt mobile source emission standards that are more stringent than imposed by
the EPA. The ARB regulates on‐road and off‐road mobile sources, consumer products, and
fuels. Other responsibilities include air quality research on health effects, atmospheric
chemistry, air quality modeling, monitoring and other implementation programs.
The BAAQMD is responsible for air quality regulations at the regional and local level and
regulates stationary (industrial) air pollutant emission sources, area‐wide sources, and
certain transportation sources. The BAAQMD also operates grant and incentive programs,
conducts air monitoring, and enforces its rules and regulations. The BAAQMD prepares plans
to attain state and federal standards. The BAAQMD recently completed the 2010 Clean Air
Plan to provide a comprehensive strategy to reduce emissions from stationary and mobile
                                                     12‐5

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
emission sources. The plan addresses ozone, particulate matter, air toxics, and greenhouse
gas emission in a single, integrated plan. The plan was adopted by the BAAQMD Board on
September 15, 2010.
The City of San Ramon works cooperatively with the BAAQMD, the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG), and the Bay Area Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) on
air quality issues related to land use and transportation. Local government’s control of
development and its ability to condition new development, to impose mitigation measures,
and to set development standards provide substantial opportunities to reduce air pollutant
emissions.
TOXIC AIR CONTAMINANTS
Health and Safety Code Section 39655 defines toxic air contaminants as an air pollutant that
the California Air Resources Board or the Department of Food and Agriculture finds “may
cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious illness, or which may
pose present or potential hazard to human health.”
When approving discretionary projects, the City has the ability to consider the location of
potential sources of hazardous emissions to ensure appropriate distances from existing and
planned sensitive land uses. Likewise, when considering the location of potentially sensitive land
uses near stationary and mobile sources of toxic air contaminants, the City should exercise
discretion to ensure that potential impacts are properly addressed and appropriately mitigated.
A toxic air contaminant (TAC) of concern for the City is Fine Particulate Matter (PM2.5). PM2.5
is a complex mixture of substances that includes elements such as carbon and metals;
compounds such as nitrates, organics, and sulfates; and complex mixtures such as diesel
exhaust and wood smoke. PM2.5 can be emitted directly from manmade sources and can also
be formed in the atmosphere through reactions among different pollutants; however,
assessing local community risk and hazard impacts relates only to direct PM2.5 emissions, not
those formed in the atmosphere.
Evidence suggests that PM2.5 is the most harmful air pollutant in the San Francisco Bay Area
Air Basin in terms of the associated impact on public health. TAC and PM2.5 fall within two
broad categories, stationary sources and mobile sources. Common stationary source types of
TAC and PM2.5 emissions include gasoline stations, dry cleaners, and diesel backup
generators. Stationary sources are regulated through BAAQMD permit requirements and are
generally identified on local inventories and acknowledged and addressed through local
environmental review.
Common mobile sources are on‐road motor vehicles on freeways and roads such as trucks
and cars, and off‐road sources such as construction equipment. Mobile sources are prevalent
in many communities based on regional roadway networks that carry higher levels of vehicle
and truck traffic.
SITING OF SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
If a new project is likely to be a place where people live, play, or convalesce, it should be
considered a receptor. A project or land use should also be considered a receptor if sensitive
                                                12‐6

                             Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
individuals are likely to spend a significant amount of time at that location. Sensitive
individuals refer to those segments of the population most susceptible to poor air quality:
children, the elderly, and those with pre‐existing serious health problems affected by air
quality (ARB 2005). Examples of receptors include residences, schools and school yards,
parks and play grounds, daycare centers, nursing homes, and medical facilities. Residences
can include houses, apartments, and senior living complexes. Medical facilities can include
hospitals, convalescent homes, and health clinics. Playgrounds could be play areas
associated with parks or community centers.
Policy 12.5‐I‐1 addresses the location of sources of hazardous emissions as well as sensitive
land uses in order to minimize or avoid potential health risks to people that might result from
hazardous air pollutant emissions. When siting a new source or receptor, the existing or
future proposed sources of TAC and/or PM2.5 emissions that would adversely affect
individuals within the planned project should be examined. Stationary sources are typically
know and are identified on existing inventories; however, mobile sources such as freeways
and high traffic arterial roadways are more difficult to identify with certainty absent additional
analysis.
To address the issue of mobile TAC and/or PM2.5 emissions associated with the local
transportation network, Figure 12‐1 delineates a 1,000 ft screening zone from identified
potential mobile sources. The screening zones have been established based on the average
daily trip on the roadway (over 10,000 average daily trips) and distance criteria (1000 feet)
provided for in the BAAQMD CEQA guidelines. In addition, Policy 12.4‐I‐3 requires analysis
of sensitive receptors and these screening zones will assist in identifying potential conflicts
between air quality issues and land uses. The fact that a sensitive receptor land use is
proposed on a property within the established screening zone does not exclude approval of
such uses, but rather suggests that additional air quality and health screening should be
considered based on the specific project characteristic and location to determine any potential
health impacts and if mitigation measures may be necessary.
12.3 CLIMATE CHANGE AND GREENHOUSE GASES
The greenhouse effect results when shortwave solar radiation is readily transmitted through
the atmosphere on the way in, but longer‐wave infrared radiation is prevented from being
transmitted out as it is absorbed by atmospheric gases often referred to as greenhouse
gases. The greenhouse gases trap heat near the surface of the earth, resulting in heating of
the atmosphere. Rising levels of greenhouse gases that result from human activities are of
concern because of the potential to change the global climate in an adverse way. Although
uncertainty regarding the cause of climate change exists, there is broad scientific consensus
that actions should be taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as well as air quality
criteria pollutants.
The State of California has taken action with the adoption of the California Global Warming
Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32). The legislative findings from AB 32 articulate California’s
position regarding why action is needed:
                                             12‐7

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
        38501. The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:
        Global warming poses a serious threat to the economic well‐being, public
        health, natural resources, and the environment of California. The potential
        adverse impacts of global warming include the exacerbation of air quality
        problems, a reduction in the quality and supply of water to the State from the
        Sierra snowpack, a rise in sea levels resulting in the displacement of
        thousands of coastal businesses and residences, damage to marine
        ecosystems and the natural environment, and an increase in the incidences of
        infectious diseases, asthma, and other human health‐related problems.
STATE REGULATIONS AND INITIATIVES
Assembly Bill 32
The California State Legislature adopted Assembly Bill 32, the California Global Warming
Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32), which charged the California Air Resources Board (ARB) to
develop regulations on how the State would address global climate change. AB 32 focuses
on reducing greenhouse gas emissions in California. Greenhouse gases, as defined under
AB 32, include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), sulfur‐
hexafluoride (SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
The ARB approved the 1990 greenhouse gas emissions level of 427 MMTCO2e on
December 6, 2007 (ARB 2007). Therefore, emissions generated in California in 2020 were
required to be equal to or less than 427 MMTCO2e. Emissions in 2020 in a “business as
usual” scenario are estimated to be 596 MMTCO2e, which did not account for reductions
from AB 32 regulations (California Air Resources Board 2008). At that level, a 28 percent
reduction was required to achieve the 427 million MTCO2e 1990 inventory. In October 2010,
ARB prepared an updated 2020 forecast to account for the recession and slower forecasted
growth. The forecasted inventory without the benefits of adopted regulation is now estimated
at 545 million MTCO2e. Therefore, under the updated forecast, a 21.7 percent reduction from
“business as usual” (BAU) is required to achieve 1990 levels (ARB 2010).
California Air Resources Board (ARB) Scoping Plan
The ARB’s Climate Change Scoping Plan (Scoping Plan) contains measures designed to
reduce the State’s emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020 to comply with AB 32 (ARB
2008). The Scoping Plan identifies recommended measures for multiple greenhouse gas
emission sectors and the associated emission reductions needed to achieve the year 2020
emissions target—each sector has a different emission reduction target. Most of the
measures target the transportation and electricity sectors.
                                              12‐8



                                      Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
The Scoping Plan differentiates between “capped” and “uncapped” strategies. Capped
strategies are subject to the cap‐and‐trade program, which became effective January 1,
2012. The Scoping Plan states that the inclusion of these emissions within the cap‐and trade
program will help ensure that the year 2020 emission targets are met despite some degree
of uncertainty in the emission reduction estimates for any individual measure. Implementation
of the capped strategies is calculated to achieve a sufficient amount of reductions by 2020 to
achieve the emission target contained in AB 32. Uncapped strategies that will not be subject
to the cap‐and‐trade emissions caps and requirements are provided as a margin of safety by
accounting for additional greenhouse gas emission reductions.1
ARB Scoping Plan Update
The ARB approved the First Update to the Scoping Plan (Update) on May 22, 2014. The
Update identifies the next steps for California’s climate change strategy. The Update shows
how California continues on its path to meet the near‐term 2020 greenhouse gas limit, but
also sets a path toward long‐term, deep GHG emission reductions. The report establishes a
broad framework for continued emission reductions beyond 2020, on the path to 80 percent
below 1990 levels by 2050. The Update identifies progress made to meet the near‐term
objectives of AB 32 and defines California’s climate change priorities and activities for the
next several years. The Update does not set new targets for the State, but describes a path
that would achieve the long term 2050 goal of Executive Order S‐05‐03 for emissions to
decline to 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050 (ARB 2014).
The ARB has no legislative mandate to set a target beyond the 2020 target from AB 32 or to
adopt additional regulations to achieve a post‐2020 target. The Update estimates that
reductions averaging 5.2 percent per year would be required after 2020 to achieve the 2050
goal. With no estimate of future reduction commitments from the State, identifying a feasible
strategy including plans and measures to be adopted by local agencies is not possible.
Implementation of the City’s General Plan Update and CAP will help support both the short
term and long term objectives of the Update. However, there is no way of determining
whether the City would need to take additional actions beyond its existing programs and the
land use and transportation strategies contained in the General Plan Update and CAP until
such a time as new state targets and a new Scoping Plan with mandatory measures is
adopted.
1
  On March 17, 2011, the San Francisco Superior Court issued a final decision in Association of Irritated Residents v.
  California Air Resources Board (Case No. CPF‐09‐509562). While the Court upheld the validity of the ARB Scoping Plan
  for the implementation of AB 32, the Court enjoined the ARB from further rulemaking under AB 32 until the ARB amends its
  CEQA environmental review of the Scoping Plan to address the flaws identified by the Court. On May 23, 2011, ARB filed
  an appeal. On June 24, 2011, the Court of Appeal granted the ARB’s petition staying the trial court’s order pending
  consideration of the appeal. In the interest of informed decision‐making, on June 13, 2011, the ARB released the expanded
  alternatives analysis in a draft Supplement to the AB 32 Scoping Plan Functional Equivalent Document. The ARB Board
  approved the Scoping Plan and the CEQA document on August 24, 2011.
                                                              12‐11

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
Senate Bill 375
State Senate Bill 375 (SB 375) was signed into law on September 30, 2008. This
legislation addresses one facet of implementation of the AB 32. The bill assures that the
decisions about how to achieve travel‐related greenhouse gas emissions from cars and light
trucks will remain in the hands of locally elected officials. SB 375 aligns what have been
three separate planning processes—one for transportation, housing, and for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions—into a single process. The legislation provides more certainty for
General Plans and better coordination between state agencies.
SB 375 provides exemptions from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for
residential projects that are consistent with the regional plan to achieve greenhouse gas
reductions. The bill also amends the housing element law, extending the amount of time that
the State has to review most local housing elements from five to eight years. It provides a
foundation for a comprehensive approach to reducing greenhouse gas emissions from the
land use and transportation sector. SB 375 seeks to harness funding and regulatory
incentives to align transportation, housing and land use planning.
Especially important for local government are the regional Sustainable Communities Strategy
(SCS) and the Alternative Planning Strategy (APS) requirements of the legislation. The ARB
must certify that the region’s SCS will achieve its greenhouse gas emission reduction targets.
Projects outside the approved SCS would not qualify for federal transportation funding. If the
ARB determines that a region’s SCS will not achieve the greenhouse gas emission reduction
targets, the Metropolitan Planning Organization must prepare an Alternative Planning
Strategy, separate from the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), identifying further measures
needed to achieve the targets. Although these measures directly impact RTPs prepared by
the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC), the success of the Sustainable
Communities Strategy/Alternative Planning Strategy depends on the land use decisions by
local land use agencies. The ARB adopted final SB 375 regional targets on September 23,
2010.
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) adopted the Plan Bay Area that includes
the 2040 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) and Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS)
on July 18, 2013 (ABAG 2013). The RTP describes the strategy to achieve the SB 375
targets for the Bay Area. A technical evaluation of the strategy prepared by the ARB in April
2014 identifies a 4.1 percent reduction in emission per capita by 2020 and 8.7 percent per
capita by 2035 (ARB 2014). The SCS includes a full range of land use and transportation
strategies to guide future growth in the region in ways that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Senate Bill 743
Senate Bill 743 (Steinberg, 2013) made several changes to the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) for projects located in areas served by transit (i.e., transit‐oriented
development or TOD). Those changes direct the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research
to develop a new approach for analyzing the transportation impacts under CEQA. Candidate
metrics include, but are not limited to Vehicle Miles Traveled, Automobile Miles Generated,
Multi‐modal Level of Service, Fuel Use and/or Vehicle Hours Traveled and which are all
being considered as new measures to assess traffic impacts. Regardless of which
methodology is ultimately adopted, the measure will likely be directly correlated to GHG
                                              12‐12

                             Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
reduction strategies contained in this Element and the CAP. As such, the quantification of
GHG impacts associated with future project traffic will be easily measurable in the context of
the CAP as opposed to the current LOS and delay based methodologies. LOS standards may
still be used for local goals and objectives; however, once the new methodology is adopted,
LOS standards will no longer be the tool for CEQA impact analysis.
GREENHOUSE GAS DESCRIPTIONS
The EPA describes the global warming potential as the potential of a gas or aerosol to trap
heat in the atmosphere; Individual greenhouse gas compounds have varying properties,
global warming potential and atmospheric lifetimes. To simplify the measurement and
quantification of global warming potential (GWP) associated with greenhouse gas emissions,
carbon dioxide has been established as the reference gas. Carbon dioxide has a global
warming potential of 1, which easily allows other greenhouse gases to be converted to carbon
dioxide equivalent (CO2e) to simplify calculations. The calculation of the carbon dioxide
equivalent is a consistent methodology for comparing greenhouse gas emissions, since it
normalizes various greenhouse gas emissions to a consistent metric. Methane’s warming
potential of 21 indicates that methane has a 21 times greater warming effect than carbon
dioxide on a molecule per molecule basis. A carbon dioxide equivalent is the mass emissions
of an individual greenhouse gas multiplied by its GWP.
Table 12‐3 provides a description of the characteristics of greenhouse gases that are
regulated under AB 32.
                                              12‐13

                                     San Ramon General Plan 2035
                                     Table 12‐3: Greenhouse Gas Descriptions
  Greenhouse Gas                 Description and Physical Properties                                Sources
Methane (CH4)             Methane is a flammable gas and is the main                Methane is extracted from
                          component of natural gas. Global Warming                  geological deposits (natural gas
                          Potential (GWP) = 21.                                     fields). Other sources are from
                                                                                    landfills, decay of organic matter,
                                                                                    fermentation of manure, and cattle.
Nitrous oxide (N2O)       Nitrous oxide is also known as laughing gas and Microbial processes in soil and water,
                          is a colorless greenhouse gas. GWP = 310.                 fuel combustion, and industrial
                                                                                    processes.
Carbon dioxide            Carbon dioxide is an odorless, colorless,                 Carbon dioxide is emitted from
(CO2)                     natural greenhouse gas. GWP = 1.                          natural and anthropogenic sources.
                                                                                    Natural sources include
                                                                                    decomposition of dead organic
                                                                                    matter; respiration of bacteria, plants,
                                                                                    animals, and fungus; evaporation
                                                                                    from oceans; and volcanic
                                                                                    outgassing. Anthropogenic sources
                                                                                    are from burning coal, oil, natural
                                                                                    gas, and wood.
Hydrofluorocarbons        The HFCs with the largest measured                        HFCs are synthetic chemicals that
(HFCs)                    atmospheric concentrations are HFC‐23 and                 are used as a substitute for
                          HFC‐134a (10 ppt), and HFC‐152a (1 ppt).                  chlorofluorocarbons in applications
                          GWPs:                                                     such as automobile air conditioners
                          HFC‐23 = 11,700                                           and refrigerants.
                          HFC‐134a = 1,300
                          HFC‐152a = 140
Perfluorocarbons          PFCs have stable molecular structures and                 Two main sources of PFCs are
(PFCs)                    only break down by ultraviolet rays about 60              primary aluminum production and
                          kilometers above Earth’s surface. Because of              semiconductor manufacturing.
                          this, PFCs have very long lifetimes, between
                          10,000 and 50,000 years. GWPs range from
                          6,500 to 9,200.
Sulfur hexafluoride       Sulfur hexafluoride is an inorganic, odorless,            This gas is man‐made and used for
                          colorless, and nontoxic, nonflammable gas.                insulation in electric power
                          Concentrations in the 1990s were about 4 ppt.             transmission equipment, in the
                          It has the highest GWP of any gas evaluated,              magnesium industry, in
                          23,900.                                                   semiconductor manufacturing, and as
                                                                                    a tracer gas.
Notes:
ppm = parts per million; ppt = parts per trillion (measure of concentration in the atmosphere); GWP = global warming
potential.
Source: Compiled from a variety of sources, including EPA, Global Warming Potentials and Atmospheric Lifetimes,
2006 and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007.
                                                            12‐14

                                    Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
Table 12‐4 and Figure 12‐2 show the generation of California’s greenhouse gas emissions by
major economic sector. The top three sectors are transportation, electric power generation,
and industrial fuel use. These sectors are integral to our daily activities and so reducing
emissions from these sectors is likely to affect many aspects of our lives.
         Table 12‐4: California Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory in 2012 by Economic Sector
                                                                2012 Emission
                                                      (Millions of Metric Tons of CO2               Percentage of
                     Sector1                                   Equivalent/Year)                         Inventory
 Transportation                                                       167.4                                36.5
 Electric Power                                                         95.1                               20.7
 Commercial and Residential Fuel Use                                    42.3                                9.2
 Industrial Fuel Use                                                    89.2                               19.4
 Recycling and Waste                                                     8.3                                1.9
                                           2
 High Global Warming Potential Gases                                    18.4                                4.0
 Agriculture                                                            37.9                                8.3
 Total Emissions                                                      458.7                               100.0
 Notes:
 1
   Sequestration of emissions from forestry activities is not included. Emission categories are as defined in the ARB
   Scoping Plan.
 2
   High global warming potential gases persist in the atmosphere for tens to hundreds of years in the atmosphere, thus
   increasing their impact. High global warming potential gases are used as refrigerants, fire suppressants, and the
   manufacture of semiconductors and foam products.
 Source: ARB 2014 California Greenhouse Gas Inventory for 2000‐2012 by Category as Defined in the Scoping Plan,
 last updated May 2014.
It is instructive to consider greenhouse gas emissions at a smaller scale for perspective. The
following examples are from emission estimates from the ARB and other sources:
      •   1 kWh of electricity = approximately 1 lb. CO2e
      •   1 therm of natural gas = approximately 12 lbs. CO2e
      •   1 gallon of gasoline = approximately 20 lbs. CO2e
      •   1 mile of driving at 20 miles per gallon = 1 lb. CO2e
      •   California 2012 per person emissions = 12.1 metric tons/year CO2e
                                                           12‐15

                                   San Ramon General Plan 2035
                      Figure 12‐2: California Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory 2012
                                                                  Transportation
                               8%
                     4%
                                                                  Electric Power
                  2%
                                                            37%   Commercial and
                                                                  Residential Fuel Use
            19%                                                   Industrial Fuel Use
                                                                  Recycling and Waste
                                                                  High Global Warming
                      9%                                          Potential Gases2
                                                                  Agriculture
                                           21%
Source: California Air Resources Board Emissions Inventory 2014.
STATE TARGETS
The ARB Scoping Plan contains emission targets for the year 2020 of 427 million metric
tons of CO2e (MMTCO2e) based on a goal of returning California’s emissions to 1990 levels.
California’s 2006 emission inventory was 484 MMTCO2e, but is projected to grow to 545
MMTCO2e by 2020 if no action were taken to limit the cumulative increase in emissions
related to population and economic growth. This was revised from 596 to 545 MMTCO2e
after updated data from the 2000‐2010 inventory. Therefore, reaching the target level of 427
MMTCO2e by 2020 requires reductions amounting to 118 MMTCO2e or 21.7 percent below
projected 2020 levels.
Figure 12‐3 displays California’s greenhouse gas emission trends from 2000 to 2012. AB 32
requires California to reduce its emission inventory to 1990 levels by 2020. The State has
made substantial progress toward meeting this goal. Additionally, the State has achieved the
goal of Executive Order S‐05‐03 to reduce emissions to 2000 levels by 2010. A statewide
emission reduction mandate beyond 2020 does not currently exist; however, Executive Order
S‐05‐03 also includes an ultimate target of reducing emissions in 2050 to 80 percent below
1990 levels. Reductions of that magnitude would require the transformation of the State’s
energy sources and the widespread implementation of zero emission technologies that are
not currently developed or commercially available.
                                                       12‐16

                                 Air
                                 A Quality and Greennhouse Gaas
                  Figure 12‐3: Caliifornia Greenh
                                                house Gas Em missions Tren
                                                                         nds 2000 to 20
                                                                                      012
Source
     e: ARB, 2014, GHG
                     G   Update Reeport.
KEY ELEMENTS
      E              FOR ACHIEV    VING CALIFO  ORNIA’S 202  20 TARGET
The ARB
      A       Scopinng Plan outlines the ke    ey elements of Californiia’s strategyy for reducin ng its
greennhouse gas emissions
                     e           to
                                  o 1990 levelss by 2020 aand includes::
    •    Expanding   g and streng gthening existing energyy efficiency pprograms ass well as bu  uilding
         and applia  ance standards;
    •    Achieving a statewide    e renewable energy mix oof 33 percennt;
    •    Developin  ng a Californ nia cap‐and‐‐trade prograam that linkss with other Western Climate
         Initiative partner
                     p       progrrams to crea ate a regionaal market sysstem;
    •    Establishing targets for f transportation‐relatedd greenhousse gas emisssions for re    egions
         throughou  ut California and pursuing  g policies annd incentivess to achieve those targetts;
    •    Adopting and implem     menting mea   asures pursuuant to existting state la aws and pollicies,
         including California’s Clean Car standards,
                                               s           G
                                                           Goods Movem    ment measures, and the  e Low
         Carbon Fuel Standard     d; and
    •    Creating targeted
                     t         feees, including a public gooods chargee on water u    use, fees on
                                                                                                 n high
         global wa  arming poten   ntial gases, and a fee to fund thee administrative costs o     of the
         State’s lon ng‐term com mmitment to AB A 32 impleementation.
The ARB
      A      Scopin ng Plan inclu  udes descrip ptions and aanticipated eemission red ductions for each
strate
     egy proposed    d to achieve e California’ss greenhousse gas reducction goals, and it includ des a
discussion of the   e role of loccal governme   ent in achieeving these goals. The ARB encourrages
local governmentts to adopt a reduction goal for muunicipal opeerations emisssions and move
                                                     12‐17

                                       San Ramon General Plan 2035
toward establishing similar goals for community emissions that parallels the State’s
commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 15 percent from 2008 levels by 2020.
SAN RAMON GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
Table 12‐5 provides San Ramon’s 2014 community greenhouse gas emissions (GHG)
inventory. This is an updated inventory from the previous 2008 community GHG emissions
inventory. The updated inventory was prepared as part of the San Ramon Climate Action
Plan Greenhouse Gas Inventory Update Report (2014). The inventory provides a baseline to
identify emission reduction opportunities and to model future year emission targets. The
percentage contribution of each sector is also illustrated in Figure 12‐4.
         Table 12‐5: City of San Ramon Community Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2014 by Sector
                                                            Equivalent CO2            Equivalent CO2            Energy
                       Sector                                (tons/year)                    (%)                (MMBtu)
  Motor Vehicles                                             374,636                        57                    —
  Electricity (Residential, Commercial,                         76,604                      12                    —
  Municipal, Water Transport)
  Natural Gas (Residential, Commercial,                        101,637                      16               1,910,217.4
  Municipal)
  Waste                                                         16,382                       3                    —
  Offroad equipment                                             30,628                       5                    —
  ODS Substitutes                                               45,709                       7                    —
  Total                                                       645,596                     100.0             1,910,217.4
  Notes:
  Generated for San Ramon using STAPPA/ALAPCO and ICLEI‐Local Governments for Sustainability Clean Air and
  Climate Protection Software developed by Torrie Smith Associates, Inc.
  Alternative Daily Cover is defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board as materials other than soil
  used at a landfill on all surfaces of the fill where no additional solid waste will be deposited within 180 days.
  Source: FirstCarbon Solutions, 2014.
                                                             12‐18

                                    Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
             Figure 12‐4: San Ramon Community Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory 2014
                                                                                       Motor Vehicles
                                  7%
                       5%
                                                                                       Electricity (Residential,
                   3%                                                                  Commercial, Municipal,
                                                                                       Water Transport)
                                                                                       Natural Gas (Residential,
              16%                                                                      Commercial, Municipal)
                                                                                       Waste
                                                                 57%
                                                                                       Offroad equipment
                   12%
                                                                                       ODS Substitutes
Source: FirstCarbon Solutions, 2014.
Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS). ODS include chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons
(HCFCs), halons, methyl bromide, carbon tetrachloride, hydrobromofluorocarbons, chlorobromomethane, and methyl
chloroform. Substitutes are alternative to these compounds that have a lesser impact on GHG generation.
SAN RAMON STRATEGIES
San Ramon has committed to reducing local air pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions
through actions under its purview. The City’s influence over the density and design of land
use projects and the local transportation system allow for potentially significant reductions in
transportation‐related emissions. The City also has substantial influence over the energy use
from new development through conditions of approval based on proportional impacts and
established regulation, CEQA mitigation measures, design standards, green building
standards, and incentive programs. The City can reduce emissions from government
operations by incorporating green building techniques, and energy efficiency into City capital
improvement projects and purchasing decisions. To further this effort, the General Plan 2030
called for the formation of an a City Council appointed body to monitor the City’s progress in
implementation of the City’s Climate Action Plan and other programs to achieve the reduction
targets identified in AB 32. The General Plan 2035 continues the policies of monitoring and
updating the CAP as necessary to achieve reduction targets.
                                                         12‐19

                               San Ramon General Plan 2035
The Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Element includes policies that support local actions,
including:
    •   Cooperation with regional agencies and private companies on multi‐jurisdictional
        strategies
    •   Encouraging smart growth
    •   Supporting transit oriented development
    •   Promoting multimodal transit and Complete Streets
    •   Supporting pedestrian‐oriented development
    •   Providing facilities that encourage bicycling
    •   Requiring solar‐ready roofs where feasible
    •   Establishing green building standards
    •   Promoting water conservation
    •   Encouraging Recycling and solid waste reduction
    •   Promoting energy conservation
    •   Supporting the use of renewable energy sources and low‐carbon fuels including
        electric and fuel cell (hydrogen) vehicles.
    •   Encouraging Transportation Demand Management programs
CLIMATE ACTION PLAN (CAP)
The City has prepared a Climate Action Plan as the primary implementation strategy for its
greenhouse gas policies. The City adopted the CAP concurrently with the General Plan
2030. The General Plan 2035 continues the CAP implementation strategy and the CAP
document contains the following components:
    •   Baseline and future year emission inventories for the community and local government
        operations;
    •   Emission reduction estimates from potential reduction measures and strategies;
    •   Emission reduction targets for 2020 and 2035;
    •   Descriptions of strategies selected to achieve targets; and
    •   Implementation plan with mechanisms for monitoring and course corrections.
12.4 REGIONAL COORDINATION
Air quality is a truly regional concern. Air pollutants can travel long distances and do not
recognize political boundaries. Regional travel is a substantial contributor to air quality
impacts affecting the region and San Ramon. The City’s participation in regional air quality
and transportation programs and initiatives can help ensure consistency in implementation
and best use of resources.
                                               12‐20

                            Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
GUIDING POLICIES
12.4‐G‐1 Improve and protect San Ramon’s air quality and promote improvements in
         subregional air quality.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
12.4‐I‐1 Cooperate with other local, regional, and state agencies to achieve and maintain air
         quality standards.
         Effective governmental coordination and cooperation in on‐going government
         programs requires proactive and sustained effort. The differing responsibilities and
         constituencies of cities and counties, along with those of state, federal and regional
         agencies, will require a commitment by all to reduce land use‐based sources of air
         pollution that affect our public health and quality of life. Working together for a
         common interest can multiply the resources available to accomplish air quality goals.
12.4‐I‐2 Establish a City Council‐appointed body or other similar entity to assist in
         monitoring the City’s progress in meeting greenhouse gas emissions targets.
         The appointed body will be responsible for overseeing the appropriate City
         department(s) who are responsible for implementing the City’s Climate Action Plan.
         To coordinate efforts, a Climate Change Coordinator should be identified who will
         be a single point of contact to coordinate efforts to reduce the City’s greenhouse
         gas emissions. These efforts may include expanded recycling programs, water
         conservation, review of maintenance practices, green building programs, fleet
         services, etc.
12.4‐I‐3 Analyze the air quality and climate change impacts of discretionary projects using
         applicable regulatory guidance; for example, the BAAQMD’s CEQA Air Quality
         Guidelines.
         Stationary and mobile TAC and/or PM2.5 emissions should be evaluated in the
         context of existing and planned sensitive receptors. Figure 12‐1 identifies areas
         within the City, based on roadway traffic volumes may result in potential health
         concerns sensitive receptors absent project specific mitigation as a result of mobile
         TAC. New discretionary projects, classified as sensitive receptors, located within the
         established buffer zones should conduct additional air quality analysis and identify
         any necessary mitigation measures.
12.4‐I‐4 Use the City’s environmental review process to impose appropriate mitigation
         measures on new development to reduce air quality and greenhouse gas emissions
         impacts.
         Mitigation measures appropriate for the type of project and its physical location can
         reduce air quality and greenhouse emissions impacts through reduced energy use
         and motor vehicle use. The adoption of SB 743 will likely change the way traffic
         impacts are mitigated based on a vehicle or trip standard as opposed to a delay
         and level of service standard.
                                             12‐21

                              San Ramon General Plan 2035
12.4‐I‐5 Work with the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD), the
         Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC), and transit providers to implement
         the regional Clean Air Plan.
         The regional Clean Air Plan includes transportation control measures that reduce
         vehicle emissions by increasing transit use, carpooling, bicycling and walking. Many
         of these measures are reliant on local government action for implementation. The
         City works closely with the BAAQMD and the MTC to implement applicable
         measures in San Ramon.
12.4‐I‐6 Educate residents on the linkage between land use, transportation, water and
         energy use and air pollution. Efforts should include measures that can be taken and
         resources that are available to improve air quality and reduce potential climate
         change impacts.
         Without the understanding and support of the general public, local air quality and
         climate change prevention programs cannot be expected to achieve the desired
         results. Illustrating the livability and other benefits of land use and transportation
         measures such as increased density near transit or reduced street widths and traffic
         calming can increase support for these measures. Educating the public on air
         quality issues is a vital component of a successful air quality program. For example,
         the BAAQMD’s Spare the Air Program includes measures that encourage the public
         to reduce polluting activities on bad air days such as ridesharing, free transit
         passes, and fireplace use curtailment.
12.5 AIR QUALITY, LAND USE, AND TRANSPORTATION
GUIDING POLICIES
12.5‐G‐1 Improve air quality by integrating air quality, land use, and transportation planning
         that incorporates appropriate project location, design, and application of best
         available technologies.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
12.5‐I‐1 Minimize air quality and climate change impacts through project review, evaluation,
         and conditions of approval when planning the location and design of land use
         projects and transportation system projects needed to accommodate expected City
         population growth.
12.5‐I‐2 Support and encourage projects proposing infill, and mixed use development that
         creates walkable neighborhoods and communities and increases access to transit.
         Strategies that reduce air quality impacts, such as mixed‐use development, will
         encourage people to walk between home and business. Local emissions can also be
         reduced by incorporating such strategies as Complete Streets, trails and bicycle paths
         into site design, so that people will be able to use their cars less frequently. The City
                                                12‐22

                            Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
         encourages the use of best available technologies in terms of energy efficiency and air
         pollutant emissions that provide cost‐effective emission reductions.
12.5‐I‐3 Work with regional and local transit agencies to assess development project
         impacts on long‐range transit plans and transit facilities during the planning stages
         of land use projects and ensure that potential impacts are avoided.
         Projects with higher density housing or employment centers that are close to high‐
         quality transit service contribute to the success of the transit system through
         increased ridership. Conversely, low‐density development near transit stations can
         reduce the effectiveness of the transit system. The City can identify areas along
         transit corridors or near existing or proposed transit facilities where new growth
         areas can be planned to maximize their potential for transit service. The City can
         coordinate and consult with the regional transit agencies on large projects.
12.6 HAZARDOUS EMISSIONS AND PUBLIC HEALTH
GUIDING POLICIES
12.6‐G‐1 Minimize exposure of the public to hazardous air pollutant emissions, particulates,
         and noxious odors from freeways, major arterial roadways, commercial and
         industrial uses with substantial truck trips, and other uses that produce toxic
         emissions through the use and handling of fuels and solvents.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
12.6‐I‐1 Locate sources of hazardous emissions at appropriate distances from existing and
         planned sensitive land uses in order to minimize or avoid potential health risks to
         people that might result from hazardous air pollutant emissions. Locate residential
         development projects and projects categorized as sensitive receptors at adequate
         distances from existing and potential sources of hazardous emissions.
         Siting decisions for hazardous emission sources and sensitive receptors have the
         potential to create land use conflicts. Common hazardous emission sources include
         freeways and high traffic roads, distribution centers, dry cleaners, gasoline stations,
         diesel engines, and auto body shops. Providing appropriate locations and
         separation for incompatible land uses for all types of development can minimize
         conflicts and promote economic growth. The ARB’s Air Quality and Land Use
         Handbook provides suggestions for appropriate distances between sensitive uses
         and sources of hazardous emissions. The Handbook recognizes that local
         conditions should be considered in application of the guidelines. In addition, the City
         requires health risk assessments for projects with potential for exposure to
         significant amounts of toxic and hazardous emissions. Figure 12‐1 establishes
         mobile source screening zones for which additional air quality analysis should be
         conducted when locating sensitive receptors within these areas.
                                             12‐23

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
12.6‐I‐2 Evaluate potential handling, storage, and transport of hazardous materials in new
         commercial and industrial developments to minimize public exposure to hazardous
         air pollutants.
         Development projects that will handle, store, and transport hazardous materials
         require special consideration and evaluation to ensure that potential accidental
         releases will not impact the public.
12.6‐I‐3 Require construction and grading activities to incorporate particulate emissions
         reduction measures.
         Particulate emissions are generated during construction activities from diesel
         engines used for most off‐road equipment and from soil disturbance during site
         grading. This implementing policy supports the Bay Area Air Quality Management
         District’s Clean Air Plan. Best management practices for construction and grading
         such as site watering, and use of diesel particulate filters are often required as
         mitigation measures in environmental documents and as standard conditions for
         projects requiring a grading plan.
12.6‐I‐4 Require all new wood‐burning stoves and fireplaces to comply with EPA‐ and
         BAAQMD‐approved standards and provide informational handouts outlining low‐
         emission alternatives to wood‐burning fireplaces.
         Many homes in San Ramon are equipped with fireplaces, which are an important
         source of localized air pollution. Wood smoke released from fireplaces and wood
         stoves contains carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, volatile organic compounds,
         and inhalable particulate matter (PM10). Wood burning should be encouraged only
         in stoves and fireplaces designed to minimize air pollutants. The City promotes the
         BAAQMD’s Winter Spare the Air Program that prohibits wood burning on days when
         air quality is unhealthful. The program also encourages residents to burn as cleanly
         as possible throughout the winter by using seasoned wood and cleaner burning
         alternatives such as natural gas fireplaces, EPA‐certified wood heaters, and pellet
         stoves, and manufactured logs. Pacific Gas & Electric and the Hearth Products
         Association have offered incentives in the past in the form of cash rebates to
         encourage replacement of old wood‐burning appliances with more efficient
         fireplaces and stoves. These incentives are determined annually and are not
         necessarily offered each year.
12.7 TRANSPORTATION ENHANCEMENT
GUIDING POLICIES
12.7‐G‐1 Invest in more efficient and effective transportation infrastructure, City fleet
         management and support for trip reduction programs to reduce traffic congestion,
         vehicle trips and the need for costly new or expanded roadways.
                                              12‐24

                            Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
12.7‐I‐1 The City shall encourage participation in feasible, affordable, innovative and flexible
         employer‐based trip reduction programs for their employees.
         The City of San Ramon qualified for the “Best Workplace for Commuters” for 2006.
         This means that the City met the National Standard of Excellence for commuter
         benefits, thereby cutting traffic and air pollution and improving the overall health and
         quality of life. The City leads by example with early implementation and
         demonstration of trip reduction programs. Current programs include: Guaranteed
         Ride Home, Vanpool Subsidies, Carpool Incentives, Transit Incentives, Student
         Transit Ticket Program, and Spare the Air participation. City departments with
         regular business hours can consider telecommuting programs and flexible work
         schedules so long as customer service is not affected.
12.7‐I‐2 City fleet vehicle operators shall be encouraged to develop and maintain a fiscally
         sound inventory and priority schedule to replace or convert existing conventional
         fuel vehicles with clean fuel vehicles as new vehicles are purchased and existing
         vehicles are retired from service.
         The City of San Ramon has an active program to upgrade its fleet vehicles. San
         Ramon has been adding alternative fuel vehicles to its fleet since 1999. The San
         Ramon Public Services Department utilizes a fleet of 16 compressed natural gas‐
         (CNG‐) powered pick‐up trucks to assist in maintaining public parks, streets,
         drainage, signals, lights, facilities, and landscaping. In addition, nine of the 14 vehicles
         that the City’s franchised garbage hauler uses to collect residential and commercial
         garbage, recyclables, and yard trimmings in San Ramon are CNG‐powered. Natural
         gas vehicle fuel creates lower emissions than gasoline and diesel, including a 25‐
         percent reduction in greenhouse gases. In 2013, the City completed installation of two
         Electric Vehicle (EV) charging stations, one at City Hall and one at the City Permit
         Center that provide additional support infrastructure for alternative fuel vehicles.
12.7‐I‐3 Encourage the development of state‐of‐the‐art telecommunications infrastructure
         within the City, including satellite and neighborhood work centers for telecommuting
         to reduce vehicular commute travel and related emissions.
         Encouraging alternative work environments will help reduce travel by automobile,
         thus reducing air pollution and traffic congestion. Improvements in
         telecommunications technology have made telecommuting more viable for larger
         numbers of employees and have lowered the cost.
12.7‐I‐4 Provide information to encourage the use of transportation modes that minimize
         motor vehicle use and the resulting air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.
         Reducing the reliance on automobiles will minimize air pollution in the City. The
         Traffic and Circulation Element includes policies to encourage Complete Streets,
         public transit and non‐motorized modes of travel and coordination of the City’s
         Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs with regional plans that are
         aimed at reducing traffic congestion and improving air quality.
                                                 12‐25

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
12.7‐I‐5 Construct and promote infrastructure and facilities that support and encourages the
         use of low‐emission transportation and alternative modes of travel, including a safe
         and comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian system that connects all parts of the City.
         The increased use of low‐emission vehicles is a cornerstone of implementing the
         State’s air quality goals and strategy to reduce vehicle emissions that contribute to
         climate change. Electric vehicle, CNG and fuel cell technology infrastructure
         development is critical to the expanded use and continued success of these low
         emission vehicles. The City is in the position to continue to promote the
         development of this infrastructure as part of the City’s Capital Improvement Program
         for City facilities and for private property based on new regulations for new
         development. The City should continue to review and refine its Zoning Ordinance
         and development standards for residential and commercial properties to ensure that
         opportunities for low emission vehicle infrastructure are considered as part of the
         design process and pursued where appropriate. Pre‐wiring for single‐family
         development should be assessed based on the nature of the development and
         installation standards for EV charging stations and similar technologies should be
         considered for commercial office, retail and multifamily development.
         Additionally, programs that encourage people to walk, bicycle, carpool, and use
         public transit are more successful when infrastructure and facilities are in place that
         increase convenience and safety of using those modes. San Ramon has developed
         a wide variety of facilities at locations around the City that fulfill this policy.
         Examples include the San Ramon Transit Center, park and ride lots, and bike racks
         and lockers at the Transit Center. Complete Streets, bicycling and walking are key
         elements of San Ramon’s circulation system. The City has an extensive network of
         bikeways, sidewalks, and trails that enhance neighborhood accessibility and help to
         reduce reliance on the private automobile. All new development is required to
         consider the bicycle and pedestrian system in their design.
12.8 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION
GUIDING POLICIES
12.8‐G‐1 Minimize air emissions and potential climate change impacts related to energy
         consumption in government operations and the community.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
12.8‐I‐1 Increase the use of energy conservation features, renewable sources of energy and
         low‐emission equipment in new and existing development projects within the City.
         Natural gas‐burning appliances used for space heating, water heating, and cooking
         are a sizable source of NOx and CO2 emissions. Consumption of electricity also
         causes pollutant emissions from the operation of power plants fueled by fossil fuels.
         Reduction in local energy demand will reduce overall energy demand, which
         decreases the expediency for power plant construction. Local efforts to reduce
         energy consumption can save consumers money and improve air quality. Simple
         and cost‐effective designs, technologies, and methods are available to achieve
         energy savings and reduce air pollutant emissions.
                                             12‐26

                            Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
12.8‐I‐2 Encourage the use of solar‐ready roofs into residential and commercial
         development. New residential development should include proper solar orientation
         (south‐facing roof area sloped at 20° to 55° from the horizontal), clear access on
         the south sloped roof (no chimneys, heating vents, plumbing vents, etc.), electrical
         conduit installed for solar electric system wiring, plumbing installed for solar hot
         water systems, and space provided for a solar hot water storage tank. Roofs for
         commercial development should be designed to maximize potential area available
         for solar panels and provide electrical conduit to support future installation.
         Photovoltaic solar panels and solar hot water systems are key measures for
         reducing greenhouse gas emissions from electrical power generation and from
         natural gas combustion for heating. Most commercial buildings have large roofs with
         surface area available for solar panel installation. Careful residential subdivision
         design is required to maximize the solar orientation of houses. The City also
         encourages passive solar designs that reduce cooling and heating requirements
         through building design features such as window locations that minimize direct
         sunlight during the summer, but allow direct sunlight during the winter, roof
         overhangs for shading, and low emissivity windows and blinds. Even partial shading
         of solar panels can greatly reduce the power generation. The roof design should
         avoid locating items such as chimneys and vents on areas of the roof with the best
         solar potential. The location of heating, ventilation, and cooling systems is important
         for both commercial and residential projects.
12.8‐I‐3 Promote urban forestry projects that shade buildings, homes, streets, pedestrian
         walkways, and urban core areas to reduce surface and ambient temperatures and
         reduce energy required for cooling.
         San Ramon’s Community Forestry Program was adopted in recognition that trees
         abate noise and air pollution, favorably modify micro‐climates, reduce soil erosion
         and runoff, protect against flood hazards and risk of landslides, enhance the visual
         environment, encourage quality development, and provide a source of community
         pride. San Ramon’s Landscape Design Standards require landscaping plans for
         nearly all development. In parking lots, canopy trees are required to be provided
         throughout the parking area at the equivalent of one tree for every four spaces, to
         provide shade. One tree for each 30 linear foot is required adjacent to residential
         areas. Trees that shade building roofs can reduce the area available for installation
         of solar panels. The shading potential of trees, accounting for long‐term growth
         potential, should be considered for all projects installing solar panels.
12.8‐I‐4 Initiate and sustain on‐going efforts with local water agencies, utility providers and
         developers to establish and implement voluntary incentive‐based programs to
         encourage the use of energy and water efficient designs and equipment in new and
         existing development projects within the City.
         PG&E and East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) offer incentives, rebates,
         and technical assistance to residents and businesses wanting to improve energy
         efficiency and reduce water use.
                                             12‐27

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
12.8‐I‐5 Reduce water use and the related energy use for treating and conveying potable
         water by developing standards requiring the use of reclaimed water and non‐
         potable water sources for landscaping and construction activities including, but not
         limited to street sweeping and fugitive dust control, The development standards
         shall require new development areas that will be served with recycled water to be
         plumbed with a “purple pipe” system to facilitate the future use of recycled water.
         Implementation of this standard shall be through the adoption of development
         regulations and standards such as the Zoning Ordinance and Grading Manual and
         shall include applicability thresholds based on project size and a waiver process
         when application of these standards are not practicable in the context of the site
         conditions, state and federal regulations, water quality regulations, the project size
         and scope, project impacts or environmental concerns.
         EBMUD and the Dublin San Ramon Services District (DSRSD) jointly provide and
         distribute recycled municipal water in San Ramon through the San Ramon Valley
         Recycled Water Program (DERWA). At least half of the City’s parks are currently
         using recycled water for irrigation. When completed, the program will supply
         approximately 2 million gallons per day (mgd) to parts of San Ramon, Danville, and
         Blackhawk. Future plans identify a network of recycled water lines serving the
         Bishop Ranch office park. Specific project requirements for the use or future use of
         “purple pipe” and reclaimed water for construction purposes shall be incorporated
         into the project’s development conditions and permit requirements.
12.8‐I‐6 Support ongoing efforts with the Green Affordable Housing Coalition (GAHC),
         building industry, water and utility districts and the BAAQMD to promote enhanced
         energy conservation and sustainable building standards for new construction.
         The City of San Ramon encourages sustainable building practices by providing New
         Residential Construction Green Building Guidelines that were prepared for Contra
         Costa County communities. Programs such as LEED certification operated by the
         U.S. Green Building Council, the Energy Star operated by EPA and the U.S.
         Department of Energy, and others provide developers with recognition for going
         above and beyond current standards. City staff participates on the Green Affordable
         Housing Coalition that provides information and outreach on green building to the
         affordable housing community.
12.8‐I‐7 Work with local water and energy utilities and the building industry to develop or
         revise City design standards relating to solar orientation, water use, landscaping,
         use of cool paving surfaces, parking lot shading and such other measures oriented
         towards reducing energy demand.
         Measures and practices that have been proven effective over time can be
         incorporated as City design standards to provide consistent implementation and
         guidance to developers. Solar orientation can provide benefits from passive design
         features to solar power generation. Water conserving landscaping and irrigation
         systems are effective in reducing water demand. Measures such as using cool
         paving materials with higher reflectivity and shading parking lots can reduce
         ambient temperatures and cooling loads.
                                              12‐28

                             Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas
12.8‐I‐8 Provide recycling programs for construction and demolition debris, and for
         commercial and/or community recycling of plastic, paper, green waste, and food
         waste to reduce energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions.
         Recycling has been expanded to cover more and more types of materials to meet
         state recycling and diversion mandates. In addition, to extending the life of the
         landfill, recycling and diversion results in energy savings related to manufacturing of
         new items, transport of the waste, and reduced methane production from the
         decomposition of organic waste. San Ramon has many programs in place, including
         Composting of Residential Yard Trimmings, Composting of Residential Food Scraps
         and Soiled Paper, Home Composting Program, Curbside Recycling Program, Multi‐
         Family Dwelling Recycling Program, Commercial Recycling Program, and City
         Facilities, Events, and Venues Recycling Program. San Ramon Municipal Code,
         Division B6, Chapters XIII and II, requires projects to divert at least 50 percent of
         waste from construction/demolition/remodel activities.
12.9 CLIMATE CHANGE
GUIDING POLICIES
12.9‐G‐1 Reduce the City’s proportionate contribution of greenhouse gas emissions and the
         potential impact that may result in climate change from internal governmental
         operations and land use activities within its authority.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
12.9‐I‐1 Strive to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from its internal governmental
         operations and land use activities within its authority by 15 percent below 2008
         levels by the year 2020 pending adoption of revised targets for the City’s Climate
         Action Plan. The City will also work with the MTC to ensure that the City receives
         its proportionate fair share reduction in greenhouse gas emissions as may be
         identified under the provisions of SB 375 (2008 Chapter 728) for any projects or
         activities requiring approval by MTC.
         The California Air Resources Board (ARB) Scoping Plan suggests that cities strive to
         achieve a 15 percent emission reduction from government operations and the overall
         community by 2020. As part of SB 375 implementation, the SB 375 Regional Targets
         Advisory Committee recommended approaches to set greenhouse gas reduction
         targets to the ARB in September 2009. The ARB adopted final regional targets on
         September 23, 2010. The City will work with the MTC to determine the City’s
         proportionate fair share reduction of the regional targets. The results of this process
         could require revision of the City’s internal greenhouse gas targets.
12.9‐I‐2 Keep current and maintain the City’s adopted Climate Action Plan (CAP) as an
         implementation strategy of the General Plan 2035.
         The CAP shall include an inventory of greenhouse gas emissions within the City.
         The CAP shall set out specific policies and actions to be undertaken by the City to
         reduce greenhouse gas emissions under the control of the City. The CAP targets
                                                12‐29

                             San Ramon General Plan 2035
         will be updated as necessary during periodic reviews of the CAP based upon the
         potential of available sources for control, the feasibility of control implementation,
         and potential for funding to pursue implementation.
12.9‐I‐3 Conduct regular reviews of progress towards greenhouse gas emission reduction
         targets established by the City’s CAP, reporting progress and revising the plan as
         needed to achieve the plan’s objectives.
         The Annual Progress Reports required for the General Plan by Government Code
         Section 65400(a)(2) also provides a suitable forum to address progress on CAP
         implementation. Under adaptive management, measures would be assessed
         periodically for effectiveness and revised or replaced as needed to improve the
         program.
12.9‐I‐4 Work with other local and regional governments to assess federal and state
         programs and their impact on greenhouse gas emissions and mitigation efforts.
         Federal and state programs to reduce greenhouse gases often affect the same
         emission sources that will be targeted for reductions by the City. Work with other
         local and regional governments to ensure that its efforts enhance state and federal
         programs and are not duplicative.
12.9‐I‐5 Utilize tiered significance thresholds, as available, for the evaluation of project
         greenhouse gas emissions impacts, the preparation of project level greenhouse gas
         emission inventories, and the identification and application of mitigation.
         The 2010 BAAQMD’s 2010 CEQA thresholds were set aside by the Courts. The
         Appellate Court reinstated the BAAQMD’s “significance thresholds” for evaluating air
         quality and GHG impacts under CEQA. It is unclear if this decision will be appealed
         to the California Supreme Court, but in the interim project level analysis and
         consistency with the CAP will be required to address project impacts.
12.9‐I‐6 Require businesses to minimize emissions of ozone‐depleting compounds.
         The City has adopted regulations to reduce the release of chlorofluorocarbons
         (CFCs) into the atmosphere from activities within the City of San Ramon. Municipal
         Code Title B Regulations, Chapter III Ozone‐Depletion Control regulates these
         compounds. Article 1 prohibits the use of CFC‐processed food packaging, and
         Article 2 regulates the use and recycling of CFCs in refrigeration or air conditioning
         units in buildings and motor vehicles, fire extinguishers, and building insulation.
                                             12‐30

