 Adopted 2-16-10
 Effective 3-18-10
Amended 5-16-12
 Amended 8-6-12
CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
               LU-ii
                                           CONTENTS
Land Use Element ............................................................................................ 1
       Introduction............................................................................................ 1
       Issues Addressed By the Land Use Element ........................................ 1
       The Context for Planning In Grover Beach ........................................... 5
       Residential Neighborhoods ................................................................... 6
       Commercial Districts.............................................................................. 9
       Industrial Districts ................................................................................ 10
       Population and Demographics ............................................................ 11
Land Use Diagram and Standards................................................................ 14
       City Limits, General Plan Area and Sphere of Influence..................... 14
       Standards for the Intensity of Development ........................................ 14
       Land Use Designations ....................................................................... 16
       General Plan Development Holding Capacity ..................................... 23
Goals, Policies and Implementation Measures ........................................... 26
       Housing and Residential Neighborhoods ............................................ 28
       Commercial and Office Land Uses...................................................... 34
       Industrial Land Uses............................................................................ 46
       Parks and Recreation .......................................................................... 49
       Public and Quasi-Public Land Uses .................................................... 49
       Urban Reserve .................................................................................... 51
       Open Space/Resource Conservation.................................................. 53
       The Coastal Zone ................................................................................ 59
       Growth Management ........................................................................... 59
       Community Design and Character ...................................................... 61
       Economic Development....................................................................... 66
       Sustainability and Environmental Justice ............................................ 69
       Administration of the General Plan...................................................... 74
       Summary Table of Implementation Measures..................................... 75
                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-iii
                                       TABLES
        Table 1 -- Future Population Growth ................................................................... 12
        Table 2 – Age of Grover Beach Residents.......................................................... 12
        Table 3 – Ethnicity of Grover Beach Residents................................................... 13
        Table 4 – Gender By Age Group......................................................................... 13
        Table 5 -- Gross Acreage By General Plan Land Use Category......................... 23
        Table 6 -- Residential Development Holding Capacity........................................ 24
        Table 7 -- Non-Residential Development Holding Capacity................................ 25
        Table 8 -- Implementation Measures................................................................... 76
                                      FIGURES
Figure 1 -- Grover Beach Neighborhoods and Districts ..................................................... 6
Figure 2 -- The 5-Minute ‘Pedestrian Shed’ ....................................................................... 7
Figure 3 -- Population Growth, 1990 – 2009 .................................................................... 11
Figure 4 -- Land Use Diagram .......................................................................................... 21
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-iv

III. LAND USE ELEMENT
Introduction
When considering the seven topics, or elements that a general plan is
required to cover (land use, circulation, housing, conservation, open space,
noise and safety), the issue of land use is often of greatest interest to the
public. The Land Use Element determines the locations within the city’s
General Plan area where residential, commercial, industrial, public, and open
space land uses may occur at present and in the future. The Land Use
Element also determines the location, rate and timing of new growth and
development, which in turn informs the other Elements of the General Plan
relative to the timing of roadway and infrastructure improvements, the need
for additional affordable housing and other matters driven by land use.
Issues Addressed By the Land Use Element
The Visioning Project (Chapter II) identifies a range of issues to be
addressed by the Land Use Element and the specific policies where these
issues are addressed. Other important issues addressed by the Land Use
Element include:
Climate Change
Recent changes to State law (Assembly Bill 32 and Senate Bill 375) require
every City and County to take steps to minimize the effects of land use
decisions on climate change, primarily by adopting strategies aimed at
reducing the emission of greenhouse gases. The Land Use Element
addresses these requirements directly through Policies LU-27.1 through
27.10 which require, among other things, the preparation of a Climate Action
Plan to identify strategies to achieve greenhouse gas reduction targets. One
of the key recommendations of AB32 and SB 375 is to adopt land use
policies that incorporate principles of “Smart Growth”. These principles
include:
         Create a range of housing opportunities and choices ;
         Create walkable neighborhoods
         Encourage community and stakeholder collaboration
         Foster distinctive, attractive communities with a strong sense of
          place
         Make development decisions predictable, fair and cost effective
         Mix land uses
         Preserve open space, natural beauty and critical environmental
          areas
         Provide a variety of transportation choices
         Strengthen and direct development towards existing communities
         Take advantage of compact building design
The Land Use Element embraces these concepts by requiring (among other
things) the development of pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods and districts
composed of a complementary mix of land uses that foster modes of
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-1

transportation other than the automobile. More importantly, the historic
development pattern of Grover Beach with its grid system of streets,
interconnected neighborhoods within walking distance of school, parks, and
shopping has resulted in a pattern of development largely consistent with
these principles. In this sense, Grover Beach is an example to other
communities in efforts to embrace Smart Growth as a means of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.
Large Undeveloped Parcels
Buildout of the General Plan will occur through the development of the
remaining undeveloped infill parcels. The Land Use Element provides
specific guidance for the three remaining larger undeveloped areas of the
City:
Northeast Grover Beach
There are three largely
vacant parcels located
north of Atlantic City
Avenue and west of
Oak Park Boulevard
that comprise about
15.5       acres.     The
northerly property (APN
060-031-021) is con-
strained by a number of
factors, including:
     o   Significant biological resources that include stands of willows and
         other riparian species along Meadow Creek and a number of large
         oak trees;
     o   Steep slopes
     o   Archaeological resources (potentially)
     o   View protection
     o   The floodplain of Meadow Creek
The middle property (APN 060-031-022) has limited opportunities for
vehicular access and must rely on access from adjoining properties. And the
southerly property (APN 060-031-005) is constrained by a number of factors,
including:
     o   A number of large oak trees;
     o   Steep slopes
     o   Protection of views from the south
     o   Archaeological resources (potentially)
     o   Undocumented fill
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-2
These large vacant holdings offer considerable potential for a range of land
uses that could help broaden the City’s tax base and help meet its regional
fair share of affordable housing. The Land Use Element provides specific
policy guidance for the development of these parcels to address the
identified physical constraints (LU-3.3, LU-3.4, LU-9.1 and LU-9.2).
The Strawberry Field
The Strawberry Field
comprises        the       last
remaining property within
the City’s General Plan
area with ongoing pro-
ductive agricultural opera-
tions. While maintaining
viable      agriculture      is
important in its own right,
the     strawberry      fields
provide      an    important
community amenity and a
source of locally-grown
food. At the same time,
the field is surrounded on
all    sides     by    urban
development and lies within the City’s corporate boundaries. Thus, at some
point in the future it may be appropriate to convert this land to an urban use,
in part to help offset the pressure to convert larger agricultural holdings
elsewhere.
The Strawberry Field presents few physical constraints to development.
Accordingly, it could accommodate a wide range of land uses and help the
City achieve its affordable housing and economic development objectives.
The Land Use Element (Policy LU-15.1) recommends keeping the
Strawberry Field in productive agriculture until such time as urban
development is timely and initiated by the property owner. In addition, Policy
LU-15.2 requires the preparation of a specific plan to set forth the appropriate
range of land uses and development standards.
Farroll Road Property (APN 060-572-002)
The vacant property located on the north side of Farroll
Road at 16th Street constitutes one of the City’s last
remaining large infill residential sites. The southerly
extension of 16th Street will divide the property with the
larger portion (about 8 acres) on the east and about 1.3
acres on the west. The Land Use Diagram designates the
site as Low Density Residential. Policy LU-3.2 requires
development of the site to address privacy and
neighborhood compatibility issues and to incorporate a
useable open space/park like setting centrally located to
serve future residents and a landscaped parkway along
    th                                                                Looking northeast at the Farroll
16 Street.
                                                                      Road property.
                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-3

                     Aerial view of the Farroll Road
                                               th
                     property showing the 16      Street
                     extension.
The 13 Street Corridor
The 13th Street corridor is one of three primary north-south connections
between Grand Avenue and the community of Oceano and beyond. The
corridor has been developed with an eclectic mix of residences and
businesses between Grand Avenue and Farroll Road. The mix of
development raises the question of whether the corridor should be
predominantly residential along its frontage, or businesses, or a combination
of the two. There are a number of neighborhood-serving commercial
businesses along 13th Street serving the day to day needs of surrounding
residents within easy walking distance.
The Land Use Element recommends preserving existing residential
                          th
development along 13 Street, including the existing mobile home park
(Policy LU-10.2). In addition, Policy LU-10.1 recommends limited expansion
of neighborhood serving businesses along 13th Street where such expansion
will be compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
The Front Street Industrial Area
The Front Street industrial area between Front Street and Beckett is an area
in transition from housing to industrial, with several dwellings interspersed
among recent industrial projects along with vacant and underutilized parcels.
There are stable residential neighborhoods immediately to the east.
A number of factors suggest that continued industrial development in the
Front Street area would not be desirable. These issues include:
        The proximity of Front Street to Grand Avenue and the beach;
        The proximity of residences to the east and compatibility conflicts
         with surrounding residences, including access through residential
         neighborhoods for delivery vehicles serving industrial businesses;
        The slow pace of development of this area with industrial
         businesses;
Accordingly, the Land Use Diagram designates the Front Street area for
additional Visitor Serving Mixed-Use development, and recommends that the
City assist business owners in efforts to relocate to more suitable locations in
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-4

the industrial district south of Farroll Road. The one remaining area with an
Industrial designation is the property located west of Front Street to the
railroad that has an existing approval for development.
Consistency Between Land Use and Zoning
One of the objectives of the Land Use Element update is to ensure
consistency between the Land Use Diagram and the corresponding zoning.
This is addressed by Implementation Measure No. 4 (See Table 8).
Infill Development
Much of the City of Grover Beach has been developed. Consequently the
fundamental pattern, distribution, and form of development has been
established. Achieving the objectives of the Visioning Project (Chapter II)
such as the establishment of distinct commercial and mixed use centers will
necessitate the redevelopment and re-use of these areas. Redevelopment of
existing developed properties is inherently more difficult to achieve than the
development of vacant properties. In addition, the infill and recycling of
existing properties must be accommodated in a manner that does not
adversely disrupt existing neighborhoods.
The Context for Planning In Grover Beach
Setting
Grover Beach is a city of about 2.25 square miles situated on a broad coastal
plain that stretches from the coastal dunes to the Arroyo Grande Valley. The
beach and dune area adjacent to the City lie within Pismo State Beach which
is managed by the California Department of Parks and Recreation. The City
is separated from the beach by the northerly terminus of the coastal dune
complex that has formed along the shore from Grover Beach to Point Sal.
The dunes provide opportunities for recreation and for the protection of
sensitive natural resources.
Existing Land Use and Pattern of Development
The basic pattern of urban development in Grover Beach can be traced to
the grid system of streets established by its founder, D.W. Grover, in the late
   th
19 century, who envisioned his new city as the "…grandest summer and
winter seaside resort on the Pacific Coast".
The City has experienced intermittent periods of development following
World War II and continuing through the 1950’s and 60’s. The scale and
character of development reflects each of these eras. Older neighborhoods
consist of single story detached dwellings of wood frame construction and
stucco exterior constructed on small lots. More recent development has seen
an increase in the size of dwellings, and an increase in two-story
construction.
The City has provided significant areas for development of multiple family
dwellings and in the past 10 years the development of these areas has
provided for a wider range of housing opportunities. In addition, there are
                                                                                The City’s grid system of streets
                                                                                was established by D.W. Grover.
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-5

four mobilehome parks and a mobilehome subdivision scattered throughout
the community.
In order to meet the City’s allocation of affordable housing as prescribed by
the Regional Housing Needs Allocation adopted by the San Luis Obispo
Council of Governments, the City will need to set aside sufficient land to
serve the needs of targeted income groups. Please refer to the Housing
Element for additional information regarding housing issues.
Residential Neighborhoods
Grover Beach is composed of a diverse collection of neighborhoods (Figure
1) interconnected by a grid system of streets. The street pattern, the
abundance of small neighborhood businesses, and the proximity of housing
to the commercial ‘spine’ formed along Grand Avenue, make Grover Beach
neighborhoods imminently ‘walkable’, and accessible to businesses that
serve their day-to-day needs.
Neighborhoods are often defined by a quarter-mile “pedestrian shed”, in
which most residents’ daily needs can be met within a five-minute walk. As
shown on Figure 2, most residents of Grover Beach are within a short walk of
neighborhood-serving businesses.
Figure 1 -- Grover Beach Neighborhoods and Districts
                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-6

Figure 2 -- Neighborhood Serving Commercial Businesses and the 5-Minute
‘Pedestrian Shed’
                      CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                     LU-7

The Northern Hillsides
The Northern Hillsides neighborhood lies in the upland area generally
bounded by Atlantic City Avenue, N. 4th Street, Oak Park Boulevard and El
Camino Real. Residences are afforded spectacular views along the coast,
and toward the foothills. In addition, the Northern Hillsides support groves of
oak trees on the north-facing slopes and important riparian resources along
Meadow Creek. Residential development consists primarily of single family
dwellings on larger lots, with occasional duplex and multi-family units
especially along Atlantic City Avenue. This neighborhood has considerable
remaining infill development potential
North Grover Beach
This neighborhood includes the residences north of the Grand Avenue
                     th
corridor between 4 street and Oak Park Boulevard and south of Atlantic City
Avenue. The pattern of residential development consists of single family
dwellings on smaller individual lots north of Newport Avenue, with residential
densities increasing toward Grand Avenue where an assortment of
apartments, condominiums and mobile homes occupy the blocks north of
Ramona Avenue and south of Brighton Avenue. This entire neighborhood is
within a five-minute walk of commercial businesses along Grand Avenue.
                                           th
Southeast Grover Beach and the 13 Street Corridor
This neighborhood includes newer single family residential development
south of Farroll Road and east of 13th Street, which connects this
neighborhood with Grand Avenue. South of Longbranch, the pattern of
residential development consists of older single family dwellings on individual
lots, interspersed with newer dwellings on larger cul-de-sac lots. South of
Farroll Road the grid system of streets has been replaced by new residential
subdivisions with cul-de-sacs. This neighborhood contains one of the last
remaining large infill lots. Development along the 13 Street corridor north of
Farroll Road is a mix of single family residences, retail businesses, offices
and quasi-public uses. The small businesses serve the surrounding
neighborhood with a variety of day-to-day goods and services.
South Grover Beach
This neighborhood consists of older, higher density housing on smaller lots
north of Manhattan Avenue and south of Grand Avenue. There are several
vacant and underutilized lots in the area, which could support additional
                                                th
higher density infill development. West of 4 Street is industrial development
along the railroad right-of-way which should be evaluated for expansion of
beach-serving visitor development.
Northwest Grover Beach
The neighborhood west of 4th Street and north of Ramona Avenue consists
of older single family residences and medium-to-high density development
north of Atlantic City Avenue. This neighborhood borders the north Front
Street industrial area where older residences are being replaced by newer
industrial businesses. Reducing impacts to existing residential
neighborhoods from expanded industrial development in this area is an
important objective of the General Plan.
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-8
Commercial Districts
Commercial development in Grover Beach is concentrated along the Grand
Avenue corridor, along El Camino Real and in smaller neighborhood-serving
nodes. Commercial businesses within these areas serve different needs of
visitors and residents.
The predominant commercial feature of the City is the commercial corridor
that runs along W. Grand Avenue from the eastern City limits to State Route
1 on the west. Much of the older commercial businesses, especially along
the Grand Avenue corridor, are smaller by today’s standards, reflecting the
size of the underlying lots. The typical lot width of 50 feet and smaller has
contributed to a pattern of development with smaller buildings of often
unrelated character and style.
Visitor Serving Businesses
The City should continue to capitalize on its desirable beach-side setting by
attracting a number of businesses, hotels, motels and restaurants that cater
to the needs of visitors. Motels and hotels have been established along El
                                              th
Camino Real near the Oak Park and 4 Street freeway interchanges with
Highway 101, along with restaurants and shops aimed at travelers.
At the west end of Grand Avenue near the entrance to Pismo State Beach
and the Oceano Dunes State Vehicular Recreation area are a number of
retail, restaurants and service businesses to serve the needs of beach-goers.
The City intends to develop a beach-front lodge on property just inside the
State Beach property on Grand Avenue to serve as an anchor for expanding
tourism and reinforcing the City’s image as a beach-side community.
Shopping Centers and Large-Scale Retail
The commercial development along Grand Avenue east of 14th Street
supports more conventional, larger-scale retail centers that provide for the
day-to-day needs of Grover Beach residents. These centers support a
diverse assortment of retail and service businesses and are designed to be
visited primarily by automobile.
Downtown/Central Business District
                                                 th           th
The area along Grand Avenue between 5 Street and 14 Street, with a
                                        th                 th
Downtown Core area between 8 Street and 11 Street and north to
Ramona Park serves as the central business district for Grover Beach. The
majority of the City’s civic offices are here, as well as the post office and
financial institutions. The City should encourage creation of a Civic Center in
the vicinity of the existing City Hall complex and encourage County, State
and other agencies to locate in these areas.
Neighborhood-Serving Businesses
As discussed previously, the majority of Grover Beach neighborhoods are
served by an assortment of small, independently owned and operated
businesses that include small grocery stores, food establishments, hair
cutting, and other services that cater to the day-to-day needs of Grover
Beach residents. These neighborhood businesses are an invaluable
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-9
                                                                                Amended by Resolution No. 12-54

resource for residents by providing needed goods and services within
walking distance.
Industrial Districts
Grover Beach has two industrial districts, each with its own distinct character,
issues and opportunities. Older industrial development consists of smaller
pre-fabricated buildings providing manufacturing, warehousing, auto storage
and repair, and contractor’s storage businesses with ten or fewer employees.
More recent industrial development south of Farroll Road and along Front
Street and Atlantic City has included larger businesses with stable, well
paying or head of household jobs.
The Front Street Industrial District
The Front Street industrial area between Front Street and Beckett is an area
in transition from housing to industrial, with several dwellings interspersed
among recent industrial projects. In addition, there are stable residential
neighborhoods immediately east of the Front Street industrial district. This
situation raises concerns regarding Impacts from industrial development
(visual clutter, noise, traffic, light and glare) on the remaining dwellings, and
on the surrounding neighborhoods. Many of the industrial businesses in the
Front Street area are owner-occupied and provide living quarters.
When considering the neighborhood context, the proximity of the beach and
Grand Avenue, the Front Street Industrial District is considered an
appropriate location for the expansion of visitor-serving mixed-use
development.
The Fourth Street Triangle
The industrial area in the triangle formed by South Fourth Street, Rockaway
Avenue and the railroad right-of-way presents opportunities for the expansion
of existing, stable employment as well as additional visitor-serving
development in the vicinity of the train station and the entrance to the beach.
South of Farroll Road Industrial District/Grover Beach Business Park
The majority of industrial land in Grover Beach is located south of Farroll
                                                                   th
Road between the railroad right-of-way/State Route 1 and 12 Street, north
of Highland Avenue. This area has been developed with an assortment of
smaller pre-fabricated buildings containing manufacturing businesses with
ten or fewer employees. More recent industrial development south of Farroll
Road has included larger businesses with stable, well paying jobs. This area
offers considerable opportunities for infill development and the expansion of
the City’s employment base.
Parks
Grover Beach also provides neighborhood and community parks which
contain playground equipment, ball fields, barbecue areas and community
centers that provide for child care/education centers and community meeting
places. Detailed policies and programs to guide the acquisition and
development of park land to serve the City are provided in the Parks and
Recreation Element of the General Plan.
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-10

Streets and Rights of Way
Street rights-of-way occupy about 24% of the land area within the City, which
reflects the overly wide nature of the streets
Population and Demographics
The goals and objectives of the General Plan must be founded on a thorough
understanding of the present and future residents of the City, if the objectives
of the Plan are to be achieved. What follows is a brief discussion of past and
future population growth in Grover Beach, and an overview of the
demographic composition of its residents, as reported by the 2000 Census.
Additional information about Grover Beach demographics and socio-
economic data is provided in the General Plan Background Report.
Past and Future Population Growth
Figure 3 shows historic population for the City from 1990 to 2009 as reported
by the California Department of Finance (DOF). As Figure 3 shows, the City’s
population has grown slowly over the years. According to DOF, the City’s
population grew from about 11,500 in 1990 to about 13,262 in 2005, an
average annual growth rate of about 0.8 percent per year. By comparison,
the County population as a whole grew at an average annual rate of about
1.30 percent during the same period.
Table 1 shows population projections prepared for the San Luis Obispo
Council of Governments (SLOCOG) for the City of Grover Beach and San
Luis Obispo County (total population). Table 1 suggests that population
growth for the City will continue at a modest pace for the next twenty years,
growing from an estimated population of 13,550 in 2010 to about 15,000 in
2030, which represents an average annual growth rate of about 0.54 percent.
During the same period, the County population is expected to grow at about
1.2 percent per year, from about 275,000 residents in 2010 to about 335,000
in 2030.
Figure 3 – Population Growth, 1990 – 2009
                                          City of Grover Beach
                                       Historic Population Growth
                                 Source: California Department of Finance, May 2009
                13,500
                13,000
   Population
                12,500
                12,000
                11,500
                11,000
                10,500
                         1990   1992    1994     1996     1998    2000     2002       2004   2006   2008
                                                                 Year
                                  CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                     LU-11

             Table 1 -- Future Population Growth, City of Grover Beach
                              and San Luis Obispo County
                                                Future Population By Year
       Jurisdiction          2010          2015            2020           2025         2030
      Grover Beach          13,550        13,950          14,400         14,700       15,000
San Luis Obispo County     274,890       288,480         304,920        318,990      335,470
Source: : Economics Research Associates, Population and Employment Forecast Report, July, 2006,
medium growth projection prepared for the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG).
 Age, Ethnicity and Gender
 Tables 2, 3 and 4 summarize the age, ethnicity and gender of Grover Beach
 residents as reported by the 2000 US Census. As Table 2 shows, the age
 composition of Grover Beach residents is very similar to the composition of
 the County as a whole, with a sizeable portion of the population in the ‘work
 force’ ages of 20 to 55. The City also has a slightly higher percentage of
 school-aged children than the County, which suggests the need for greater
 consideration of schools, recreation facilities and programs, and day care. It
 should be noted that these data are almost eleven years old in 2009, and
 that the proportions have likely changed somewhat as the population has
 aged. For example, the 2010 Census may reveal a larger percentage of
 residents over age 65, consistent with what has occurred in many coastal
 cities, which in turn has implications for future housing and services,
 including medical services.
                     Table 2 – Age of Grover Beach Residents
                                                                                SLO
                    Age Group                      Number        Percent
                                                                               County
     19 and under                                    3,663         29%          26%
     20 to 34                                        2,824         21%          20%
     35 to 54                                        4,040         31%          30%
     55 to 74                                        1,853         14%          16%
     Over 74                                          687           5%           8%
     Total:                                         13,067
 Source: 2000 US Census
 Table 3 provides a summary of the ethnicity of residents as reported by the
 2000 Census. As Table 3 shows, Grover Beach consists of mostly white
 residents, followed by Hispanic/Latino and other races, respectively. The
 percentage of Hispanic residents is slightly higher than for the County as a
 whole.
                            CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                            LU-12

                   Table 3 – Ethnicity of Grover Beach Residents
                                                                          SLO
                    Category                    Number      Percent
                                                                         County
   White                                         9,023         70%        76%
   Black or African American                      190          1%          2%
   Asian                                          376          3%          4%
   Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander     684          6%          3%
   Hispanic or Latino                            2,719         20%        15%
   Total:                                        13,067
Source: 2000 US Census
Table 4 indicates the population of Grover Beach is nearly equally divided
between genders, with slightly more female than male residents. There are
slightly more female residents within the workforce years of ages 20 to 55.
                          Table 4 – Gender By Age Group
                        Age Group                  Male           Female
             0 to 17                               1,733           1,613
             18 to 39                              2,085           2,155
             40 to 54                              1,436           1,505
             55 to 74                               818            1,035
             75 and Over                            262             425
             Total:                                6,334           6,733
          Source: 2000 US Census
The 2000 census also reports that the majority of Grover Beach residents
live in one-person or two-person households, with an average household
size of 2.58, which is slightly higher than the average household size for the
County as a whole (2.49).
                           CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                           LU-13

LAND USE DIAGRAM AND STANDARDS
The Land Use Diagram (Figure 4) depicts proposed land uses for Grover
Beach. In addition to showing the various uses to which land may be
committed, the Land Use Diagram depicts several important jurisdictional
and regulatory boundaries, described below.
City Limits, General Plan Area and Sphere of Influence
The Land Use Diagram (Figure 4) shows the City’s current (2009)
incorporated limits within which the City provides the full range of public
services and exercises exclusive control over land use.
Another important regulatory boundary is the City’s adopted sphere of
influence established for the City by the Local Agency Formation
Commission. The Cortese-Knox Act defines a sphere of influence as a
“...plan for the probable ultimate physical boundaries and service area of a
local agency...” (Government Code Section 56076). In more practical terms,
the sphere of influence identifies land within the City’s General Plan area that
may eventually be annexed into the City.
As shown on the Land Use Diagram, the general plan area and sphere of
influence are identical to the incorporated limits.
Standards for the Intensity of Development
The following sections describe the land use designations appearing on the
Land Use Diagram, standards of population density and building intensity for
the various land use designations, and examples of locations within the
Planning Area where the various land use designations have been applied.
In accordance with State law, the General Plan must specify standards of
population density and building intensity for each land use designation.
Standards for building intensity for residential designations are stated in
terms of the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre and
the allowable range of dwelling units per gross acre. For purposes of this
General Plan, gross density and net density are defined as follows:
          Gross Residential Density: The total acreage of a given area
          inclusive of streets, parks, schools, water features, plus the acreage
          devoted to residential development, divided by the total number of
          residential dwelling units within the area.
          Net Residential Density: The total acres of a given area devoted to
          residential development, only, excluding streets, parks, schools and
          all other areas, divided by the number of dwellings within that area.
Standards of building intensity for residential uses are stated as the allowable
range of dwelling units per gross acre. Standards of population density for
residential uses can be derived by multiplying the maximum allowable
number of dwelling units per gross acre by the average number of persons
                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-14

per dwelling unit assumed for the applicable residential designation. The
assumed average number of persons per dwelling unit for each residential
designation has been extrapolated from estimates by the California
Department of Finance for San Luis Obispo County.
For non-residential land uses, building intensity standards are expressed in
terms of maximum allowable floor-area ratios (FARs). A floor-area ratio is
the ratio of building size to lot area:
Floor Area Ratio = Maximum Building Area Allowed
                            Net Area of Lot
The FAR is most often used to determine the maximum allowable building
size for a particular lot, as follows:
Maximum Building Area Allowed = Net Area of Lot X Floor Area Ratio
For example, a 5,000 square foot lot with a FAR of 1.00 will allow a building
of 5,000 gross square feet, regardless of the number of stories in the building
(e.g., 2,500 square feet on two floors, or 5,000 square feet on one floor). The
same lot with a FAR of 0.50 would allow a 2,500 square foot building, or a
10,000 square foot building with a FAR of 2.00.
                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-15
Land Use Designations
Land Use Designations define the amount, type and nature of development
that is allowed on the Land Use Plan. These designations represent the
intended future use of each parcel of land within the city limits. The following
is a definition of each of the land use designations. One or more of the
zoning districts established in the City’s Zoning Code corresponds to each of
the land use designations. The Zoning Code translates the long-term
objective of the land use designations into detailed regulations pertaining to
permitted and conditional uses, site development standards, and
performance criteria to implement the goals and policies of the General Plan.
A proposed project must conform to the Land Use Designation on the Land
Use Diagram or must go through a General Plan Amendment process. In
addition, State law requires that the City’s General Plan and Zoning Code be
consistent in order to promote cohesive short-and long-range developments.
However, the intent of these two documents is different, and therefore they
do not have to be – and typically are not –precisely the same. The General
Plan’s land use designations are intended to give general guidance on the
density and intensity of development, which are often expressed in ranges,
whereas the Zoning Code contains very specific standards about how
development may occur.
Residential Land Use Designations
There are three primary residential land use designations. Each of the
residential use categories includes a range of allowable densities. The
maximum density defines the maximum number of units per gross acre at
which development can occur, unless an additional bonus is provided by
State or City regulations. Residential density (the number of dwelling units
allowed per acre, calculated prior to dedications for streets and other
improvements) may decrease due to site constraints or increase if affordable
housing bonuses are incorporated. The determination of precise density,
development location, and lot coverage permitted on individual sites will
depend upon many factors, including but not limited to architectural design,
the method of addressing parking needs, landscaping, street layout and
neighborhood compatibility.
Low Density Residential
The Low Density Residential designation allows for single-family detached
and attached homes, secondary residential units, public and quasi-public
uses, and similar and compatible uses. Residential densities shall be in the
range of 2 to 5 units per gross acre. For purposes of estimating future
population, the number of residents per dwelling unit is assumed to be 2.5
persons.
Medium Density Residential
The Medium Density Residential designation allows for small lot single-family
attached or detached homes, duplexes, multi-family residential units, public
and quasi-public uses and similar and compatible uses. Residential
densities shall be in the range of 6 to 9 units per gross acre. For purposes of
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-16

estimating future population, the number of residents per dwelling unit is
assumed to be 2.5 persons.
High Density Residential
The High Density Residential designation provides for single-family attached
homes, multi-family residential, mobile home parks, public and quasi-public
uses and similar and compatible uses. Residential densities shall be in the
range of 10 to 20 units per gross acre. For purposes of estimating future
population, the number of residents per dwelling unit is assumed to be 3.0
persons.
Commercial and Industrial Designations
There are four commercial designations which accommodate a full range of
commercial enterprises; three of the four incorporate mixed use development
which allows for residential development to accompany commercial
development. The actual development intensity accommodated on a given
site will be a function of the building and development codes, public works
standards and other development regulations. In addition, new development
must be consistent with policies of the General Plan aimed at protecting
public safety, achieving high quality site planning and design, and the
protection of significant natural resources.
Central Business District – Mixed-Use
The Central Business District – Mixed-Use designation provides for the
establishment of a pedestrian-oriented downtown core through the functional
integration of retail, commercial services, restaurants, professional offices,
civic, entertainment and residential uses. This category allows for both
vertical (different uses stacked above one another) and horizontal (different
ground level uses on a single parcel) mixed use opportunities. In general, the
ground floor of development within the Central Business District – Mixed-Use
designation should be occupied by retail shops, service businesses
(including eating and drinking establishments) and professional offices, with
the upper floors reserved for visitor accommodations, offices and dwellings.
In some areas designated Central Business District – Mixed-Use, the City
may wish to emphasize office uses to serve as a transition to surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
The ratio of building floor area to site area shall not exceed 3.0. The Zoning
Code will establish maximum building height and lot coverage, and minimum
setbacks from streets and other property lines, as well as procedures for
exceptions to such standards in special circumstances. However, the
maximum building height for structures in this designation shall be 40 feet or
3 stories, whichever is greater. A higher building height may be established
for specific areas by the Zoning Code.
Development review will determine a project’s realized building intensity, to
reflect existing or desired architectural character in a neighborhood. When
dwellings are provided they shall not exceed 20 units per gross acre. So long
as the floor area ratio is not exceeded, the maximum residential density may
be developed in addition to nonresidential development on a site. For
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-17

purposes of estimating future population, the number of residents per
dwelling unit is assumed to be 2.0 persons.
Visitor Serving – Mixed-Use
The Visitor Serving – Mixed Use designation accommodates a
complementary range of hotels and motels, bed and breakfast
accommodations, convention facilities, restaurants, recreational uses and
retail sales primarily for the convenience of visitors. This category is
intended to foster the establishment of a pedestrian-oriented district near the
beachfront, the train station, and the entrance to the Oceano Dunes State
Vehicular Recreation Area, and Pismo State Beach that provides
convenience goods and services for visitors to Grover Beach and the
surrounding neighborhood areas. Opportunities to provide family oriented
businesses within this area should be explored. The Visitor Serving- Mixed
Use category allows for both vertical (different uses stacked above one
another) and horizontal (different ground level uses on a single parcel) mixed
use opportunities.
In general, ground floor development within the Visitor Serving – Mixed-Use
designation should be reserved for retail shops, eating and drinking
establishments, and visitor accommodations, with the upper floors reserved
for additional visitor accommodations, offices and dwellings. To assure
adequate space for visitor-serving uses, properties within this designation
should not include general retail stores unless oriented to visitors, auto
repair, or business services. Although mixed-use development is
encouraged, it is not required.
The ratio of building floor area to site area shall not exceed 3.0. The Zoning
Regulations will establish maximum building height and lot coverage, and
minimum setbacks from streets and other property lines, as well as
procedures for exceptions to such standards in special circumstances.
However, the maximum building height for structures in this designation shall
be 40 feet or 3 stories, whichever is greater. A higher building height may be
established for specific areas by the Zoning Code.
When dwellings are provided in the Visitor Serving –Mixed Use district, they
shall not exceed 20 units per acre. So long as the floor area ratio is not
exceeded, the maximum residential density may be developed in addition to
nonresidential development on a site. For purposes of estimating future
population, the number of residents per dwelling unit is assumed to be 2.0
persons.
Neighborhood Serving – Mixed-Use
Land uses within the Neighborhood Serving – Mixed-Use designation are
intended to provide for the convenience shopping needs of the surrounding
neighborhood with neighborhood retail, commercial services, personal
services and professional offices. These centers can also integrate housing
with commercial development on a single site. Neighborhood Serving uses
should be available within about a five minute walk or bike ride of residences.
In general, these uses should be located on sites not exceeding about four
acres, unless the neighborhood to be served includes a significant amount of
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-18

high density residential development. Although mixed-use development
within the Neighborhood Serving – Mixed Use designation is encouraged, it
is not required.
The ratio of building floor area to site area shall not exceed 0.75. The Zoning
Code will establish maximum building height and lot coverage, and minimum
setbacks from streets and other property lines, as well as procedures for
exceptions to such standards in special circumstances. However, the
maximum building height for structures in this designation shall be 30 feet or
two stories, whichever is greater.
Development review will determine a project’s realized building intensity, to
reflect existing or desired architectural character in a neighborhood. When
dwellings are provided, they shall not exceed 9 units per gross acre. So long
as the floor area ratio is not exceeded, the maximum residential density may
be developed in addition to nonresidential development on a site. For
purposes of estimating future population, the number of residents per
dwelling unit is assumed to be 2.0 persons.
Retail and Commercial Services
Areas for shopping centers that serve community-wide needs are designated
Retail and Commercial Services. The Retail and Commercial Services areas
are intended to provide for a wide range of retail sales and personal services
within the context of distinctive, pedestrian oriented shopping centers that
serve customers and clients from the surrounding community. These uses
include grocery stores, drug stores, restaurants, video stores, beauty salons,
dry cleaners, non-automobile repair shops, nurseries and home maintenance
centers. Retail and Commercial Services centers may accommodate retail
uses of a larger scale that would be inappropriate in the Central Business
District – Mixed Use, Visitor Serving -- Mixed Use or Neighborhood Serving
Mixed-Use commercial areas.
Additionally, this designation accommodates highway-oriented visitor-serving
uses such as hotels, motels, restaurants and service stations located near
Highway 101. The ratio of floor area to site area shall not exceed 0.50.
In some instances, the City may determine through a Use Permit that
residential use would be appropriate at the Medium Density (6-9 DU/Acre) to
provide a transition area into the surrounding residential areas.
Industrial
The Industrial designation allows for planned industrial parks, warehouses,
retail uses when accessory to a warehouse or industrial use, light
manufacturing and assembly, and similar and compatible uses. In addition,
the Industrial designation accommodates smaller service businesses such as
contractor’s yards and car storage. This designation also allows for
automobile service and repair shops, wholesalers and commercial uses
related to building and mechanical material sales and supply.
The ratio of floor area to site area shall not exceed 0.50. The Zoning
Regulations will establish maximum building height and lot coverage, and
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-19

minimum setbacks from streets and other property lines, as well as
procedures for exceptions to such standards in special circumstances.
Development review will determine a project’s realized building intensity, to
reflect existing or desired architectural character in a neighborhood.
Dwellings may be provided as part of a specially approved mixed-use
development which may include live-work settings, caretaker’s residences, or
other similar and compatible living arrangements. The appropriate residential
density would be set considering the maximum residential density allowed in
any neighboring residential area.
Public/Quasi Public
The Public/Quasi-Public designation provides for government-owned
facilities, schools, and quasi-public uses. The ratio of floor area to site area
for the development of permanent structures in the Public/Quasi-Public
designation shall be determined at the time of development review.
Parks and Recreation
The Parks and Recreation designation provides for existing and planned
public parks and other recreational uses. Examples of specific uses that are
appropriate within this designation include active playing fields, parks and
recreation facilities, plazas, bicycle and walking trails, and water re-charge
and detention facilities that are also used as public parks when they are not
flooded. The ratio of floor area to site area for the development of permanent
structures in the Parks and Recreation designated areas shall be determined
at the time of development review.
Open Space/Resource Conservation
The Open Space/Resource Conservation designation is applied to areas
intended for active and passive recreation (including the Pismo Beach State
Park and golf course), to preserve sensitive habitat for special status plant or
animal species, in areas subject to flood hazard, in areas for watershed
protection, and on land subject to steep slopes.
In general, structures are not allowed within this designation; however,
structures necessary to support recreation activities at the State Park may be
considered. The commercial extraction of natural resources is prohibited
under this designation.
Urban Reserve
The Land Use Diagram (Figure 4) shows desired future uses for most land
within the City’s General Plan area. However, the City has not decided the
best eventual use for the Strawberry Field south of Highland Avenue. This
area is designated Urban Reserve, indicating that it will be suitable for urban
development when certain conditions are satisfied, beginning with a desire
expressed by the property owner. The Urban Reserve designation is to be
changed to a range of urban classifications as prescribed by the
requirements set forth in the General Plan only when the conditions
necessary for development can be satisfied and a certain type of
development is approved through adoption of a specific plan addressing all
of the requirements of Government Code Section 65451. (See Policy LU-15.)
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-20

Figure 4 -- Land Use Diagram
                             CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                            LU-21
[This page left blank intentionally]
                                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                    LU-22
General Plan Development Holding Capacity
The General Plan “development holding capacity” is the number of dwelling units, commercial
and industrial floor space, etc., that can be accommodated based on the amount of land
designated for these uses. Due to market forces, the size and shape of parcels and other
factors, the maximum development potential is rarely achieved. For this reason, holding
capacity is typically expressed as 80 percent of the gross development potential (acres x
building intensity).
Table 5 summarizes the gross acreage designated for various land uses by the Grover Beach
General Plan, and their corresponding holding capacities. Tables 6 and 7 summarize the
development holding capacities for residential and non-residential land, respectively. As Tables
6 and 7 show, the General Plan Land Use Diagram could accommodate a population of about
16,080 residents at full buildout, in addition to about 2.9 million total square feet of commercial
and industrial development. It should be noted that these figures represent an estimate of
conditions at full buildout of the land designated for these uses inclusive of existing development.
                               Table 5 -- Gross Acreage By General Plan
                                              Land Use Category
                                                                     Gross       Percent
                                Land Use Category
                                                                     Acres       of Total
                    Low Density Residential                          345.78        22.71
                    Medium Density Residential                       169.10         11.1
                    High Density Residential                         126.30         8.30
                    Central Business District – Mixed Use             37.44         2.46
                    Visitor Serving Mixed-Use                         56.14         3.69
                    Neighborhood Serving Mixed-Use                    7.60          0.50
                    Retail and Commercial Services                    38.95         2.56
                    Industrial                                        73.66         4.84
                    Public/Quasi-Public                               39.89         2.62
                    Parks and Recreation                             16.022         1.05
                    Open Space and Resource Conservation             197.13        12.95
                    Urban Reserve                                     39.14         2.57
                    Rights-Of-Way and Other Land                     375.05        24.64
                    Total:                                          1522.12         100
                  Source: City of Grover Beach General Plan Land Use Diagram, 2009
                                      CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                     LU-23                                 Amended by Resolution No. 12-54

                                                                    Table 6 -- Residential Development Holding Capacity
                                                                                              Ave. Net                   Persons                                                     Total
                                                                                                                                       Estimated       Existing (2009)                 At
                                                                            Vacant +        Residential    Net New         Per
     Land Use Category             Total     Vacant     Underutilized                                                                  Additional                                   Buildout
                                         1          1             2      Underutilized      Density For    Dwelling      Dwelling
                                  Acres      Acres         Acres                                                      3         5      Population
                                                                              Acres             New          Units         Unit
                                                                                                        2                                           Dwelling                Dwelling
                                                                                           Development
                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                     Units     Population     Units      Population
Low Density Residential            345.78     19.65          22.4             42.05               4           109           2.5           273
Medium Density Residential         169.10     2.37           1.86              4.23              7             15           2.5            38
High Density Residential           126.30      3.4          38.17              41.57             16            614           3           1,842
Central Business District -
                                                                                                                   4
Mixed Use                          37.44      1.166         13.72             14.886             16            86            2            171
                                                                                                                    4
Visitor Serving Mixed-Use           56.14     4.57          27.47             34.26              16           276            2            553
Neighborhood Serving Mixed-
                                                                                                                  4
Use                                  7.6       1.21          5.56              6.77               7             2           2.5             5
Retail Service Commercial           38.95       0             2                 2                7             14           2.5            35
Total:                             784.96    32.366        111.18             145.77                          1,116                      2,917       5,708        13,254      6,824        16,171
                 Notes:
                 1.   Source: City of Grover Beach General Plan Land Use Diagram, 2009
                 2.   Sources: Lisa Wise Consulting, City of Grover Beach Draft Housing Element, May, 2009, and CMCA, May 2009
                 3.   Average net density x vacant and underutilized acres.
                 4.   Assumptions for the residential component of mixed-use development:
                            a. Percentage of mixed-use floor area devoted to residences:
                                       i. Central Business District and Visitor-Serving Mixed Use: 33%
                                      ii. Neighborhood Serving Mixed Use: 10%
                            b. Average unit size: 1,500 square feet
                 5.   Source: City of Grover Beach General Plan Land Use Diagram, 2009
                 6.   Source: California Department of Finance, Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties and State, 2001-2009, May 2009
                                                                                   CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                   LU-24                                                                Amended by Resolution No. 12-54
                                                             Table 7 -- Non-Residential Development Holding Capacity
                                                                                                                                                                        Existing
                                                                                                           Gross                                      Net New             Non-           Total
                                                                          Vacant +        Floor      Development         Correction   Mixed-Use     Development        Residential         At
  Land Use Category            Total      Vacant      Underutilized                                                    4         5                                  8
                                     1           1              2      Underutilized      Area         Potential          Factor      Floor Area     Potential            Floor       Buildout
                              Acres       Acres           Acres                                 3        (square feet)                                (square feet)               6    (square feet)
                                                                           Acres         Ratios                                       Devoted to                          Area
                                                                                                                                                  7                     (square feet)
                                                                                                                                      Residential
Central Business District
- Mixed Use                    38.35       1.166          13.72            14.886           3           1,945,302           0.2         128,390       260,671
Visitor Serving Mixed-
Use                            59.79        4.57          27.47             32.04           3           4,186,987           0.3         414,512       841,584
Neighborhood Serving
Mixed-Use                       7.6         1.21           3.76              4.97         0.75           162,370            0.2          3,247         29,227
Retail and Commercial
Services                       38.95        2.52           16.8             19.32          0.5           420,790            0.1            0           42,079
Total        Commercial,
Office, Retail:               144.69       9.466          61.75             71.21                       6,715,449                                    1,173,561           746,257      1,919,818
Industrial                     70.01         12           30.07             42.07          0.5           916,285            0.4            0          366,514            563,044       929,558
      Notes:
      1.   Source: City of Grover Beach General Plan Land Use Diagram, 2009
      2.   Defined as properties where the assessed value of improvements is less than the median for all properties in the given land use category.
      3.   Source: City of Grover Beach General Plan Land Use Diagram, 2009
      4.   Total vacant and underutilized acres x floor area ratio x 43,560
      5.   Corrects for small and/or irregular parcel size, parking and setback requirements, constraints associated with existing development.
      6.   Assumptions for mixed-use floor area devoted to residential:
                a. Central Business District Mixed Use = 33%
                b. Visitor Serving Mixed Use = 33%
                c. Neighborhood Serving Mixed Use = 10%
      7.   Net New = (Gross Development X Correction Factor) – floor area for residential.
      8.   Sources: City of Grover Beach, May 2009, and San Luis Obispo Council of Governments, 2003
                                                                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        LU-25
                                                                                                                                                                      Amended by Resolution No. 12-54

GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
The overall objectives to be achieved by the Land Use Element are
described above and in the Vision Project (Chapter II). To achieve these
objectives, the Land Use Element sets forth goals, policies and
implementation measures defined as follows:
         Goal: The ultimate purpose of an effort stated in a way that is
         general in nature and immeasurable.
         Policy: A specific statement in text or diagram guiding action and
         implying clear commitment.
         Implementation Measure or Action: An action, procedure,
         program, or technique that carries out general plan policy.
         Implementation programs also specify primary responsibility for
         carrying out the action and a time frame for its accomplishment.
The list of goals, policies and implementation measures is organized by the
following topics:
         Housing and Residential Neighborhoods
         Commercial and Office Uses
         Industrial Land Uses
         Parks and Recreation
         Public and Quasi-Public Land Uses
         Urban Reserve
         Open Space/Resource Conservation
         The Coastal Zone
         Growth Management
         Community Design and Character
         Economic Development
         Sustainability and Environmental Justice
         Administration
Following each policy (or in some cases, groups of policies) is a list of
specific implementation measures to provide guidance about how the
purpose and intent of each policy will be achieved through actions by the
City. Not all policies require specific steps or actions for implementation, but
will be used to guide decision-making when questions arise about changes to
land use as part of the development review process.
Summary Table of Implementation Measures
A complete listing of implementation measures, the policies they implement,
the party responsible for implementation, and a recommended
implementation timeframe is provided in Table 8 which follows the list of
goals, policies and implementation measures.
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-26
CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
               LU-27
Housing & Residential Neighborhoods
                            Housing and Residential Neighborhoods
                            Goal LU-1:       To protect and                 preserve       existing   residential
                                             neighborhoods.
                                  Policies
 Protect Existing                 LU-1.1     Protect existing neighborhoods. The City shall promote the
  Neighborhoods                              preservation of existing stable residential neighborhoods.
                                             Implementation Measures
                                                   Assess development projects for consistency with the above
                                                    policy through the development review process.
                                  LU-1.2     “Complete” neighborhoods. In general, the City will promote
                                             the establishment and preservation of “complete” neighborhoods
                                             that exhibit the following characteristics:
                                                      a. A mix of housing types and densities serving the
                                                          broadest range of households, incomes and ages;
                                                      b. Neighborhood serving retail businesses should be
                                                          provided within a five-minute walk or bicycle ride of
                                                          surrounding residences;
                                                      c. Parks, schools and other public/quasi-public uses
                                                          within a short walk or bicycle ride;
                                                      d. A complete and interconnected system of roadways,
                                                          bicycle and pedestrian paths, and transit stops that link
                                                          the neighborhoods;
                                                      e. Blocks with a substantial tree canopy shading the
                                                          street and sidewalk;
                                                      f. Connectivity to surrounding neighborhoods, retail
                                                          centers and employment;
                                                      g. A sense of personal safety;
                                                      h. Elements that foster the sustainable use of scarce or
                                                          non-renewable resources, such as walkable streets,
                                                          the orientation of buildings to facilitate solar heating
                                                          and cooling, and a complementary range of uses that
                                                          promote alternate forms of transportation.
                                                      i. Improved access to high-speed internet connections.
                                             Implementation Measures
                                                   Assess development projects for consistency with the above
                                                    policy through the development review process.
                                                           CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                          LU-28

                                                                            Housing & Residential Neighborhoods
LU-1.3 Creating Walkable Neighborhoods. Neighborhoods should be
       protected from intrusive traffic. All neighborhood street and                      Walkable
                                                                                       Neighborhoods
       circulation improvements should favor the pedestrian and local
       traffic over pass-thru traffic. Vehicle traffic on residential streets
       should be slow. To foster suitable traffic speed, street design
       should include measures such as narrowing lanes, creating
       bikeways on designated routes, landscaped parkways, traffic
       circles, textured crosswalks, and, if necessary, stop signs, speed
       humps, and road closures or cul-de-sacs..
       Implementation Measures
            Assess development projects for consistency with these
             policies through the development review process.
            Use redevelopment to help fund traffic calming
             improvements within the Improvement Project area.
            Incorporate traffic calming elements in the Capital
             Improvement Program.
LU-1.4 Mobile home parks. The City’s existing mobile home parks are                       Mobile Homes
       an important component of the City’s affordable housing stock
       and should be preserved, where feasible.
       Implementation Measures
            Assess development projects for consistency through the
             development review process.
            Adopt a Mobilehome Park Conversion Ordinance to
             establish regulations that govern the process for any
             proposals for mobile home closures.
LU-1.5 Le Sage Mobile Home Park. The Le Sage mobile home park
       west of State Route 1 and north of Grand Avenue should be
       preserved as an important component of the City’s affordable
       housing within the Coastal Zone. The transition of the park to
       accommodate additional visitor serving commercial or retail
       businesses should be allowed only if the existing mobile home
       residents are not displaced.
       Implementation Measures
            Designate this site Visitor Serving Mixed-Use
            Assess any changes to the use of the mobile home park for
             consistency with this policy through the development review
             process.
                    CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                   LU-29

Housing & Residential Neighborhoods
                            Goal LU-2:     To designate adequate land in a range of residential
                                           densities to address the housing needs of all income
                                           groups expected to reside in Grover Beach.
                                  Policies
 Affordable Housing               LU-2.1   Adequate supply of residential land. The City shall maintain an
                                           adequate supply of residential land in appropriate land use
                                           designations and zoning categories to accommodate projected
                                           household growth, maintain normal vacancy rates, and to provide
                                           for its allocation of affordable housing as prescribed by the San
                                           Luis Obispo Council of Government’s Regional Housing Needs
                                           Assessment.
                                  LU-2.2   Affordable housing. The City shall promote the development of
                                           affordable housing to meet the needs of low- and moderate-
                                           income households, consistent with the policies and programs of
                                           the Housing Element.
                                  LU-2.3   Housing choices. The City shall provide for and encourage a
                                           range of housing choices, including live/work units, multifamily
                                           development and Single Room Occupancies (SRO), intended to
                                           meet the special needs of senior citizens, the physically and
                                           mentally challenged, and very low, low and moderate income
                                           households.
                                  LU-2.4   Special needs housing. Housing provided for residents with
                                           special housing needs should be compatible with surrounding
                                           development.
                                  LU-2.5   Special needs housing in mixed-use areas. Notwithstanding
  Special Needs                            the preference for ground-floor commercial and retail businesses
     Housing
                                           in mixed-use development, housing for residents with special
                                           needs should be allowed in all or part of a mixed-use
                                           development so long as such development is compatible with
                                           surrounding non-residential development.
                                  LU-2.6   Location of higher densities. Generally, higher density housing
                                           should be located in areas served by the full range of urban
                                           services, within walking distance of neighborhood shopping
                                           areas, schools, parks and employment.
                                           Implementation Measures
                                                Amend the Land Use Diagram as needed to provide suitable
                                                 building sites for housing.
                                                Promote the development of affordable housing using
                                                 Redevelopment affordable housing set aside funds as
                                                 provided in the Agency’s 5-Year Implementation Plan.
                                                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       LU-30

                                                                               Housing & Residential Neighborhoods
                 Implement the policies and programs provided in the
                  Housing Element.
Goal LU-3:  To ensure infill residential development is compatible
            with surrounding development.
   Policies
   LU-3.1   Compatible infill development. Housing built within an existing                Infill Residential
            neighborhood should be compatible in scale and in character with                 Development
            that neighborhood. Where neighborhoods are primarily single
            story, two-story housing may be permitted but should be
            designed to respect the privacy of surrounding residences. All
            multifamily development and large group-living facilities should be
            compatible with nearby, lower density development.
                 a. Architectural Character: New buildings should respect
                     existing buildings where they contribute to neighborhood
                     architectural character, in terms of size, spacing, and
                     variety.
                 b. Privacy and Solar Access: New buildings should be
                     designed to respect the privacy and solar access of
                     neighboring buildings and outdoor areas, particularly
                     where multistory buildings or additions may overlook
                     backyards of adjacent dwellings.
                 c.  Compatible Color and Materials: New buildings should
                     employ a palette of building materials and colors that
                     complements existing development where they contribute
                     to neighborhood architectural character.
            Implementation Measures
                 Assess development projects for consistency with the above
                  policy through the development review process.
   LU-3.2   Farroll Road Property (APN 060-572-002). The vacant property
            located on the north side of Farroll Road at 16th Street
            constitutes one of the City’s last remaining large infill residential
            sites. The southerly extension of 16th Street will divide the
            property with the larger portion (about 8 acres) on the east and
            about 1.3 acres on the west. The site is designated as Low
            Density Residential. Development of this site should address
            privacy and neighborhood compatibility issues as required by
            Policy LU-3.1 and incorporate a useable open space/park like
            setting centrally located to serve future residents. Residential
                                                                                              The Farroll
            development should continue the pattern of residential                          Road Property
            development established to the north and south with building
                                       th
            entrances that face 16 Street, landscaped front yards between
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-31

Housing & Residential Neighborhoods
                                         the building and the street, and parking at the rear of the
                                         buildings. The design for 16th Street should also incorporate a
                                         landscaped parkway.
                                         Implementation Measures
                                             Amend the Land Use Diagram as necessary consistent with
                                              the above policy.
                                             Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                              policy.
  Atlantic City/Oak               LU-3.3 Atlantic City and Oak Park Boulevard Property (APN 060-031-
  Park Boulevard                         005). This property consists of 9.7 acres and is an appropriate
      Property
                                         location for both Medium Density and High Density Residential
                                         land use designations. Appropriate land uses for the site would
                                         include single family and multi-family dwelling units, senior
                                         housing and long-term care facilities. Development of this site
                                         should also consider the incorporation of a park.
                                         Implementation Measures
                                             Amend the Land Use Diagram as necessary consistent with
                                              the above policy.
                                             Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                              policy.
                                  LU-3.4 Preference for a single Master Plan. A single Master Plan
                                         governing development of the three properties near the northwest
                                         corner of Atlantic City and Oak Park Boulevard (APNs 060-031-
                                         005, 060-031-021 and 022) shall be prepared and approved by
                                         the City prior to the development of any of the three properties.
                                         The requirement for a single Master Plan may be waived by the
                                         Planning Commission if it can be demonstrated that access and
                                         on-site circulation can be provided for all three properties to the
                                         satisfaction of the City.
                                         No use permit or Master Plan shall be required for the portion of
                                         the site designated for High Density residential development and
                                         identified as an Opportunity Site in the Housing Element of the
                                         General Plan, so long as the project is developed at a density of
                                         20 units/acre; provided that the proposed development will be
                                         subject to Site and Architectural Approval. This site has the
                                         capacity to meet the affordable housing requirement under the
                                         Regional Housing Needs Allocation.
                                         The Master Plan prepared for the remainder of the property shall
                                         ensure that common issues of access and site design have been
                                         addressed. In addition, the Master Plan should address at least
                                         the following:
                                                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    LU-32

                                                                    Housing & Residential Neighborhoods
 a. The identification of an appropriate range and location of
    land uses;
 b. The identification of suitable building sites that protect
    sensitive resources, views and minimize grading by
    integrating the development into the hillside;
 c. Protection of the sensitive biological resources associated
    with Meadow Creek and large oak trees;
 d. The provision of safe vehicular and pedestrian access and
    on-site circulation; one option is to investigate the feasibility
    of obtaining access from one or more adjoining properties
    (APNs 060-031-021 and 022);
 e. Evaluate opportunities for a pedestrian/bike link with the oak
    woodland adjoining the site to the west.
 f. Avoidance of areas subject to flooding, steep slopes and
    areas containing archaeological resources;
 g. Development standards to ensure compatibility with the
    character and scale of the surrounding development;
 h. View protection;
 i. Create an adequate buffer from surrounding residential
    development;
 j. Identification of an appropriate park site in consultation with
    the Parks and Recreation Department.
 k. Possible development of a neighborhood serving
    commercial center.
Implementation Measures
   Require a Master Plan to be prepared to cover the
    development of all three properties in accordance with the
    requirements established above.
   Review development projects for consistency with the above
    policy.
           CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                          LU-33

Industrial Land Uses
                     Commercial and Office Land Uses
                     Goal LU-4:       To designate adequate land and provide support for the
                                      development of commercial uses providing goods and
                                      services to Grover Beach residents and to become the
                                      commercial service hub for southern San Luis Obispo
                                      County.
                         Policies
                         LU-4.1       Promotion of commercial sector. The City shall promote, and
    Promoting
   Commercial                         assist with the maintenance and expansion of, Grover Beach’s
  Development                         commercial sector to meet the needs of Grover Beach residents,
                                      employees, and visitors. The City will continue to gather market
                                      information to inform decisions regarding efforts to promote local
                                      businesses and attract new businesses.
                         LU-4.2       Retail development. The City shall promote the establishment,
                                      maintenance, and expansion of businesses in Grover Beach that
                                      generate retail sales taxes as important contributors to the local
                                      economy.
                                      Implementation Measures
                                           Continue to implement the City’s Economic Development
                                            Strategy.
                         LU-4.3       Mixed use development. The City will promote mixed use
   Mixed Use
 Development, In                      developments that functionally integrate businesses that depend
     General                          on foot traffic and exposure to pedestrians on the ground floor
                                      (such as retail, restaurants and visitor-serving accommodations)
                                      with     residences,       professional     offices and/or  visitor
                                      accommodations on the upper floors. Vertical (different uses
                                      stacked one above another) and horizontal (different ground level
                                      uses on a single parcel) mixed use development will be
                                      encouraged.
                                      Implementation Measures
                                           Designate suitable areas for mixed-use development.
                                           Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
                                            accommodate mixed-use development.
                                           Prepare and adopt specific plans as needed to guide the
                                            development and re-development of mixed-use sites.
                         LU-4.4       Design of mixed-use development. Mixed use developments
                                      should be designed to mitigate potential conflicts between
                                      residential and non-residential uses, considering such issues as
                                      noise, lighting, security, and truck and automobile access.
                                                   CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  LU-34

                                                                                  Industrial Land Uses
            Implementation Measures
                Establish development criteria for noise, lighting, security,
                 loading, etc., by amending the Zoning Code where
                 necessary.
                Review development projects for consistency with this policy
                 as part of the development review process.
Goal LU-5   To revitalize the Grand Avenue Corridor/Beach Area
            into vibrant, economically sound, pedestrian-oriented
            districts.
   Policies
   LU-5.1   Grand Avenue Corridor Master Plan as a guide for
            revitalization. A Master Plan shall be prepared which shall,          Grand Avenue
                                                                                   Master Plan
            through text, maps and illustrations, set forth the vision for the
            physical and economic development and revitalization of the
            Grand Avenue corridor The area to be included in the Master
            Plan study area will be established as the first task of this
            planning effort. The Master Plan should address all of the
            following:
             a. The appropriate boundaries of the area to be included within
                 the Master Plan area.
             b. The appropriate range and location of land uses.
             c. Detailed strategies for accomplishing the following:
                        i. Strengthening the City’s connection to the beach,
                            the beach-side lodge site, and the train station.
                                                                               th
                       ii. Establishing a visitor-serving retail node at the 4
                            Street/Grand Avenue intersection.
                      iii. Creation of a civic center/downtown business district
                            “core” bounded by 8th Street, 11th Street, Ramona
                            Avenue and Rockaway Avenue.
                     iv. Protecting sensitive biological, scenic and cultural
                            resources.
             d. Elements to foster traffic calming and strengthen the
                 pedestrian character of the corridor and surrounding areas
                 should be evaluated, including:
                        i. Streetscape improvements such as landscaped
                            medians and roundabouts.
                       ii. Corner bulb-outs and textured cross-walks.
                      iii. Pedestrian-scale street lighting.
                     iv. Seating and other street furniture.
                       v. Street trees and landscaping.
                     vi. Public open space, gathering areas and plazas.
                     vii. Elements to promote wayfinding.
                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                         LU-35

        Industrial Land Uses
                                                  viii. Interpretive displays that foster a greater
                                                          understanding of the natural resources of the beach
                                                          and dunes.
                                            e. Design guidelines for new development to address at least
                                               the following:
                                                      i. Architectural character, and especially the
                                                          placement of buildings on a lot and how buildings
                                                          relate to the streetscape
                                                     ii. Site planning
                                                    iii. Parking and access
                                                    iv. Landscaping
                                                     v. Signage
                                            f. Development standards, including appropriate locations for
                                               four-story buildings.
                                            g. Public and private (off-street) parking and parking standards,
                                               including the need for, and appropriate locations for, parking
                                               facilities and angled parking on side streets and parking to
                                               accommodate visitors with recreational vehicles.
                                            h. A mobility plan for motor vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles,
                                               transit, and the physically impaired that may include a
                                               walkway over State Route 1 and the railroad tracks.
                                            i. Coastal access as required by the California Coastal Act,
                                               including safety concerns for improving pedestrian access
                                               across the railroad.
                                            j. A plan for funding and implementation of Redevelopment
                                               Agency funds for street improvements and storefront
                                               remodels.
                                           Implementation Measures
                                              Prepare and adopt a Master Plan consistent with the above
                                               requirements by 2010.
                                              Review development projects for consistency with the
                                               Master Plan following adoption.
                                Goal LU-6: To establish an attractive, beach-oriented visitor
                                           serving district generally between 5th Street and the
                                           beach.
         West Grand Avenue         LU-6.1  West Grand Avenue area. The West Grand Avenue area is an
                                           appropriate location for the development of a significant mixed-
                                           use    visitor-serving       district  anchored   by    a    major
                                           lodge/hotel/convention center constructed west of Meadow
                                           Creek. Revitalization efforts in this area will be guided by the
                                           Master Plan prepared in accordance with Policy LU-5.1.
                                                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
Amended by Resolution No. 12-54                                        LU-36

                                                                           Industrial Land Uses
       Implementation Measures
           Designate suitable areas for visitor-serving mixed-use
            development, including the transition of the Front
            Street/Beckett Place industrial area to visitor-serving uses
            with the exception of the property west of Front Street
            extending to the railroad.
           Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
            accommodate visitor-serving mixed-use development.
           Prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the Grand Avenue
            corridor to guide the development and re-development of
            vacant and underutilized mixed-use sites.
           Implement a bike route plan connecting the West Grand
            Avenue area with the butterfly grove and regional bicycle
            systems serving the Cities of Pismo Beach and Arroyo
            Grande and linked with the regional DeAnza Trail.
           Support development of family-oriented uses within this
            area.
           Review development projects for consistency with the
            Master Plan following adoption.
LU-6.2 Beach Front Lodge. The City will actively pursue development of    The Beach Front
       the Beach Front Lodge site with a hotel/convention center that          Lodge
       incorporates at least the following general features:
           a. The hotel/convention center design should be in context
               with the surrounding dune complex and beach. The
               project should consist of more than one building with
               staggered heights and bulk to break up the building mass
               and allow for view corridors from the site.
           b. Retention of adequate public parking for beach-goers and
               for patrons.
           c. Pedestrian, bicycle and transit connections to the beach,
               the dunes, the train station and mixed-use visitor-serving
               development east of Highway One.
           d. Public access to the beach and dunes.
           e. Compliance with relevant provisions of the Coastal Act.
           f. Protection of sensitive biological, scenic and cultural
               resources;
       Implementation Measures
           The City has entered into a Joint Powers Agreement with the
            State of California and selected a hotel operator to proceed
            with development of the Lodge/Conference Center.
           Implement the Improvement Project and Economic
            Development Strategy.
           Prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the Grand Avenue
            corridor including West Grand Avenue and the Lodge Site.
           Review development proposal for consistency with the
            Master Specific Plan following adoption.
                   CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                  LU-37

Industrial Land Uses
                      LU-6.3  Multi-modal Transit Center. The 2.3 acre parcel on State Route
                              1 immediately adjacent to the existing train station is an
                              appropriate location for the expansion of transit-related facilities
                              to serve the City and region. Development of this site should
                              incorporate the following features:
                                  a. A range of uses to complement the train station and
                                      serve the transit needs of the City and region and
                                      emphasizing visitor serving commercial development as
                                      provided by the Local Coastal Plan. Because of noise
                                      and other compatibility issues associated with the
                                      adjacent railroad and State Route 1, Mixed-Use
                                      development with residential uses is prohibited.
                                  b. Improved access to the county recreational vehicle park
                                      and possible improvement of additional camping facilities.
                                  c. Pedestrian and bicycle connections to the train station,
                                      the beach and surrounding visitor-serving development
                                      and the County recreational vehicle park.
                                  d. Parking for transit/train patrons and businesses.
                                  e. A design that will mitigate for the loss of the small,
                                      degraded Federal wetland area utilizing low-impact
                                      development features.
                             Implementation Measures
                                  As part of the Capital Improvement Project, review design
                                   plans for consistency with the above policy.
      Preferences for LU-6.4 Preferences for mixed-use development. In general, ground
      Visitor Serving
                             floor development within the Visitor Serving – Mixed-Use
         Mixed Use
       Development           designation should be reserved for retail shops, eating and
                             drinking establishments, and visitor accommodations, with the
                             upper floors occupied by additional visitor accommodations,
                             offices and dwellings. To assure adequate space for visitor-
                             serving uses, properties within this designation should not include
                             general retail stores such as larger grocery and drug stores, auto
                             sales or repair, or business services that are more suited to
                             shopping centers. Although mixed-use development is
                             encouraged, it is not required.
                             Implementation Measures
                                  Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
                                   incorporate the above preferences.
                                  Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                   policy as part of the development review process.
                                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                         LU-38

                                                                             Industrial Land Uses
LU-6.5  Street character. In general, buildings constructed in the area
        designated Visitor Serving – Mixed Use should be placed at the
        back of sidewalk along the street frontage, especially along
        Grand Avenue, with adequate space between the building and
        the curb to accommodate pedestrian walkways, street furniture
        (seating, lighting, landscaping, public art), and for outdoor dining
        and gathering.
        Implementation Measures
             Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
              incorporate the above preferences.
             Review development projects for consistency with the above
              policy as part of the development review process.
             The City will complete median/bulb-out and pedestrian
              improvements to the West Grand Avenue area from 4th
              Street to the railroad by 2010.
LU-6.6  4th Street and Grand Avenue. The properties surrounding the
                                                                             3rd Street and
        intersection of 4th Street and Grand Avenue should be developed      Grand Avenue
        with visitor-serving mixed-use development that includes retail on
        the ground floors and housing, offices and/or visitor
        accommodations on the upper floors. This area may be
        appropriate for taller (e.g, four story) buildings.
       Implementation Measures
             Prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the Grand Avenue
              corridor to guide the development and re-development of
              mixed-use sites.
             Review development projects for consistency with the
              Master Plan following adoption.
LU-6.7  Industrial area south of Grand Avenue. The industrial area              th
                                                                               4 St. Industrial Area
        south of Grand Avenue between 3rd Street and the railroad right-
        of-way is an appropriate area for additional visitor-serving
        commercial development such as visitor-serving retail and bed
        and breakfast accommodations with adequate setback from the
        railroad.
       Implementation Measures
             Prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the Grand Avenue
              corridor to guide the development and re-development of
              mixed-use sites. Involve the property owners in this process.
LU-6.8  Transition of the Front Street industrial area to Visitor-              Front St. Industrial
                                                                                        Area
        Serving Uses. The Front Street industrial area north of Ramona
        Avenue east of Front Street extending to Beckett Place is an
        appropriate location for additional visitor-serving commercial
                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                    LU-39

 Industrial Land Uses
                                   development. Accordingly, the City will encourage existing
                                   businesses to relocate to more suitable locations in the industrial
                                   area south of Farroll Avenue with the exception of the property
                                   west of Front Street extending to the railroad which remains
                                   designated Industrial. The City/Redevelopment Agency should
                                   assist property owners in the relocation of their businesses.
                                  Implementation Measures
                                        Prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the Grand Avenue
                                         corridor to guide the development and re-development of
                                         mixed-use sites.
                                        Assist property owners in relocating their businesses to more
                                         suitable locations in the industrial park south of Farroll
                                         Avenue.
                         LU-6.9    Tourism. The City should continue efforts to capitalize on its
                                   beach-side setting by marketing to a broad range of tourist
                                   activities, including ‘eco-tourism’.
                                   Implementation Measures
                                        Continue to implement the City’s Economic Development
                                         Strategy.
                      Goal LU-7:   To create a well-defined, pedestrian-oriented central
                                   business district/civic center that serves as the center
                                   of Grover Beach’s business, civic, and cultural life.
                         Policies
 Central Business        LU-7.1    Central Business District/Civic Center Core Area. The City
District/Civic Center              and the Redevelopment Agency shall promote the development
     Core Area                     of a well-defined, pedestrian-oriented central business district
                                   core area bounded by 8th Street, 11th Street, Ramona Park and
                                   Rockaway Avenue, consistent with the requirements of policy LU-
                                   5.1. The City shall encourage the concentration and
                                   intensification of urban uses in this area, including residential
                                   uses, as a means of increasing pedestrian activity and providing
                                   support for commercial and civic activities. The central business
                                   district core area shall include commercial, professional office,
                                   financial, civic, residential, cultural, and recreational uses, and
                                   shall serve all segments of the community.
                                  Implementation Measures
                                        Amend the Land Use Diagram to designate this area for
                                         Central Business Mixed-Use development.
                                                 CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                LU-40

                                                                                 Industrial Land Uses
              Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
               accommodate Central Business Mixed-Use development.
              Prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the Grand Avenue
               corridor to guide the development and re-development of
               mixed-use sites.
              Review development projects for consistency with the
               specific plan following adoption.
LU-7.2  Development of a City Center Around City Hall. The city
        should encourage County, State and other agencies to locate
        facilities in proximity to the existing City Hall to create a Civic
        Center that would meet the needs of the residents, businesses
        and visitors to the City.
       Implementation Measures
              Work with County, State or other agencies to identify
               possible locations to locate or relocate these services to
               create a Civic Center near to the downtown area.
LU-7.3  Preferences for uses. In general, the ground floor of                   Preferences for
        development within the Central Business District – Mixed-Use          Uses In the Central
        designation should be reserved for retail shops, service               Business District
        businesses (including eating and drinking establishments) and
        professional offices, with the upper floors reserved for visitor
        accommodations, offices and dwellings.
        Implementation Measures
              Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
               incorporate the above preferences.
              Review development projects for consistency with the above
               policy as part of the development review process.
LU-7.4  Street character. In general, buildings constructed in the area       Street Character In
        designated Central Business – Mixed Use should be placed at          the Central Business
        the back of sidewalk along the street frontage, especially along            District
        Grand Avenue, with adequate space between the building and
        the curb to accommodate pedestrian walkways, street furniture
        (seating, lighting, landscaping, public art), and for outdoor dining
        and gathering.
        Implementation Measures
              Incorporate provisions for streetscape improvements in a
               Master Plan prepared for the Grand Avenue corridor.
              Continue development of pedestrian improvements, street
               trees and medians extending from 4th Street through to 11th
               Street.
                      CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                     LU-41

Industrial Land Uses
                                 Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
                                  incorporate the above preferences.
                                 Implement the Grover Beach Improvement Project.
                                 Incorporate streetscape improvements as part of the City’s
                                  Capital Improvement Program. The timing of these
                                  improvements will be determined as transportation funding
                                  becomes available.
                     LU-7.5 Infill development. The City shall encourage infill development
                            that promotes strengthening and revitalizing the central business
                            district/civic center.
                            Implementation Measures
                                 Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                  policy as part of the development review process.
                     LU-7.6 Parks in the Central Business District. The City shall continue
                            to provide parks in and near the central business district to foster
                            an environment that supports businesses that depend on
                            pedestrian activity.
                            Implementation Measures
                                 Identify suitable locations for parks as part of the Grand
                                  Avenue Master Plan.
                                 Continue to require park land dedication or the payment of in
                                  lieu fees for park acquisition.
                                 Implement the programs provided in the Parks and
                                  Recreation Element.
                                 Partner with the Chamber of Commerce in community
                                  events at Ramona Park and Cleaver Park (once developed)
                                  that will bring residents and visitors into the Central Business
                                  District area.
                     LU-7.7 Streetscape improvements. The City (and Redevelopment
     Streetscape
 Improvements in the
                            Agency) shall take the lead in upgrading the visual quality of
   Central Business         streets in the downtown area and require individual development
        District            projects to incorporate frontage improvements.
                            Implementation Measures
                                 Implement the Grand Avenue Master Plan recommendations
                                  for Streetscape Improvements..
                                 Complete the Grand Avenue Enhancement Project and the
                                  proposed streetscape improvements through the Central
                                  Business District.
                                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                         LU-42

                                                                             Industrial Land Uses
                Incorporate streetscape improvements as part of the City’s
                 CIP. The City shall complete the streetscape improvements
                 as funding become available (anticipated in 2011).
                Continue the façade improvement programs and determine if
                 there are other appropriate tools to upgrade the visual
                 quality of the downtown.
                Evaluate the existing sign standards and develop a program
                 to encourage replacement/upgrade of signs that are not in
                 conformance with the standards established in the Master
                 Plan.
                Require development projects to install required frontage
                 improvements through the development review process.
Goal LU-8: To develop the east commercial area along Grand
           Avenue from 14th Street to Oak Park Boulevard with
           businesses that provide a wider range of goods and
           services desired by residents of Grover Beach and
           surrounding communities.
   LU-8.1  Designate areas for larger commercial centers. The                East Grand Avenue
           commercial development along Grand Avenue east of 14th Street
           to Oak Park Boulevard supports more conventional, larger-scale
           retail centers that provide for the day-to-day needs of Grover
           Beach residents. These centers support a diverse assortment of
           retail and service businesses and are designed to be visited
           primarily by automobile. City will promote the development of
           larger commercial centers along the east end of Grand Avenue to
           provide a broader range of the goods and services desired by
           Grover Beach residents.
           Implementation Measures
                Amend the Land Use Diagram to designate suitable
                 locations for Retail and Commercial Services development.
                Amend the Zoning Code as necessary to establish
                 development        standards    for    neighborhood serving
                 businesses.
   LU-8.2  Broaden the tax base. The City should assist property owners
           and prospective developers in the development of larger, more
           diverse businesses in the east Grand Avenue area that provide a
           broader range of the goods and services desired by Grover
           Beach residents.
           Implementation Measures
                Implement the Economic Development Strategy.
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-43

Industrial Land Uses
                         LU-8.3  Streetscape improvements. The City should continue to provide
                                 street trees, landscaped medians, sidewalks, bicycle paths, street
                                 lighting and signage to facilitate access to East Grand Avenue
                                 businesses by means other than motor vehicles.
                                 Implementation Measures
                                      Incorporate streetscape improvements as part of the City’s
                                       CIP.
                                      Require pedestrian facilities to be incorporated into new
                                       development as part of the development review process.
                      Goal LU-9: To provide for an expansion of the highway-oriented
                                 commercial node at Oak Park Boulevard and El Camino
                                 Real.
     Commercial          LU-9.1  Northerly property fronting El Camino (APN 060-031-021).
  Properties Along El            This property consists of about 5.8 acres and is an appropriate
        Camino                   extension of the Retail Commercial Services land use designation
                                 on the northerly and easterly portions of the site outside of
                                 sensitive biological resources. Appropriate land uses for the site
                                 would include visitor accommodations, a restaurant, small-scale
                                 retail and other similar uses and possible residential development
                                 to provide a transition into the adjoining residential areas to the
                                 west.
                                 Implementation Measures
                                      Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                       policy.
                                      A single Master Plan governing development of the three
                                       properties near the northwest corner of Atlantic City and Oak
                                       Park Boulevard (APNs 060-031-005, 060-031-021 and 022)
                                       shall be prepared and approved by the City prior to the
                                       development of any of the three properties. (See details
                                       provided in policy LU-3.4 regarding Master Plan provisions.)
                                      Incorporate a substantial buffer of a minimum of 50 feet or
                                       provide a transition with residential development to the
                                       residences to the west to minimize compatibility impacts,
                                       including noise, glare, time of operation.
                                      Comply with policies LU-16.1, et seq relating to the
                                       protection of sensitive biological resources.
                         LU-9.2  Middle property (APN 060-031-022). This property consists of
                                 about 1.8 acres and is an appropriate location for Retail and
                                 Commercial Services, visitor accommodations, a restaurant,
                                 small-scale retail and other similar uses and possible residential
                                 development to provide a transition into the adjoining residential
                                 areas to the west.
                                              CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                             LU-44

                                                                             Industrial Land Uses
            Implementation Measures
                Amend the Zoning Code as necessary consistent with the
                 above policy.
                Review development projects for consistency with the above
                 policy and the Master Plan requirements provided under
                 LU-3.4.
                Incorporate a substantial buffer of a minimum of 50 feet or
                 provide a transition with residential development to the
                 residences to the west to minimize compatibility impacts,
                 including noise, glare, time of operation.
Goal LU-10: To provide for the day-to-day needs of Grover Beach
            residents by establishing neighborhood-serving
            businesses within walking and biking distance of
            surrounding neighborhoods.
   LU-10.1  Preserve existing neighborhood-serving retail. Existing            Neighborhood
                                                                             Serving Businesses
            neighborhood serving commercial businesses should be retained,
            and expanded only where such expansion does not adversely
            impact surrounding residences.
            Implementation Measures
                Review development projects for consistency with the above
                 policy as part of the development review process.
   LU-10.2  Preserve residential development along S. 13th Street.                    th
                                                                                S. 13 Street
            Existing residences along 13th Street south of Grand Avenue,
            including the mobile home park, should be retained and protected
            from the impacts of non-residential development. There may be
            portions of these developments that front directly onto Grand
            Avenue that may transition to commercial mixed use
            development in accordance with City requirements.
            Implementation Measures
                Review development projects for consistency with the above
                 policy as part of the development review process.
                Complete street improvements (curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
                 street trees, lighting, etc.) including traffic calming and
                 pedestrian oriented improvements.
   LU-10.3  Preserve existing neighborhood serving businesses along S.
            13th Street. The existing neighborhood-serving commercial
            businesses along 13th Street south of Grand Avenue should be
            retained. Limited expansion of non-residential development
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-45

        Industrial Land Uses
                                           should be allowed only where such expansion does not adversely
                                           impact surrounding residences.
                                           Implementation Measures
                                               Amend the Land Use Diagram to designate suitable
                                                locations for additional neighborhood serving commercial
                                                development.
                                               Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                                policy as part of the development review process.
                                Policy LU-10.4 has been deleted.
                                LU-10.5    Neighborhood serving nodes to serve existing residential
                                           neighborhoods. The City will investigate the establishment of
                                           neighborhood-serving commercial nodes within walking distance
                                           of existing residential neighborhoods, especially in the vicinity of
                                           Oak Park Boulevard and Atlantic City Avenue.
                                           Implementation Measures
                                               Assess the suitability of remaining vacant and underutilized
                                                properties for their suitability.
                                               Consider incorporating neighborhood-serving development
                                                as part of the development of APN060-031-005 (refer to
                                                Policy LU-3.4).
                                                       CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
Amended by Resolution No. 12-54                                       LU-46

                                                                                        Industrial Land Uses
Industrial Land Uses
Goal LU-11: To designate appropriate locations and provide
                   support for industrial uses that create jobs and
                   enhance the economy of Grover Beach.
      Policies
      LU-11.1      Industrial development. The City shall promote, and assist in                Industrial
                   the maintenance and expansion of, Grover Beach’s industrial               Development
                   sector by implementing the Redevelopment Agency Industrial
                   Enhancement Project.
                   Implementation Measures
                        Implement the Industrial Enhancement Project.
      LU-11.2      Expansion and retention of industrial businesses. The City
                   will provide for the continuation of existing and the development
                   of additional industrial uses that capitalize upon the existing and
                   emerging types of industries, offer opportunities for the clustering
                   of key economic sectors and maintain the character and quality of
                   the City. The City should pursue establishing a connection to the
                   Pacific Crossing access hub and promote the unique opportunity
                   it affords for high technology businesses.
      LU-11.3      Location of industrial development. New industrial
                   development shall be located generally south of Farroll Road,
                                                                               th
                   east of Highway One and west of 13th Street and in the 4 Street
                   corridor south of Rockaway along the railroad tracks.
                   Implementation Measures
                        Review development projects for consistency with the above
                         policies as part of the development review process.
                        Maintain truck routes to minimize traffic through residential
                         neighborhoods.
                        Ensure emergency access is maintained, especially at the
                         south end of Huber at Highland Avenue.
      LU-11.4      Clean industries. The City shall promote the development of
                   clean or green industries that use sustainable production
                   practices and identify and promote the use of alternative and
                   clean technologies and do not pose health risks associated with
                   water and air pollution or potential leaks or spills.
                                CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                               LU-47

Industrial Land Uses
                             Implementation Measures
                                  Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                   policy as part of the development review process.
                     LU-11.5 Live-work settings. The City will promote the establishment of
 Live-Work                   live-work settings in industrial districts.
                             Implementation Measures
                                  Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code as necessary
                                   to allow live-work units and to establish performance
                                   standards for such units.
                                  Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                   policy as part of the development review process.
                     LU-11.6 Compatibility of new industrial development. Where new
                             industrial development adjoins a residential neighborhood, the
                             buildings should be placed at the front of the site with landscaping
                             provided between the building and the sidewalk. Storage and
                             loading areas and outdoor activities should be located on the
                             interior of the site and screened from public view.
                             Implementation Measures
                                  Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
                                   incorporate the above design standards.
                                  Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                   policy as part of the development review process. The
                                  The City should consider assisting businesses in providing
                                   site improvements that lessen impacts on surrounding
                                   residential areas, and consider providing assistance with
                                   relocation when the impacts cannot be removed.
                                          CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                         LU-48

                                                                          Parks & Recreation/Public & Quasi-Public Land Uses
Parks and Recreation
Goal LU-12: To establish and maintain a public park system and
                  recreation facilities suited to the needs of Grover
                  Beach residents and visitors.
      LU-12.1     Park land requirements for development. New development                                      Park Land
                  shall be required to assist in meeting the City’s standard for                            Requirements For
                  parkland acres per 1,000 residents.                                                       New Development
                  Implementation Measures
                       Implement the measures provided in the Parks and
                        Recreation Element.
                       Review development projects for consistency with the above
                        policy and other relevant provisions of State law relating to
                        the provision of park land.
Public and Quasi-Public Land Uses
Goal 13:          To designate adequate land for development of public
                  and quasi-public uses to support existing and new
                  residential, commercial, and industrial land uses.
      Policies
      LU-13.1     Land for public facilities. The City shall designate adequate,                          Public Facilities
                  appropriately-located land for City, County, School District, and
                  health care facilities.
                  Implementation Measures
                       Amend the Land Use Diagram as needed to provide suitable
                        building sites for public facilities.
      LU-13.2     Clustering of public facilities/joint use. The City shall promote
                  the clustering of public and quasi-public uses such as schools,
                  parks, libraries, child care facilities, and community activity
                  centers. Joint-use of public facilities shall be promoted, and
                  agreements for sharing costs and operational responsibilities
                  among public service providers shall be encouraged.
                  Implementation Measures
                       Review the siting of public facilities for consistency with the
                        above policy as part of the development review process.
                               CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                              LU-49

   Parks & Recreation/Public & Quasi-Public Land Uses
                                      LU-13.3      Public safety facilities. The City shall pursue the development
                                                   of additional public safety facilities as needed to serve the
                                                   growing population.
                                                   Implementation Measures
                                                       Amend the Land Use Diagram as needed to provide suitable
                                                        building sites for public facilities.
                                                       Incorporate needed public facilities as part of the CIP.
                                Goal LU-14: To ensure continued compliance with the requirements
                                                   of the Oceano Airport Land Use Plan (OCALUP).
                                      Policies
                                      LU-14.1      Airport Land Use Plan. Development within the City’s General
Oceano Airport Land                                Plan area shall be permitted only if it is consistent with the
    Use Plan
                                                   Oceano Airport Land Use Plan. Prospective buyers of property
                                                   subject to airport influence shall be so informed.
                                                   Implementation Measures
                                                       Development projects must be reviewed and found
                                                        consistent with the above policy and OCALUP.
                                                       Prior to enacting certain ordinances and actions (general
                                                        plan and general plan amendments, specific plans, and
                                                        specific plan amendments, zoning ordinances and building
                                                        codes and modification thereof) pertaining to lands within the
                                                        airport land use planning areas, such actions shall be
                                                        referred to the Airport Land Use Commission for approval.
                                                               CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                              LU-50

                                                                                                   Urban Reserve
Urban Reserve
Goal LU-15: Preserve areas designated Urban Reserve (the                                        The Strawberry Field
              Strawberry Field) in agriculture until such time as
              urban development is initiated by the property owner.
     LU-15.1  Timing of development. Until such time as the property owner
              initiates an application for a general plan amendment, the
              Strawberry Field area should remain designated Urban Reserve.
     LU-15.2  Development preceded by a specific plan. Development of the
              Strawberry Field shall be preceded by the adoption of a specific
              plan as prescribed by Government Code '65451. In addition to
              addressing all of the requirements of Government Code '65451,
              the specific plan shall address at least the following:
               a. The appropriate boundaries of the area to be included within
                    the specific plan area. The properties along 4th Street could
                    be considered for inclusion in the Specific Plan.
               b. A land use plan incorporating an appropriate range and
                    location of land uses. Table LU-15.1 has made assumptions
                    regarding the appropriate mix of future land use categories.
                    However, the property owner may propose modifying the
                    mixture of uses based on needs within the community.
                         Table LU-15.1 Land Use Assumptions for Areas
                                       Designated Urban Reserve
                       Land Use Category                            Gross Acreage1
                  Low Density Residential                           40-50% of total4
                  Medium Density Residential                       13% - 17% of total4
                  High Density Residential                          4% - 6% of total4
                  Neighborhood Serving Mixed                  1 acre per 1,000 residents of
                  Use                                                      project
                  Office and Light Industrial6                             5-10%
                                                             5 acres per 1,000 residents of
                  Developed Parkland2, 5
                                                                           project
                  Public/Quasi-Public3, 5                  As determined by service provider
                  Notes:
                    1. Total acreage of the project site before subdivision.
                    2. Acreage of parkland exclusive of drainage detention basins.
                    3. Includes school sites, city facilities such as police and fire stations,
                         storm drainage facilities.
                    4. Acreage exclusive of affordable housing inclusionary requirements.
                    5. These uses will require Airport Land Use Commission Review.
                    6. Could include mixed use or live-work projects.
                            CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                           LU-51
Urban Reserve
                       c.  A description of housing products. The specific plan
                           application shall describe the range of housing products
                           allowed within the project. The description will include:
                                 i. Building type (single-family detached, single family
                                     attached, apartments, townhome, etc.);
                                ii. Gross residential density for each product type;
                               iii. Building elevations;
                               iv. Number of bedrooms;
                                v. Colors and materials;
                               vi. Tenure (for-sale, for rent);
                       d. Specific Plan. Design guidelines for new development that
                           address at least the following:
                                 i. Architectural character, and especially the
                                     placement of buildings on a lot and how buildings
                                     relate to the street
                                ii. Conceptual building elevations for each product type
                                     including color palette, materials, etc.
                               iii. Site planning
                               iv. Parking and access
                                v. Landscaping
                               vi. Signage
                       e. Development standards, including a list of allowed and
                           conditionally allowed uses;
                       f. Public and private (off-street) parking;
                       g. A mobility plan for motor vehicles, pedestrians, bicycles,
                           transit, and the physically impaired;
                       h. A plan for implementation;
                      Implementation Measures
                          Amend the Zoning Code to create an Urban Reserve district.
                          When initiated by the property owner, prepare and adopt a
                           specific plan consistent with the above requirements.
                          Review development projects for consistency with the
                           specific plan following adoption.
              LU-15.3 Farmland preservation. The City shall continue to work with the
                      County and other jurisdictions to implement conservation
                      strategies that preserve productive farmland.
                      Implementation Measures
                          Adopt and implement a Right To Farm Ordinance or provide
                           protection as provided in state regulations include AB 2881
                           and California Nuisance Code (Civil Code Section 3479
                           et.seq.)
                          Adopt and implement an Agricultural Conservation Program
                           to help mitigate the permanent conversion of productive
                           farmland to a non-agricultural use.
                                   CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                  LU-52

                                                                                    Open Space/Resource Conservation
Open Space/Resource Conservation
Goal LU-16: To protect and enhance the City’s important natural
                 and human-made resources.
     Policies
     LU-16.1     Open space/resource conservation land. The City shall
                                                                                                      Open Space
                 designate the following types of land as open space:
                 a. Sensitive habitats or unique resources such as oak
                     woodlands, riparian/creek corridors, significant wetlands and
                     corridors which connect habitats.
                 b. Those areas which are best suited to non-urban uses due to:
                          a. infeasibility of providing proper access or utilities;
                          b. excessive slope or slope instability;
                          c. wildland fire hazard;
                          d. noise exposure;
                          e. flood hazard;
                          f. scenic value;
                 Implementation Measures
                     Amend the Land Use Diagram as needed consistent with the
                      above policy.
     LU-16.2     Open space uses. Lands designated Open Space/Resource
                 Conservation should be used for purposes which do not need
                 urban services, major structures, or extensive landform changes.
                 Such uses include:
                 a. Unimproved trails.
                 b. Watershed protection; wildlife and native plant habitat; and
                     passive recreation.
                 c. Buildings, lighting, paving, use of vehicles, and alterations to
                     the landforms and native or traditional landscapes on open
                     space lands should be minimized, so rural character and
                     resources are maintained.
                 Implementation Measures
                     Review development projects for consistency with the above
                      policy as part of the development review process.
     LU-16.3     Hillsides. Hillside development shall:
                                                                                                         Hillside
                  a. Keep a low profile and conform to the natural slopes;                            Development
                  b. Avoid large, continuous walls or roof surfaces, or prominent
                      foundation walls, poles, or columns;
                              CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                             LU-53

Open Space/Resource Conservation
                                         c. Minimize grading of roads;
                                         d. Minimize grading on individual lots;
                                         e. Locate houses close to the street; minimize the grading of
                                             visible driveways;
                                         f. Include planting which is compatible with native hillside
                                             vegetation and which provides a visual transition from
                                             developed to open areas;
                                         g. Use materials, colors, and textures which blend with the
                                             natural landscape and avoid high contrasts;
                                         h. Minimize exterior lighting.
                                        Implementation Measures
                                            Amend applicable sections of the Zoning Code to
                                             incorporate the above preferences.
                                            Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                             policy as part of the development review process.
                                LU-16.4 Meadow Creek and wetland resources. The City should
                                        manage its Meadow Creek wetlands, floodplains, and associated
 Meadow Creek                           resources to achieve the multiple objectives of:
                                         a. Maintaining and restoring natural conditions and fish and
                                             wildlife habitat;
                                         b. Preventing loss of life and minimizing property damage from
                                             flooding;
                                         c. Providing recreational opportunities which are compatible
                                             with fish and wildlife habitat, flood protection, and use of
                                             adjacent private properties.
                                        Implementation Measures
                                            Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                             policy as part of the development review process.
                                LU-16.5 Natural resources as amenities. New public or private
                                        developments adjacent to creeks, oak woodlands and wetlands
                                        must respect the natural environment and incorporate the natural
                                        features as project amenities, provided doing so does not
                                        diminish natural values. Developments along creeks should
                                        include public access across the development site to the creek
                                        and along the creek, provided that wildlife habitat, public safety,
                                        and reasonable privacy and security of the development can be
                                        maintained.
                                        Implementation Measures
                                            Amend applicable sections of the            Zoning  Code    to
                                             incorporate the above preferences.
                                                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    LU-54

                                                                                Open Space/Resource Conservation
            Review development projects for consistency with the above
             policy as part of the development review process.
LU-16.6 Trail system. The City should work with property owners,
                                                                                                      Trails
        resource conservation agencies, the State of California, the
        adjoining cities, and the County to establish an interconnected
        system of trails connecting open space resources with
        surrounding neighborhoods.
        Implementation Measures
            Prepare and adopt a Trail Plan to achieve the intent of the
             above policy. Trail connections to be considered include a
             trail along Meadow Creek to Pismo Marsh, and a trail along
             the railroad right-of-way to the City of Pismo Beach with
             appropriate links to the regional DeAnza Trail.
            Review development projects for consistency with the above
             policy as part of the development review process.
LU-16.7 Creeks and flood hazards. To limit the potential for increased                            Creeks/Flood
        flood damage in previously developed areas, the City will:                                   Hazard
         a. Ensure that infill, remodel, and replacement projects:
                    i. Do not displace more flood water than previous
                        structures on a site;
                   ii. Do not contribute floating debris to flood waters;
                  iii. Have finish floors at least one foot above the flood
                        level or, if this is not practical, be flood-proofed, to
                        minimize risk to life and damage to utilities,
                        furnishings, merchandise, and equipment.
         b. Require new infill buildings to have greater setbacks than
             their older neighbors, when necessary to achieve the
             purposes of this section.
         c. Remove man-made obstruction from channels.
         d. Ensure that any new development in the watershed detains
             rather than accelerates runoff from development sites.
        Implementation Measures
            Maintain FEMA flood hazard information for areas subject to
             flooding within the City.
            Review development projects for consistency with the above
             policy and applicable flood hazard mitigation as part of the
             development review process.
LU-16.8 Stormwater quality. The City shall require new development to
        protect the quality of water bodies and drainage systems through
        adaptive site design, stormwater management, and the
        implementation of best management practices (BMPs). In
        addition, the City will undertake long-term watershed planning
                      CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                     LU-55

Open Space/Resource Conservation
                                        and management activities in coordination with adjoining cities,
                                        San Luis Obispo County, and State Parks.
                                        Implementation Measures
                                            The City shall adopt and implement an Urban Storm Water
                                             Quality and Discharge Control Ordinance.
                                            To ensure new development and the redevelopment of
                                             existing sites adequately protects water quality, the City shall
                                             consider, and implement where appropriate, low impact
                                             development options and revisions to the City’s water quality
                                             management regulations consistent with the Storm Water
                                             Management Program adopted by the Regional Water
                                             Quality Control Board.
                                            The City will also undertake long-term watershed planning
                                             and management activities in coordination with adjoining
                                             cities, San Luis Obispo County and State Parks. The main
                                             objectives of these efforts are to ensure the protection of
                                             water quality, the beneficial uses of water, and the biological
                                             and physical integrity of watersheds and aquatic habitat.
                                             The City will consider amendments to the policies and
                                             programs of the Land Use Element and other General Plan
                                             elements as necessary to incorporate the findings and
                                             recommendations of these watershed planning efforts.
                                            The City shall ensure that new development will maintain
                                             historic off-site storm flows unless improvements are in place
                                             or made with the development that will maintain historic
                                             downstream and upstream flows.
                                             The City has adopted and shall periodically update a Storm
                                             Water Master Plan including shared detention facilities.
                                            Apply best management practices for stormwater
                                             management.
                                            Comply with relevant provisions of the National Pollution
                                             Discharge Elimination (NPDES) program as part of the
                                             development review process.
                                LU-16.9 Archaeological resources. The City shall provide for the
                                        protection of both known and potential archaeological resources.
 Archaeological                         To avoid development on important archaeological sites, all
   Resources
                                        available measures, including purchase of fee interest or
                                        development rights, shall be explored at the time of a
                                        development proposal. Where such measures are not feasible
                                        and development would adversely affect identified archaeological
                                        or paleontological resources, adequate mitigation shall be
                                        required.
                                                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    LU-56

                                                                            Open Space/Resource Conservation
         Implementation Measures
              Review development projects for consistency with the above
               policy and other relevant provisions of State law relating to
               archaeological resources as part of the development review
               process.
              To avoid development on important archaeological sites, all
               available measures, including purchase of fee interest or
               development rights, shall be explored at the time of a
               development proposal. Where such measures are not
               feasible and development would adversely affect identified
               archaeological or paleontological resources, adequate
               mitigation shall be required.
              The City should work with appropriate resource agencies to
               develop a map of archaeological sites to assist in reviewing
               to determine if additional review should be required.
LU-16.10 Protection of sensitive species. Prior to the approval of a
         project with the potential to adversely impact special status plant                  Protection of
                                                                                           Sensitive Biological
         or animal species or their habitats, the City shall ensure                            Resources
         compliance with the relevant provisions of state and federal laws
         relating to the preservation of rare, threatened, or endangered
         species and their habitat. Such laws include, but are not limited,
         the federal and state Endangered Species Acts, the federal Clean
         Water Act.
LU-16.11 On-site resource preservation. The City shall encourage new
         development to preserve on-site natural elements that contribute
         to the community’s native plant and wildlife species value and to
         its aesthetic character.
LU-16.12 Overriding considerations. Unless there are significant
         overriding considerations, the City shall not approve projects that
         would adversely impact rare, threatened, or endangered wildlife
         or plant species or their habitats.
LU-16.13 Agency coordination. The City shall support, and participate in,
         local and regional efforts of local, state and federal resource
         agencies to protect, restore and maintain viable, contiguous
         areas of habitat for sensitive plant and animal species.
LU-16.14 Project-specific surveys for special status plants and
         animals. Where future development projects have the potential to                  Biological Surveys
         impact natural plant communities or sensitive wildlife resources,
         the City shall require the project applicant to conduct appropriate
         surveys prepared by a qualified biologist in accordance with
         applicable regulatory guidelines. Such surveys shall identify and
         map any existing rare, threatened, or endangered plant and
         animal species and recommend appropriate mitigation measures.
                      CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                     LU-57

Open Space/Resource Conservation
                                LU-16.15 Riparian habitat protection. The City shall preserve the
                                         ecological integrity of creek corridors that support riparian
                                         resources by preserving native riparian plants and, to the extent
                                         feasible, removing invasive nonnative plants. If preservation of
                                         the ecological integrity of existing resources is found to be
                                         infeasible, adverse impacts to riparian resources shall be fully
                                         mitigated consistent with the requirements of applicable state and
                                         federal regulations.
                                LU-16.16 Wetland protection. The City shall preserve and protect wetland
                                         resources including creeks and other seasonal wetland areas, to
                                         the extent feasible. If preservation of the ecological integrity of
                                         existing wetland resources is found to be infeasible, adverse
                                         impacts to such resources shall be fully mitigated consistent with
                                         the requirements of applicable state and federal regulations.
                                LU-16.17 Monitoring. Monitoring of mitigation and restoration activities
                                         shall be consistent with requirements for each species or habitat
                                         as prescribed by the relevant regulatory jurisdictional agencies.
                                         For listed or candidate species, species of special concern, or
                                         sensitive habitats for which no mitigation or avoidance measures
                                         have been published, the City shall require evidence of
                                         coordination with the responsible agencies prior to acceptance of
                                         mitigation, avoidance measures, or monitoring requirements.
                                         Implementation Measures
                                             Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                              policies as part of the development review process.
                                             Work with the County, conservation organizations, the San
                                              Luis Obispo Council of Governments, the California
                                              Department of Fish and Game, and the US Fish and Wildlife
                                              Service to identify strategies for the permanent protection of
                                              habitat for rare and endangered species.
                                             Amend the Open Space and Conservation Element to
                                              incorporate the above policies and relocate from Land Use
                                              Element.
                                                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    LU-58

                                                                                The Coastal Zone/Growth Management
The Coastal Zone
Goal LU-17: To ensure continued compliance with the California
                 Coastal Act.
     Policy
     LU-17.1     Local Coastal Program. The City will adhere to, and implement,
                 the policies and directives of the California Coastal Act by                          Coastal Act
                                                                                                      Compliance
                 implementing the certified Local Coastal Program.
                 Implementation Measures
                     Amend the Local Coastal Program consistent with this
                      General Plan.
                     Comply with relevant provisions of the Coastal Act as part of
                      the development review process.
                     In reviewing and permitting proposed development within the
                      Coastal Zone, the city will require public access when
                      appropriate or make the required finding for why access is
                      not being required.
Growth Management
Goal LU-18: To provide for orderly, well-planned, and balanced
                 growth community where the majority of residents can
                 live, work and play, consistent with the limits imposed
                 by the city’s infrastructure and environmental
                 constraints.
     Policies
     LU-18.1     Managing the pace of development. The City shall ensure that
                 urban development proceeds in an orderly fashion and in pace                     Growth Management
                 with the expansion of public facilities and services, including
                 schools. The City should continue to regulate the development of
                 housing so that the number of new dwelling units grows no faster
                 than 123 units annually or at a rate of 2.5%.
                 Implementation Measures
                     Monitor residential development to ensure residential growth
                      does not exceed 2.5 percent.
                     Review development projects for consistency with the above
                      policy as part of the development review process.
                             CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                            LU-59

The Coastal Zone/Growth Management
                               LU-18.2 Managing the relationship between jobs and housing. The
                                       City shall monitor residential and non-residential development
                                       and encourage adjustments as necessary in land use
                                       designations and the rate of project approvals to promote a
                                       reasonable citywide balance between new employment-
                                       generating development and housing development and to
                                       minimize traffic impacts.
                                       Implementation Measures
                                           Monitor residential development to ensure residential growth
                                            does not exceed 2.5 percent.
                                           Develop an inventory of the total number of jobs within the
                                            City.
                               LU-18.3 Status of land prior to urban development. Land within the
                                       General Plan Area shall ultimately be developed to urban
                                       standards described in this Chapter. Pending connection to City
                                       services, such land shall remain in agricultural, open space, or
                                       other low intensity uses.
                                       Implementation Measures
                                           Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                            policy as part of the development review process.
                               LU-18.4 Regional planning. The City will encourage regional planning
                                       and growth management throughout the County, and in
                                       cooperation with neighboring cities. The City should coordinate
                                       planning with neighboring communities, San Luis Obispo County,
                                       and the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) to
                                       craft regional solutions for regional issues such as affordable
                                       housing and transportation funding.
                                       Implementation Measures
                                           Actively participate in the regional planning programs
                                            including (but are not limited to):
                                                 o the Community 2050 project
                                                 o Regional Housing Needs Allocations
                                                 o Development of the Sustainability Community
                                                     Strategies required by SB 375.
                                                 o Greenhouse gas inventories and a Climate Action
                                                     Plan that recognizes the regional nature of air quality
                                                     concerns.
                                                 o The Regional Transportation Plan and the Air
                                                     Quality Management Plan
                                                   CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  LU-60

                                                                                    Community Design & Character
Community Design and Character
Goal LU-19: To promote the development of a coherent and
                 distinctive physical form and structure that reflects
                 Grover Beach’s small-town qualities and beach-
                 orientation.
    Policies
    LU-19.1      Preserve neighborhood qualities. The City shall seek to
                                                                                                 Neighborhood
                 preserve the vital qualities of existing, stable residential                     Preservation
                 neighborhoods and shall promote the development of new
                 residential neighborhoods with these same qualifies.
    LU-19.2      Link and define neighborhoods. The City shall use the
                 circulation system and the pedestrian and bicycle pathway
                 system as important structural elements to link and define
                 neighborhoods and districts in Grover Beach.
                 Implementation Measures
                     The above policies will be implemented as part of the
                      development review process.
                     Incorporate roadway, pedestrian, transit and bicycle
                      circulation facilities as part of the CIP.
                     Continue citywide efforts to infill and improve curb, gutter,
                      and sidewalks through private development projects, CDBG
                      architectural barrier removal projects and programs such as
                      Safe Routes to School.
Goal LU-20: To preserve the existing community character and
                 fabric and promote the development of neighborhoods
                 and commercial and industrial districts that emphasize
                 pedestrian convenience.
    Policies
    LU-20.1      Overall design objectives for commercial and mixed-use                        Design Objectives
                 development. The design of new commercial and mixed-use                        for Commercial
                 development should work toward achieving the following                           Development
                 objectives:
                    a. Consider Grover Beach’s small town scale and
                         demonstrate sensitivity to the design context of the
                         surrounding area.
                             CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                             LU-61

Community Design & Character
                                         b. Avoid “boxy” structures with large, flat wall planes by
                                              articulating building forms and elevations to create
                                              interesting roof lines, building shapes, and patterns of
                                              shade and shadow.
                                         c.   Provide landscaping as a project amenity, and to help
                                              screen parking, equipment and storage areas.
                                         d. Provide site access, parking and circulation that is planned
                                              in a logical, safe manner that avoids awkward or cramped
                                              turning movements.
                                         e. Consider the need for signs and their appropriate scale
                                              and locations early in the design process, so that they are
                                              not an afterthought.
                                         f.   Design spaces for outside equipment, trash receptacles,
                                              storage, and loading areas in the least conspicuous part of
                                              the site.
                                         g. Mitigate the potential nuisance impacts of placing
                                              dwellings in proximity to non-residential development
                                              whether they are placed within the same building, within
                                              the same site, and between commercial and residential
                                              sites.
                             LU-20.2 Pedestrian amenities for commercial areas. New commercial
                                     and office development should promote walking, bicycling and
                                     public transit, especially in the central business district/civic
                                     center and the west Grand Avenue/beach area.
                             LU-20.3 Overall design objectives for industrial development. The
Design Objectives                    design of new and redeveloped industrial projects should
  for Industrial                     incorporate the following elements:
  Development
                                      a.    Easily identifiable site access;
                                      b.    Service areas located at the sides and rear of buildings;
                                      c.    Convenient access, visitor parking and on-site circulation;
                                      d.    Screening of outdoor storage, work areas, and equipment;
                                      e.    Emphasis on the main building entry and landscaping;
                                      f.    Placement of buildings to provide plazas and courtyards;
                                      g.    Landscaped open space.
                                      h.    A variety of building and parking setbacks to avoid long
                                            monotonous building facades and to create diversity within
                                            the project.
                                      i.    An architectural style appropriate for the business type.
                                            Buildings should project an image of high quality through the
                                            use of appropriate durable materials and well landscaped
                                            settings.
                                                   CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  LU-62

                                                                            Community Design & Character
LU-20.4 Protect residential neighborhoods. Commercial and industrial
        development adjacent to existing residences should be designed
        to adequately protect the residential use from the impacts of
        noise, light, vehicular traffic, privacy, and operational hazards.
LU-20.5 Transit facilities. New development (including, but not limited to,
        commercial and mixed-use centers, industrial parks, and
        residential neighborhoods) should incorporate facilities to
        promote the use of public transit, such as bus turnarounds and
        drop-offs where appropriate.
LU-20.6 Architecture. No particular architectural style or design theme is
                                                                                          Architectural
        required in the City nor can Grover Beach be defined by any one                    Character
        particular architectural style. A wide range of architectural
        characteristics adds to the City’s overall image. While variety in
        design is generally encouraged, the compatibility of new projects
        with the existing built environment should be a priority. The goal
        is to preserve not only the beach flavor of the community but,
        equally important, its scale and ambience. “Canned” or
        “trademark” building designs and signs used by franchised
        businesses in other cities may not be acceptable in Grover
        Beach, as they can collectively have the effect of making the
        portions of the City look like anywhere in California.
LU-20.7 Neighborhood design. The City shall promote the creation of
        well-defined residential neighborhoods in newly-developing and                   Neighborhood
        existing areas. Each of these neighborhoods should have a clear                      Design
        focal point, such as a park, school, or other open space and
        community facility, and should be designed to promote pedestrian
        convenience. To this end, the City shall encourage the use of
        existing Grover Beach neighborhoods, including the grid street
        system, as models for the planning and design of new residential
        neighborhoods. Design of proposed development should address
        low impact development opportunities in accordance with the
        Storm Water Management Plan discussed in policy LU 16.8.
LU-20.8 Qualities desired in residential development. Residential
        projects should provide:
         a. Privacy, for occupants and neighbors of the project;
         b. Adequate usable outdoor area, sheltered from noise and
             prevailing winds, and oriented to receive light and sunshine;
         c. Use of natural ventilation, sunlight, and shade to make
             indoor and outdoor spaces comfortable with minimum
             mechanical support;
         d. Pleasant views from and toward the project;
         e. Security and safety;
         f. Separate paths for vehicles and for people, and bike paths
             along collector streets;
         g. Adequate parking and storage space;
                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                    LU-63

Community Design & Character
                                        h. Noise and visual separation from adjacent roads and
                                             commercial uses.
                                        i. Design elements that facilitate neighborhood interaction,
                                             such as front porches, front yards along streets, entryways
                                             facing public walkways, and building design and orientation
                                             to minimize the prominence of the garage door.
                              LU-20.9  Building height of residential infill development. The height of
                                       residential infill projects should be consistent with that of
                                       surrounding residential structures, and incorporate features to
                                       protect existing views and privacy where reasonable. Where
                                       greater height is desired, an infill structure should set back the
                                       upper floors from the edge of the first story to reduce impacts on
                                       adjacent properties.
                                       Implementation Measures
                                            The above policies will be implemented as part of the
                                             development review process.
                                            The City shall review and update the Zoning Code sign
                                             regulations to ensure that signs reflect a pedestrian scale
                                             and to evaluate where pole signs are appropriate.
                           Goal LU-21: To maintain and enhance the quality of the Grover
 Streetscapes                          Beach’s landscape and streetscape, and to improve the
                                       appearance of the City’s gateways.
                              Policies
                              LU-21.1  Street trees. The City shall endeavor to protect the urban forest
                                       created by mature trees in existing developed areas and in newly
                                       developing areas.
                              LU-21.2  Boulevard planting. The City shall establish, extend and
                                       reinforce major street tree/boulevard plantings to enhance the
                                       visual character of special and important streets within Grover
                                                                                                  th
                                       Beach, including Grand Avenue, Oak Park Boulevard, 4 Street
                                                th
                                       and 13 Street.
                              LU-21.3  Landscaped medians. The City shall identify appropriate streets
                                       for inclusion of landscaped medians.
                                       Implementation Measures
                                            Implement the Improvement Project.
                                            Incorporate streetscape improvements as part of the City’s
                                             CIP.
                                            Review street tree requirements and the list of appropriate
                                             trees.
                                                    CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   LU-64

                                                                        Community Design & Character
           Create Heritage Tree list.
           Review the Tree Removal policies to ensure they are
            preserving significant trees.
           Complete the Grand Avenue Enhancement Project and
            continue through the Downtown area as reflected in the
            City’s CIP.
           Complete the Longbranch demonstration project and identify
            where the use of Landscape Medians may be appropriate for
            this area.
           Evaluate the extension of medians along 4th Street at Grand
            Avenue
LU-21.4 Gateways. The City should establish a program for improving the
        appearance of the City’s gateways, including north 4th Street,                 Gateways
        Oak Park Boulevard, State Route 1 and Grand Avenue.
        Implementation Measures
           Prepare and implement a Gateway Plan and Wayfinding
            Signage Program for major gateways to the community.
           Incorporate gateway improvements as part of the City’s CIP.
                   CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                  LU-65

Economic Development
                     Economic Development
                     Goal LU-22: Provide for a stable economic base to sustain a range
                                      of employment and business opportunities to generate
   Economic
 Development
                                      sufficient revenues to support adequate levels of public
                                      services.
                          Policies
                          LU-22.1.    Business and employment. The City will retain and expand
                                      existing businesses and work to attract new businesses to
                                      improve employment opportunities and the range of goods and
                                      services available to the community.
                                      Implementation Measures
                                          Continue to update and maintain the City’s Economic
                                           Development Strategy.
                                          Create and maintain a business retention and attraction
                                           program.
                                          Implement the recommendations of the Technology Master
                                           Plan.
                                          Periodically review City regulations and processes to ensure
                                           they support economic development opportunities.
                                          Continue working with economic development partners such
                                           as the Chamber of Commerce, Economic Vitality
                                           Corporation, and tourism organizations.
                          LU-22.2.    Expand industrial sector. The City will continue to facilitate
                                      development /redevelopment of the City’s industrial areas.
                                      Implementation Programs
                                        Provide the necessary infrastructure to serve the industrial
                                           area south of Farroll Road.
                                        Implement the recommendations of the Technology Master
                                           Plan.
                                        Pursue opportunities for recruiting targeted industries that
                                           would compliment existing businesses or create new job
                                           opportunities.
                                                 CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                LU-66

                                                                                Economic Development
Goal LU-23: Create an identity for the City that will enhance its
            image as a tourist destination.
   Policies
   LU-23.1. Promote the City’s image. The City will promote the City’s
            tourist amenities including the Oceano Dunes State Vehicular
            Recreational Area, Pismo State Beach, monarch butterfly
            preserve, and Amtrak train service.
   LU-23.2. Gateways. The City will establish entry monuments at major City
                                                                                        Gateways
            entrances to identify Grover Beach, and provide signage directing
            visitors to key amenities such as the train station and dune
            access.
            Implementation Programs
                 Implement a marketing strategy to promote the City.
                 Work with the Chamber of Commerce to increase the
                  marketing of the City.
                 Prepare and adopt a City Gateway and Wayfinding Signage
                  Program.
Goal LU-24: To establish and maintain a supportive business
            climate and a healthy, sustainable economy.
   Policies                                                                         Promoting Business
                                                                                          Vitality
   LU-24.1  Small businesses. The City should encourage establishment of
            small businesses, including minority- and women-owned
            businesses.
   LU-24.2  Economic sustainability. The City shall work to attract and
            retain long-term, economically sustainable businesses.
   LU-24.3  Evaluate fiscal impacts. The City should evaluate the fiscal
            impacts of new major development to encourage a pattern of
            growth that will allow the City to provide high standards of public
            services, facilities, and infrastructure.
   LU-24.5  Regional cooperation. The City shall work with other cities, San
            Luis Obispo County, and local and regional economic
            development entities to expand and improve the economic
            sustainability of the region.
   LU-24.6  Partnerships. The City should partner with the Chamber of
            Commerce to promote downtown and the City’s cultural,
            entertainment, and commercial center and the development of a
                        CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                       LU-67

  Economic Development
                                   Visitor-Service Corridor that will provide for accommodations,
                                   shopping and services for visitors to the city and region.
                          LU-24.7  Entrepreneurship. The City will support local efforts to create
                                   new products, services and businesses.
                                   Implementation Measures
                                       The above policies will be implemented by continuing to
                                        implement the Economic Development Strategy, the
                                        Improvement Project and Industrial Enhancement Project.
                       Goal LU-25: To promote a diverse and balanced mix of employment
                                   opportunities.
                          Policies
                          LU-25.1  Jobs-to-housing ratio. The City shall maintain an adequate
Improving the Ratio                supply of retail, business, and industrial land to improve the ratio
 of Jobs to Housing
                                   of jobs to housing. (see also Policy LU-25.1)
                          LU-25.2  Workplace alternatives. The City shall encourage the use of
                                   alternative workplaces (such as live-work settings) by making
                                   land use designations and zoning codes compatible with qualified
                                   home-based businesses (home occupations) and telecommuting
                                   in all residential areas, subject to City Codes and regulations.
                                   (see also Policy LU-11.5)
                                               CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                              LU-68

                                                                                    Sustainability & Environmental Justice
Sustainability and Environmental Justice
Goal LU-26: To promote the sustainable use of resources.
      Policies
      LU-26.1      Commute reduction. The City shall promote the expansion of
                                                                                                           Sustainability
                   employment opportunities in Grover Beach to reduce the volume
                   and distance of home-to-work commute trips by motor vehicle.
                   Implementation Measures
                        Amend the Land Use Diagram as needed to accommodate
                         expansion of employment in Grover Beach.
                        Monitor the pace of employment and housing growth to
                         better balance jobs with housing.
      LU-26.2      Conservation of land resources. The City should encourage
                   the efficient utilization of limited land resources by encouraging
                   development at the upper end of the permitted Zoning
                   Code/General Plan residential density where appropriate. Using
                   land efficiently offers a number of advantages, including:
                        Reducing pressure to convert agricultural or open space
                         land to urban use;
                        Higher residential densities have a lower land cost per unit,
                         which helps to hold down housing costs;
                        Infill development facilitates the use of alternate modes of
                         travel, such as walking and bicycling which in turn reduces
                         traffic and improves air quality.
                   Implementation Measures
                        The above policy will be implemented as part of the
                         development review process.
      LU-26.3      Water conservation. To minimize the need for the development
                   of new water sources and facilities and sewer treatment needs,
                   the City shall promote water conservation both in City operations
                   and in private development.
                   Implementation Measures
                        Implement the Urban Water Management Plan.
                        Continue to promote the use of drought tolerant landscaping.
                        Evaluate the collection of fresh water in rain-barrels.
                                 CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                LU-69

 Sustainability & Environmental Justice
                                                   Support storm drainage systems that would keep runoff on-
                                                    site through Low Impact Design (LID) and hydromodification
                                                    approaches and percolate into the groundwater.
                                                   Consider restructuring water rates to discourage high water
                                                    use
                                                   Educate the public of the benefits of water conservation.
                               Goal LU-27: To reduce to the emission of greenhouse gases and to
                                               promote energy efficiency.
                                      Policies
                                      LU-27.1  Greenhouse gas reduction goal. The City shall work with the
                                               Air Resources Board and the San Luis Obispo County Air
                                               Pollution Control District to comply with statewide greenhouse
                                               gas reduction goals as established in the Global Warming
                                               Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32) for 2020, and subsequent goals.
                                               Implementation Measures
                                                   Work with the Air Resources Board and the SLO County
                                                    APCD to comply with statewide greenhouse gas reduction
                                                    goals as established by the Global Warming Solutions Act of
                                                    2006 which requires a reduction of emissions to the 1990
                                                    levels by the year 2020 and additional reductions extending
                                                    long-term to 2050.
   Reduction of                                    Complete the GHG emissions inventory of municipal
Greenhouse Gases                                    operations and the community wide emissions. Using this,
                                                    develop the Climate Action Plan consistent with the
                                                    requirements of AB32 and SB 375 (See policy LU-27.2).
                                                    Such a plan should consider City participation in the Climate
                                                    Action Registry, ridesharing programs and renewable energy
                                                    programs, and the potential effects of sea level rise that may
                                                    result from climate change.
                                      LU-27.2  Climate Action Plan. The City shall comply with the relevant
                                               provisions of State law (i.e. AB 32 and SB 375) to minimize the
                                               effect of citywide greenhouse gas emissions associated with
                                               buildout of the General Plan. This shall be achieved through the
                                               preparation and implementation of a Climate Action Plan.
                                               Implementation Measures
                                                   Prepare a Climate Action Plan              consistent with  the
                                                    requirements of AB32 and SB375.
                                      LU-27.3  Sustainable government buildings. All new, or major
                                               renovations to, City buildings shall be designed and constructed
                                               to meet Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
                                                           CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                          LU-70

                                                                          Sustainability & Environmental Justice
        Silver rating requirements, or their equivalent. The City should
        also evaluate the potential of the use of solar photovoltaics on
        major city buildings.
        Implementation Measures
            The above policy will be implemented as part of the
             development review process.
LU-27.4 Greenhouse gas emissions from new development. The City
        shall implement measures to reduce the emission of greenhouse
        gases from new development by:
         a. Discouraging auto-dependent patterns of development;
         b. Promoting compact, mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly, and
             transit oriented development;
         c. Promoting energy-efficient building design and site planning
             using either Build It Green and LEED Silver standards for
             residential and non-residential buildings, respectively; and
         d. Working to improve the ratio of jobs to housing.
         e. Incorporating transit facilities in new development, and by
             promoting transit use.
        Implementation Measures
            Implement the policies and programs of the General Plan.
            Review development projects for consistency with the above
             policy as part of the development review process.
LU-27.5 Passive solar heating. To the extent feasible, the City shall
        require the orientation of buildings to accomplish the following:
         a.  Maximize passive solar heating during cool seasons;
         b.  Avoid solar heat gain in warm seasons;
         c.  Enhance natural ventilation and effective use of daylight;
         d.  Maximize opportunities for the installation of solar panels;
         e.  Facilitate the use of sunlight for direct heating and
             illumination whenever possible; and
         f.  Take advantage of natural ventilation and shading to cool a
             building.
        Implementation Measures
            Review development projects for consistency with the above
             policy as part of the development review process. The City
             shall develop a checklist to assist applicants in identifying
             how their project can/does incorporate those features.
                    CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                   LU-71

Sustainability & Environmental Justice
                                     LU-27.6  Energy-saving elements efficiency. The use of exterior shading
                                              devices, skylights, daylighting controls, high performance glazing
                                              that allows the transmission of light with minimal heat gain, and
                                              high thermal mass building components is encouraged.
                                              Implementation Measures
                                                    Review development projects for consistency with the above
                                                     policy as part of the development review process.
                                     LU-27.7  Environmentally responsible government purchasing. The
                                              City shall, in its purchasing of products, equipment, or services,
                                              give preference to those which reduce or eliminate indirect
                                              greenhouse gas emissions.
                                              Implementation Measures
                                                    Amend purchasing practices consistent with the above
                                                     policy.
                                     LU-27.8  Life-cycle costing. The City shall incorporate the method of life-
                                              cycle costing to determine the most energy-efficient equipment
                                              and systems for its buildings and operations.
                                              Implementation Measures
                                                    Amend life cycle costing practices consistent with the above
                                                     policy.
                                     LU-27.9  APCD cooperation. The City shall work with the San Luis
                                              Obispo Air Pollution Control District to ensure the earliest
                                              practicable attainment and subsequent maintenance of federal
                                              and state ambient air quality standards, and will ensure to the
                                              extent possible that sensitive receptors (at risk population groups)
                                              are located away from freeway corridors, rail yards, gasoline
                                              facilities, dry cleaners, etc., consistent with the recommendations
                                              of the District’s Air Quality and Land Use Handbook:              A
                                              Community Health Perspective, as prepared by the Air Pollution
                                              Control Board.
                                     LU-27.10 CEQA. The City shall use the CEQA process to identify and avoid
                                              or mitigate potentially significant air quality impacts of new
                                              development. The CEQA process shall be used to ensure early
                                              consultation with the San Luis Obispo Air Pollution Control District
                                              concerning air quality issues associated with specific
                                              development proposals. The City will use the most recent APCD
                                              version of the APCD CEQA Guidelines to mitigate for asbestos
                                              and other air quality emissions.
                                                            CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           LU-72

                                                                                 Sustainability & Environmental Justice
Goal LU-28: To ensure the fair and equitable distribution of public
            amenities and facilities.
   Policies
   LU-28.1  Environmental justice. The City shall ensure that public facilities
                                                                                                        Environmental
            are equitably distributed throughout the city, avoiding over-
                                                                                                           Justice
            concentration in areas that are well-served, and shall ensure that
            facility location and design are compatible with nearby land uses.
            Implementation Measures
                  Review the siting of public facilities for consistency with the
                   above policy as part of the development review process.
                         CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                        LU-73

                                                                                          Administration of the General Plan
                      Administration of the General Plan
                      Goal LU-29: Ensure that the City’s General Plan is maintained to be
                                         an accurate guide for development and resource
                                         conservation.
                           Policies
Administration of the
   General Plan
                           LU-29.1       Review of policy document. The City shall review the General
                                         Plan on an annual basis to retain internal consistency and
                                         consistency with other Federal, State and local regulations and
                                         policies.
                           LU-29.2       Annual Report. The City will prepare an annual report apprising
                                         the Planning Commission and City Council of the status and
                                         effectiveness of the General Plan. The report should detail how
                                         the goals, objectives, policies, and implementation programs
                                         have been achieved.
                           LU-29.3       General Plan amendments. The General Plan shall be amended
                                         no more than four times per year. Each amendment, however,
                                         may include multiple changes.
                           LU-29.4.      Major review of General Plan and supporting materials. The
                                         City shall conduct a major review of the General Plan, including
                                         the Policy Document and background information, every five
                                         years and revise it as deemed necessary.
                           LU-29.5       Capital Improvement Program. The City shall prepare, adopt,
                                         and periodically update a five-year Capital Improvement Program
                                         (CIP). The CIP shall be reviewed for its consistency with the
                                         General Plan.
                           LU-29.6       Ordinance amendments. The City shall review and amend, as
                                         necessary, the Zoning Code and Subdivision Ordinance to
                                         ensure consistency with the General Plan.
                                         Implementation Measures
                                             The above policies will be implemented as stated.
                                                     CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    LU-74

                                                                           Sustainability & Environmental Justice
Summary Table of Implementation Measures
Table 8 provides a complete listing of implementation measures, the policies
they implement [to be added following adoption], the party responsible for
implementation, and a recommended implementation timeframe.
                       CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                      LU-75
                                         Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                                Timeframe
No.            Implementation Measure                   Policies*     Responsibility   Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                            Ongoing
                                                                                       Term  Term     Term
    The City and Redevelopment Agency will                          City Council,
1.  apply the goals, policies and programs of the      All          Redevelopment                             
    General Plan and Local Coastal Program.                         Agency, City Staff
    The City shall review and revise as necessary                   City Council
    the Local Coastal Program to ensure                             Community
2.                                                     LU-17.1                          
    consistency with the General Plan and                           Development
    California Coastal Act                                          Department
    The City and Redevelopment Agency will
    implement the Grover Beach Improvement                          City Council,
3.  Project and Industrial Enhancement Project         All          Redevelopment                             
    as a means of achieving the objectives of the                   Agency, City Staff
    General Plan.
    The City shall review and revise, as
    necessary, the Zoning Code and Subdivision
    Ordinance to accomplish the following
    purposes:
     a.    Ensure consistency with the General
           Plan in terms of zoning districts and
           development standards.                                   City Council
     b.    Ensure consistency with the General                      Community
4.                                                     All                              
           Plan in terms of the distribution and                    Development
           boundaries of zoning districts.                          Department
     c.    Create separate new zoning districts to
           adequately implement the General
           Plan.
     d.    Accommodate live/work units and
           establish performance criteria for such
           units.
     e.    Ensure consistency with ALUP.
    The City shall prepare and adopt master            LU-1.2, LU-  City Council
    development plans (e.g., specific plans and        1.3, LU-3.4, Community
5.                                                                                                            
    planned unit development plans) as deemed          LU-5.1, LU-  Development
    necessary for new development areas.               15.2         Department
    The City shall develop a program to monitor                     City Council
                                                       LU-18.1,
    residential and non-residential development                     Community
6.                                                     LU-18.2,                               
    to promote a reasonable balance between                         Development
                                                       LU-25.1
    jobs and housing.                                               Department
    The City shall continue to seek grants for the
    funding of efforts to achieve the objectives
7.                                                     All          All departments                           
    outlined in the General Plan and Improvement
    Project.
    The City shall continue to implement an
    economic development strategy to attract new
                                                       LU-22.1,
    commercial development and industry to                          City Council
                                                       LU-22.2,
    Grover Beach and to expand tourism. The                         Economic
8.                                                     LU-23.1,                                               
    active promotion of its industrial parks and the                Development
                                                       LU-24.1,
    support of minority- and women-owned small
                                                       LU-24.2
    businesses shall be a part of this strategy.
                                            CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                            LU-76

                                        Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                            Timeframe
No.            Implementation Measure                  Policies*    Responsibility Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                        Ongoing
                                                                                   Term  Term     Term
                                                                  City Council
    The City shall establish and maintain a
                                                                  Economic
    program to monitor the fiscal status of the City
9.                                                    LU-24.3     Development                            
    as it relates to the implementation of the
                                                                  Finance
    General Plan.
                                                                  Department
                                                                  Public Works
    The City will continue to implement a program
                                                      LU-21.1,    and Parks and
    for the placement and maintenance of street
10.                                                   LU-21.2,    Recreation        
    trees throughout the City, and especially
                                                      LU-21.3     Departments
    along its major thoroughfares.
    The City shall prepare, adopt and implement                   City Council
    a Climate Change Action Plan to ensure                        Community
11.                                                   LU-27.2                       
    compliance with State and federal regulations                 Development
    relating to climate change.                                   Department
                                                                  City Council
    The City and/or Redevelopment Agency shall        LU-5.1,
                                                                  Redevelopment
    implement a program for streetscape               LU-6.1,
                                                                  Agency
12. improvements, especially along Grand              LU-6.5,                       
                                                                  Community
    Avenue, to provide landscaping, seating,          LU-7.4,
                                                                  Development
    lighting and other pedestrian amenities.          LU-7.7
                                                                  Department
                                                                  City Council
    The City will prepare a plan for strengthening                Community
13.                                                   LU-21.4                       
    the appearance of the City’s gateways.                        Development
                                                                  Department
    The Planning Commission shall review the
    General Plan Policy Document every two
    years, focusing principally on actions
    undertaken in the previous two years to carry                 Community
    out the implementation programs of the Plan.                  Development
    The Planning Commission’s report to the City      LU-29.1,    Department
14.                                                                                                      
    Council shall include, as the Commission          LU-29.2     City Council
    deems appropriate, recommendations for                        Planning
    amendments to the General Plan. This review                   Commission
    shall also be used to satisfy the requirements
    of Public Resources Code §21081.6 for a
    mitigation monitoring program.
                                                                  Community
    The City shall conduct a major review of the                  Development
    General Plan, including the Policy Document                   Department
15.                                                   LU-29.4                             
    and Background Report, every five years and                   City Council
    revise it as deemed necessary.                                Planning
                                                                  Commission
                                                                  City Council
                                                                  Community
    The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically
                                                                  Development
16. update a Capital Improvements Program             LU-29.5                                             
                                                                  Department
    (CIP).
                                                                  Public Works
                                                                  Department
                                                                  Community
    The City and Redevelopment Agency will
                                                                  Development
17. continue      to    implement    the     façade   LU-20.1                                             
                                                                  Department
    improvement program.
                                                                  Redevelopment
                                           CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                          LU-77

                                          Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                               Timeframe
No.             Implementation Measure                    Policies*    Responsibility Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                           Ongoing
                                                                                      Term  Term     Term
                                                                     Agency
                                                                     Community
      The City shall prepare (or cause to be                         Development
18.   prepared) a master plan for the Grand              LU-5.1      Department        
      Avenue corridor.                                               City Council
    When initiated by the property owner, the City
    will prepare (or cause to be prepared) a
    specific plan for the Strawberry Field area as
    prescribed by Government Code '65451 to
    address the following minimum issues:
      a.   The      appropriate      boundaries      of
           properties to be included within the
                                                                     Community
           specific plan area.
                                                                     Development
      b.   The appropriate mix and location of
19.                                                      LU-15.2     Department                       
           land uses
                                                                     City Council
      c.   Design guidelines for new development
      d.   Development standards, including a list
           of allowed and conditionally allowed
           uses;
      e.   Public and private (off-street) parking;
      f.   A mobility plan for motor vehicles,
           pedestrians, bicycles, transit, and the
           physically impaired;
      g.   A plan for implementation;
    The City should encourage county, state and                      City Council
    other agencies to locate facilities in proximity                 Community
    to the existing City Hall to create a Civic                      Development
20.                                                      LU-7.2                              
    Center that would meet the needs of the                          Department
    residents, businesses and visitors to the City.                  Economic
                                                                     Development
    The City shall partner with community service
    agencies and organizations to fund energy
                                                                     City Council
    efficient projects for low income residents.
                                                         LU-27.2,    Community
21. Eligible projects include but are not limited to                                                         
                                                         LU-27.4     Development
    the installation of heating, ventilation, and air-
                                                                     Department
    conditioning systems, lighting, water heating
    equipment, and insulation and weatherization.
    The City shall consider adopting a program to
    provide incentives for projects that make an
    existing home or business more energy-                           City Council
                                                         LU-27.2,
    efficient. Eligible projects include but are not                 Community
22.                                                      LU-27.4,                            
    limited to the installation of solar panels,                     Development
                                                         LU-27.5
    tankless water heaters, and highly energy-                       Department
    efficient heating, ventilation, and air-
    conditioning systems.
    The City shall investigate options for providing
                                                                     City Council
    low-interest financing for energy efficient          LU-27.2,
                                                                     Community
23. improvements and solar system installation           LU-27.4,                           
                                                                     Development
    for residents. Such financing could take the         LU-27.5
                                                                     Department
    form of long-term assessments on individual
                                              CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                             LU-78

                                          Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                                  Timeframe
No.             Implementation Measure                     Policies*    Responsibility   Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                              Ongoing
                                                                                         Term  Term     Term
    property tax bills.
                                                                      City Council
    The City will use redevelopment to help fund                      Redevelopment
                                                          LU-10.2,
    street calming improvements and incorporate                       Agency
24.                                                       LU-19.1,                                              
    traffic calming elements in the Capital                           Community
                                                          LU-20.2
    Improvement Program                                               Development
                                                                      Department
    As part of Zoning Code amendments
                                                                      City Council
    necessary to implement the General Plan, the
                                                                      Community
25. City will establish performance criteria for          LU-11.5                               
                                                                      Development
    noise, lighting, security, loading, etc., for live-
                                                                      Department
    work settings.
    The City will review the siting of public
                                                                      City Council
    facilities as part of the development review
                                                                      Community
26. process to facilitate the clustering of facilities    LU-13.2                                               
                                                                      Development
    and to take advantage of opportunities for
                                                                      Department
    shared facilities.
                                                                      City Council
                                                                      Community
    The City will prepare and adopt an Urban
27.                                                       LU-16.6     Development and           
    Trail Plan.
                                                                      Parks & Recreation
                                                                      Departments
                                                                      City Council
    The City will identify and map areas subject to
                                                                      Community
    flood hazard within the City consistent with
                                                                      Development
28. FEMA requirements and apply flood hazard              LU-16.7                                              
                                                                      Department
    protection strategies as required by federal
                                                                      Public Works
    and State law.
                                                                      Department
    The City will prepare and adopt a program to                      City Council
    monitor residential development to ensure                         Community
29.                                                       LU-18.1                                               
    residential growth does not exceed 2.5                            Development
    percent.                                                          Department
    The City will actively participate in regional
    planning programs that include (but are not
    limited to) the Community 2050s, Regional
    Housing Needs Allocations, Development of
    the Sustainable Community Strategies                              City Council
    required by SB 375 to meet the air quality            LU-18.4,    Community
30.                                                                                                             
    reductions required by state and federal              LU-27.9     Development
    programs, greenhouse gas inventories and a                        Department
    Climate Action Plan that recognizes the
    regional nature of air quality concerns, the
    Regional Transportation Plan, the Air Quality
    Management Plan
    The City will work with ARB, SLO County and
    the APCD to comply with greenhouse gas
                                                                      City Council
    reduction goals, in part by preparing a
                                                          LU-18.4,    Community
31. Climate Action Plan. Such a plan should                                               
                                                          LU-27.9     Development
    consider City participation in the Climate
                                                                      Department
    Action Registry, the ICLEI (local governments
    for sustainability), ridesharing programs and
                                               CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                              LU-79

                                         Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                             Timeframe
No.            Implementation Measure                   Policies*    Responsibility Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                         Ongoing
                                                                                    Term  Term     Term
    renewable energy programs, and the potential
    effects of sea level rise that may result from
    climate change.
    The City will consider amending its
    purchasing and life cycle costing practices to
32.                                                    LU-27.8     City Council            
    conserve non-renewable resources and
    energy.
    The City will actively advertise the availability              City Council
                                                       LU-27.1,
33. of funds available for energy conservation                     Building                                
                                                       LU-27.4
    improvements.                                                  Department
    The City will investigate options for providing
    low-interest financing or grants for energy                    City Council
    efficient improvements to residential,             LU-27.1,    Community
34.                                                                                        
    commercial, and commercial projects,               LU-27.4     Development
    including the use of federal stimulus programs                 Department
    coupled with city funding sources.
                                                                   City Council
    The City will consider the waiver of permit
                                                       LU-27.1,    Community
35. fees to encourage energy efficiency, based                                             
                                                       LU-27.4     Development
    upon budget limitations.
                                                                   Department
    The City will prepare an annual report
                                                                   City Council
    apprising the Planning Commission and City
                                                                   Planning
    Council of the status and effectiveness of the
                                                                   Commission
36. General Plan. The report should detail how         LU 29.2                                             
                                                                   Community
    the goals, objectives, policies, and
                                                                   Development
    implementation programs have been
                                                                   Department
    achieved.
    The City shall prepare, adopt, and periodically                City Council
    update a five-year Capital Improvement                         Community
    Program (CIP). The CIP shall be reviewed for                   Development
37.                                                    LU 29.5                                             
    its consistency with the General Plan.                         Department
                                                                   Public Works
                                                                   Department
    The City shall adopt and implement a Right
    To Farm Ordinance to provide residents
                                                                   City Council
    notification of the City’s recognition of, and
                                                                   Planning
    support for, the right to farm, and to promote
                                                                   Commission
38. a good neighbor policy by advising                 LU 15.3                             
                                                                   Community
    purchasers of residential property, and
                                                                   Development
    owners of other property in the City, of the
                                                                   Department
    inherent potential problems associated with
    the purchase of such property.
    The City shall develop an Agricultural
    Conservation Program to help mitigate the
    permanent conversion of productive farmland                    City Council
    to a non-agricultural use. Such a program will                 Planning
    address at least the following:                                Commission
39.                                                    LU-15.3                       
         The establishment of a ratio of                          Community
          comparable agricultural lands to be                      Development
          permanently protected for each acre of                   Department
          agricultural use, and
         Options for satisfying the required ratio of
                                            CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                           LU-80

                                         Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                              Timeframe
No.             Implementation Measure                   Policies*    Responsibility Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                          Ongoing
                                                                                     Term  Term     Term
         preserved agricultural land for each acre
         converted to a non-agricultural use. Such
         options may include, but are not limited
         to, the payment of an in lieu fee sufficient
         to purchase a farmland conservation
         easement, farmland deed restriction, or
         other farmland conservation mechanism.
                                                        LU-16.1,
                                                        LU-16.2,
                                                                    City Council
                                                        LU-16.4,
    The City shall work with other agencies to                      Planning
                                                        LU-16.5,
    identify strategies for the permanent                           Commission
40.                                                     LU-16.10,                           
    protection of habitat for rare and endangered                   Community
                                                        LU-16.11,
    species.                                                        Development
                                                        LU-16.12,
                                                                    Department
                                                        LU-16.13,
                                                        LU-16.14
                                                                    City Council
                                                                    Redevelopment
    The City can provide relocation assistance to
                                                                    Agency
41. businesses and property owners in the Front         LU-6.8                        
                                                                    Community
    Street industrial area.
                                                                    Development
                                                                    Department
    To ensure that new development and the
    redevelopment of existing sites will
    adequately protect water quality, reduce
                                                                    City Council
    runoff volumes and pollutant loads to the
                                                                    Public Works
    Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP), the City
                                                                    Department
42. shall consider, and implement where                 LU-16.8                       
                                                                    Community
    appropriate, low impact development options
                                                                    Development
    and revisions to the City’s water quality
                                                                    Department
    management regulations consistent with the
    Storm Water Management Program adopted
    by the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
    The City will also undertake long-term
    watershed planning and management
    activities in coordination with adjoining cities,
    San Luis Obispo County and State Parks.
    The main objective of these efforts is to                       City Council
    ensure the protection of water quality,                         Public Works
    beneficial uses of water, and the biological                    Department
43.                                                     LU-16.8                       
    and physical integrity of watersheds and                        Community
    aquatic habitat. The City will consider                         Development
    amendments to the policies and programs of                      Department
    the Land Use Element and other General
    Plan elements as necessary to incorporate
    the findings and recommendations of these
    watershed planning efforts.
                                                                    City Council
                                                                    Public Works
    The City shall adopt and implement an Urban
                                                                    Department
44. Storm Water Quality and Discharge Control           LU-16.8                       
                                                                    Community
    Ordinance.
                                                                    Development
                                                                    Department
                                             CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                            LU-81

                                          Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                               Timeframe
No.              Implementation Measure                    Policies*   Responsibility Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                           Ongoing
                                                                                      Term  Term     Term
                                       Amendments to Other General Plan Elements
                                                                     City Council
                                                                     Planning
    Amend the Conservation Element to
                                                         LU-16.1-    Commission
46. incorporate relevant policies and programs                                         
                                                         LU-16.17    Community
    from the Land Use Element.
                                                                     Development
                                                                     Department
    Amend the Circulation Element to incorporate
    the following policies and programs:
    Policies:
    Level of service standard. The City shall
    endeavor to maintain a minimum Level of
    Service “C”, as defined by the 2000 Highway
    Capacity Manual or subsequent revisions, on
    all streets and intersections within the city. To
    identify the potential impacts of new
    development on traffic service levels, the City
    shall require the preparation of traffic impact
    analyses at the sole expense of the developer
    for developments determined to be large
    enough to have potentially significant traffic
    impacts.
    Traffic calming. Traffic calming techniques,
                                                                     City Council
    including roundabouts, traffic circles, ‘chokers’
                                                                     Planning
    and chicanes, shall be considered as an              [No policy
                                                                     Commission
    alternative to traditional intersection controls.    references
                                                                     Community
47.                                                      in the Land                   
                                                                     Development
                                                         Use
                                                                     Department
    Paving Surface. The City will consider using         Element]
                                                                     Public Works
    rubberized asphalt or open-grade asphalt
                                                                     Departments
    where appropriate to help lessen the noise
    impacts of roadway traffic.
    Programs:
    Roadway Standards. The City shall prepare
    roadway design standards for new and
    existing streets, roads and roundabouts.
    Such standards should include right-of-way
    width, roadway section design, and dedication
    requirements for new development to
    accommodate traffic levels expected at
    buildout of the General Plan. The roadway
    design standards should be interpreted with
    flexibility so that the roadways provided are
    no wider than required to maintain safe and
    efficient circulation and access.
                                              CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                              LU-82

                                         Table 8 -- Implementation Measures
                                                                                            Timeframe
No.             Implementation Measure                 Policies*    Responsibility Near- Mid-     Long-
                                                                                                        Ongoing
                                                                                   Term  Term     Term
      Safe Routes To School. The City shall work
      with the School District and other
      stakeholders to prepare a Safe Routes To
      School Program for each of the School Sites.
    Near-Term = Within 5 Years
    Mid-Term = Within 10 Years
    Long-Term = 10 Years and Beyond
                                           CITY of GROVER BEACH ~ GENERAL PLAN
                                                          LU-83
CITY OF GROVER BEACH
    GENERAL PLAN
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
        August 2005
  MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL                             PLANNING COMMISSION
                Mayor Shoals                               Bart Calmenson, Chair
          Mayor Pro Tem Versaw                            Robert Mires, Vice Chair
       Council Member Ashton                               Commissioner Versaw
         Council Member Ekbom                              Commissioner Barnett
        Council Member Lieberman                           Commissioner Conroy
                                                             Commissioner Leon
                                                            Commissioner Matsuura
STAFF
Jake Raper, Jr. , Community Development Director
Susan Zaleschuk, AICP, Assistant Community Development Director
Julie Hawkins, Acting Planner III
CONSULTANT ASSISTANCE (R658CE001)
Martin R Inouye – OMNI-MEANS Engineers & Planners
Ravi Narayanan, P.E. – OMNI-MEANS Engineers & Planners
                                General Plan Elements
                 Element Title                                Adoption or Last
                                                             Major Revision Date
                   Land Use                                       12/07/92
                   Housing                                        12/15/03
                  Circulation
       Open Space and Conservation                                08/06/73
            Parks and Recreation                                  03/07/05
                     Noise                                        06/21/93
                 Scenic Routes                                    11/02/81
                Seismic/Safety                                      2000
                              CITY OF GROVER BEACH
                COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
                              City Hall - 154 South Eighth Street
                               Grover Beach, California - 93433
                          Telephone 805 473-4520 - Fax 805 489-9657
                                    commdev@grover.org

                                                Table of Contents
I INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................................1
      1.1 PURPOSE AND LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY....................................................................1
      1.2 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS ..........................................1
II. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION ................................................................................................................2
III. CIRCULATION ELEMENT ORGANIZATION ............................................................................3
PART A - GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS .............................................................................4
      POLICIES AND PROGRAMS ........................................................................................................4
      GOAL 1: PROVIDE SAFE AND EFFICIENT VEHICULAR MOVEMENT.............................4
      GOAL 2: COORDINATE POLICIES FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT AND CIRCULATION7
      GOAL 3: PROMOTE ALTERNATIVE TRAVEL MODES, INCLUDING TRANSIT,
            PEDESTRIAN, BICYCLE, RAIL SYSTEMS ..........................................................................8
      GOAL 4: COORDINATE LOCAL TRANSPORTATION PLANNING AND
            ADMINISTRATION WITH THE ACTIVITIES OF OTHER GOVERNMENT
            AGENCIES AND CONCERNS OF LOCAL CITIZENS AND BUSINESSES ..................9
      GOAL 5: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT THE CIRCULATION SYSTEM TO PROTECT
            NATURAL FEATURES AND CONSERVE ENERGY. .....................................................10
PART B - PRIMARY CIRCULATION SYSTEM ................................................................................11
      B.1 CIRCULATION MASTER PLAN AND STREET CLASSIFICATION .............................11
      B.2 TRAFFIC CONTROLS ............................................................................................................16
      B.3 TRUCK ROUTES .....................................................................................................................17
      B.4 SCENIC HIGHWAYS/SCENIC ROUTES ...........................................................................18
PART C - SECONDARY CIRCULATION SYSTEM .........................................................................20
      C.1 TRANSIT/BUS ........................................................................................................................20
      C.2 RIDESHARING .......................................................................................................................20
      C.3 BICYCLE CIRCULATION .....................................................................................................20
      C.4 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION .............................................................................................24
      C.5 OTHER TRAVEL MODES .....................................................................................................24
PART D – CIRCULATION ISSUES OF CONCERN .........................................................................25
                                                 Table of Figures
Figure CE-1 Circulation Master Plan ..................................................................................................12
Figure CE-2 Truck Routes.....................................................................................................................19
Figure CE-3 Bikeway Master Plan Travel Corridors ........................................................................23
Figure CE-4 West Grand Avenue “Downtown Projects” Improvements......................................26
                                                  Table of Tables
Table CE-1 Circulation Improvements ................................................................................................6
Table CE-2 Level-Of-Service (LOS) Criteria for Roadway Segments .............................................13
                                                       Appendix
Level of Service Concept
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                                                            Page i
City of Grover Beach                                                                                            R658ce006FinalReport.doc

I INTRODUCTION
1.1 PURPOSE AND LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
     The purpose of the City’s General Plan Circulation Element is to guide the growth and
     expansion of transportation and circulation facilities within the City’s planning area. The
     intent of the Element is to coordinate the expansion of the City’s circulation system with the
     land use changes and growth of the community over the next 20 years so that good travel
     flow conditions can be maintained. The following is an excerpt from the General Plan
     Guidelines published by the Office of Planning and Research, 1982.
     Government Code Section 65302(b): "A Circulation Element consisting of the general location and
     extent of existing and proposed major thorough-fares, transportation routes, terminals, and other
     local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the Land Use Element of the General Plan."
     Since the Circulation Element was first required by State law in 1955, transportation
     technology and needs in California have changed greatly, with the emphasis today on the
     development of a balanced, multi-modal transportation system. The policies and plan
     proposals of the Circulation Element should:
          1. Coordinate the transportation and circulation system with planned land uses;
          2. Promote the efficient transport of goods and the safe and effective movement of all
               segments of the population;
          3. Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities; and
          4. Protect environmental quality and promote the wise and equitable use of economics
               and natural resources.
1.2 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
     The Circulation Element is most closely related to the Land Use Element of the General
     Plan. An effective Circulation Element attempts to coordinate estimated increases in the
     intensities of land uses with improvements in the circulation system to provide sufficient
     capacity for the resulting increases in travel demand. Roadway improvements should be
     planned well in advance of anticipated where significant traffic increases.
     Since the City street system described in the Circulation Element includes scenic routes, the
     Circulation Element is related to the City’s optimal Scenic Highways Element. Additionally,
     because traffic on the circulation system is one of the major generators of noise, the
     Circulation Element is also related to the Noise Element of the General Plan. Also, because
     traffic safety is an important concern of the Circulation Element, it is also related to the
     Safety/Seismic Safety Element. Factors of safety and seismic safety affect the location and
     design of circulation infrastructure, both in terms of structural safety and the need for
     evacuation and emergency routes.
     The Circulation Element is also directly related to the social and economic development of
     the City. Economic activities require access for the movement of materials, products,
     customers and employees. Thus, the economic health of a community is influenced by the
     effectiveness and efficiency of the circulation system.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                          Page 1
City of Grover Beach                                                                     R658ce006FinalReport.doc

II. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
To initiate the public involvement process in the City’s update process of the Circulation
Element, a public workshop was held to inform the public of the upcoming update and seek
their input on general and specific concerns on the current operation and future transportation
planning of their circulation system. Some concern was raised relative to the breath of
notification of the workshop, however, approximately 15 to 20 citizens from the public did
attend, including public officials, and was covered, live, on the local public television channel.
Through this first workshop, the citizens identified key circulation issues of concern and also
suggested their solutions and strategies to help address the issues identified.
With the input from the public workshop, technical analyses were prepared and a draft
Circulation Element was created along with a Technical Appendix that documented the
analyses. These documents incorporate all public input. The documents were submitted for
review by the City’s Planning Commission, who then forwarded their input to City Council for
their review and approval. Each of these meetings, with the Planning Commission and City
Council, were open to the public as a part of the City’s public hearing process.
An article also appeared in the City Sea Breeze newspaper in Fall, 2003 that described the
project and progress to date.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                 Page 2
City of Grover Beach                                                            R658ce006FinalReport.doc

III. CIRCULATION ELEMENT ORGANIZATION
This Circulation Element includes all the State required topics that must be included in a
Circulation Element in addition to identification of issues of concerns and potential solutions to
address them. This Element is divided into the following four sections or parts and a Technical
Appendix.
Part A – Goals, Policies and Programs
Part B – Primary Circulation System
Part C – Secondary Circulation System
Part D – Circulation Issues of Concern
In addition to this Circulation Element that is incorporated into the City’s General Plan, a
Technical Appendix has also been created (provided under separate cover) to provide a
comprehensive technical support document. The Technical Appendix includes all background
transportation conditions and traffic data, the Citywide traffic model development process and
future traffic forecasts and analyses.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                               Page 3
City of Grover Beach                                                          R658ce006FinalReport.doc

PART A - GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
The City’s Circulation Element goals will provide the overall direction the City desires in
planning and implementing the expansion of their circulation system to meet the changing
travel demands of their community. The circulation policies will establish the link between the
adopted goals and the implementing programs, and guide how the programs will actually be
implemented. The programs, themselves, are the specific action items that will accomplish the
improvement or plan that will meet and serve the expanded community need.
GOALS
     1. Provide Safe and Efficient Vehicular Movement.
     2. Coordinate Policies for Land Development and Circulation.
     3. Promote Alternative Travel Modes, Including Transit, Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Rail
          Systems.
     4. Coordinate Local Transportation Planning and Administration with the Activities of
          Other Government Agencies and Concerns of Local Citizens and Businesses.
     5. Design And Implement The Circulation System To Protect Natural Features and
          Conserve Energy.
POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Circulation Goals are provided with the groupings of Policies and Programs to readily connect the link
between the above goals and their Policies and Programs.
GOAL 1: PROVIDE SAFE AND EFFICIENT VEHICULAR MOVEMENT
Policy 1.1: Create/Update Citywide Circulation Master Plan.
               Program 1.1.1: The City shall maintain the Citywide Traffic Model to help forecast
               future travel, identify circulation deficiencies and recommend improvements.
               Program 1.1.2: The City shall update, as a necessary, the Circulation Master Plan to
               define and guide the future expansion of the circulation system (Figure CE-1).
               Program 1.1.3: The City shall pursue funding to construct improvements identified
               in the Circulation Master Plan, including seeking Federal and State grants and
               updating the traffic impact fee program on a timely basis.
Policy 1.2: Monitor the operation and performance of the street system.
               Program 1.2.1: The City shall maintain and update a functional classification of the
               street system that reflects land use and traffic patterns.
               Program 1.2.2: The City shall establish a data collection program for the street
               system to include a physical inventory, traffic volumes and accident reports. A
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                    Page 4
City of Grover Beach                                                              R658ce006FinalReport.doc

               summary of such information could be posted on the City’s website and updated as
               appropriate.
               Program 1.2.3: The City shall maintain a minimum traffic operating Level of Service
               of “C” on all City transportation facilities.
               Program 1.2.4: The City shall strive to control traffic levels in residential
               neighborhoods to not exceed a threshold of 4,000 ADT on any given residential
               street segment. If such threshold is exceeded, alternative traffic calming strategies
               shall be considered and implemented as resources permit.
Policy 1.3: Maintain roadways and traffic signals in good condition.
               Program 1.3.1: The City shall develop a priority system for physical improvements
               based on demonstrated needs according to the collected data on physical conditions,
               traffic volumes and safety reports.
               Program 1.3.2: The City shall respond quickly to traffic signal breakdowns and sign
               damages and losses.
Policy 1.4: Improve traffic capacities of streets.
               Program 1.4.1: The City shall create a Capital Improvement Program to construct,
               pursuant to available funding and priority, improvements that are consistent with
               the City’s Circulation Master Plan.
               Program 1.4.2: The City shall control and coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions
               major access points.
               Program 1.4.3: The City shall consider restriction of on-street parking on major and
               secondary arterials when needed to provide additional street capacity.
               Program 1.4.4: The City shall optimize traffic signal performance to increase traffic
               flow. Every effort will be made to coordinate this effort with adjacent jurisdictions.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                     Page 5
City of Grover Beach                                                                R658ce006FinalReport.doc

                                                          TABLE CE-1
                                                CIRCULATION IMPROVEMENTS
                West Grand Avenue
                SR 1 Highway to 8th Street – Enhance traffic safety, pedestrian accommodations and
                community character to help slow traffic
                4th Street intersection – Ensure with continued improvements through this intersection,
                proper widening is provided that enhances safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, large truck
                movement and overall vehicular travel.
                8th Street to 11th Street – “Construct Downtown Project”
                11th Street to Oak Park Avenue – Enhance traffic safety and character to help provide a
                more attractive community.
                Oak Park Boulevard
                Brighton Avenue to Ramona Avenue – Complete 4-lane widening
                Manhattan Avenue to Seabright Avenue – Complete 4-lane widening
                4th Street
                Trouville Avenue to The Pike – Widen and Extend to 4 lanes including realignment to
                align with The Pike.
                The Pike
                4th Street to Oak Park Boulevard – Widen and extend to 4 lanes
                Traffic Signals
                Atlantic City Avenue/North 4th Street
                Oak Park Boulevard/Atlantic City Avenue or Saratoga Avenue
                Oak Park Boulevard/Mentone Avenue
                Oak Park Boulevard/Farroll Avenue
                Oak Park Boulevard/The Pike
                4th Street/Farroll Avenue
Policy 1.5: Improve traffic safety.
               Program 1.5.1: The City shall review the location and frequency of accidents and
               develop specific site improvements.
               Program 1.5.2: The City shall consider changes in speed limits, parking and turning
               restrictions to enhance safety.
Policy 1.6: Provide for truck and emergency vehicle traffic.
               Program 1.6.1: The City shall designate by ordinance truck routes to direct trucks to
               routes that maintain sufficient carrying capacity and to discourage truck traffic on
               local residential streets. See CE-2 Truck Routes. Additionally, to the modification to
               the truck route serving the Front Street Industrial Area, that places the truck route on
               Ramona Street and 3rd Street, a raised median shall be installed on Grand Avenue to
               restrict access to the 1st Street intersection to right turns only.
               Program 1.6.2: The City shall identify primary emergency vehicle routes and links
               between the hospital, fire and police stations.
               Program 1.6.3: Design standards for local streets will provide adequate access for fire
               and police department services. The design of cul-de-sac streets will be discouraged
               in industrial zoned areas.
               Program 1.6.4: Implementation of traffic calming measures shall consider potential
               impacts to response times for emergency service vehicles. To further limit potential
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                        Page 6
City of Grover Beach                                                                   R658ce006FinalReport.doc

               usage of residential streets between the Front Street industrial area and 4th Street,
               traffic calming measures specifically should be considered on Newport Avenue,
               Saratoga Avenue and Brighton Avenue.
               Program 1.6.5: The City shall upgrade traffic signal installations to include
               “opticom” emergency vehicle pre-emption to enhance emergency response safety.
GOAL 2: COORDINATE POLICIES FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT AND CIRCULATION
Policy 2.1: The planning, alignment and improvement of the street network will reflect the
proposed land use pattern of the General Plan.
               Program 2.1.1: The functional classification of streets will identify street purpose and
               the standards of improvement necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic
               demand.
               Program 2.1.2: In establishing priorities for street improvements, the potential for
               effects on land use and traffic patterns will be evaluated.
               Program 2.1.3: Through-traffic will be discouraged in residential neighborhoods
               without adversely inhibiting the movement of residents. This may be accomplished
               by implementing traffic calming measures and other strategies including, but not
               limited to, traffic diversions, or street design and/or alignment modifications.
               Program 2.1.4: A system of collector streets will continue to be expanded to provide
               easy access from local streets to commercial centers, schools and other high-traffic
               generators.
               Program 2.1.5: The City shall adopt new street plan lines (street alignments) for
               arterials and collectors to protect rights-of-way for future street improvements.
Policy 2.2: Review the impact of land use proposals on the circulation system.
               Program 2.2.1: Development proposals shall be reviewed according to the provisions
               of the zoning and subdivision ordinance to ensure that adequate access, on-site
               circulation, parking and loading areas are provided.
               Program 2.2.2: The City shall require developers to provide mitigations to potential
               adverse impacts of development on the existing street system. This may include
               necessary street improvements, traffic signs or signals.
               Program 2.2.3: Roads created in subdividing or land parceling will be designed to tie
               into existing and anticipated road systems.
               Program 2.2.4: Development review will analyze of visibility at intersections.
Policy 2.3: Integrate the circulation system as a positive element of community design.
               Program 2.3.1: The City shall update and continue to implement the Street Tree
               Program, consistent with Municipal Code Chapter 5 (9500).
               Program 2.3.2: In the development review process, the City shall include
               consideration of the visual aspects of a development for roadways. Aesthetic
               consideration shall include architectural compatibility and landscaping.
               Program 2.3.3: The City shall continue implementation of the utility undergrounding
               program.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                     Page 7
City of Grover Beach                                                                R658ce006FinalReport.doc

               Program 2.3.4: The City shall consider the construction of landscaped medians on
               commercial thoroughfares (such as Grand Avenue) to help slow traffic flows and to
               help provide for a more scenic roadway.
               Program 2.3.5: The City shall consider integrating residential street features that
               calm traffic, increase safety and are aesthetic amenities to neighborhoods. This
               program to include consideration and funding of potential traffic calming
               demonstration projects on Newport Avenue and/or Long Branch streets or another
               residential street as decided upon by City Council. Additionally, reduction in
               residential street width shall also be considered as a traffic calming option. If such
               street width reduction is recommended and implemented, consideration for
               reduction of public right of way should also be included.
GOAL 3: PROMOTE ALTERNATIVE TRAVEL MODES, INCLUDING TRANSIT,
PEDESTRIAN, BICYCLE, RAIL SYSTEMS
Policy 3.1: Provide for desirable and safe alternative access to schools, parks and shopping
areas from residential areas within the City.
               Program 3.1.1: The City shall plan and require construction of bikeways, sidewalks
               and pedestrian accessways to all major destination points within the City.
               Program 3.1.2: The City shall maximize the involvement of public agencies and the
               private sector in the provision of transit services and alternative access.
Policy 3.2: Encourage the continued development and expansion of local and regional public
transit systems.
               Program 3.2.1: The City shall review and comment on proposed changes to the
               South County Area Transit (SCAT) bus system.
               Program 3.2.2: The City shall pursue a Regional Transit Station on Ramona Avenue
               at Ramona Park.
Policy 3.3: Encourage bicycle transportation.
               Program 3.3.1: The City shall create and update a Bikeway Master Plan (Figure CE-3)
               to guide the orderly provision of bikeway facilities throughout the City. This effort
               should be coordinated and in compliance with the Parks and Recreation Element of
               this General Plan.
               Program 3.3.2: The City shall provide bicycle lanes along the Grand Avenue
               corridor.
               Program 3.3.3: The City shall integrate local bikeway planning with regional plans.
               Program 3.3.4: The City shall encourage the provision of bicycle support facilities at
               major bicycle destination points.
               Program 3.3.5: The City shall continue and expand bicycle safety education
               programs within the local schools.
               Program 3.3.6: The City shall seek State Bicycle Lane Account funds and other
               funding to help pay for the completion of a comprehensive bikeway system within
               in the City.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                    Page 8
City of Grover Beach                                                               R658ce006FinalReport.doc
Policy 3.4: Improve and maintain the system of sidewalks and crosswalks to promote a
pedestrian-friendly community
               Program 3.4.1: The City shall identify and prioritize major sidewalk improvements.
               Program 3.4.2: The City shall comply with the American Disabilities Act (ADA) and
               construct improvements to enhance accessibility.
               Program 3.4.3: The City shall provide crosswalks at signalized intersections.
               Program 3.4.4: The City shall require sidewalks along public frontage for new public
               and private developments.
Policy 3.5: Promote rail transportation.
               Program 3.5.1. The City shall maintain adequate freight rail service to commercial
               and industrial properties located along the railroad right-of -way.
               Program 3.5.2. The City shall coordinate with the San Luis Obispo Council of
               Governments regarding the potential for commuter rail service. Currently, Amtrak
               stops twice daily in the City.
               Program 3.5.3. The City shall continue to enhance use of the multi-model terminal by
               promoting the Amtrak bus feeder link, which provides connections to trains north
               and south of the City.
Policy 3.6: Support accessibility to the San Luis Obispo and Oceano Airports.
               Program 3.6.1. The City shall enhance and maintain signage and routing between
               the City and the San Luis Obispo and Oceano Airports as these airports provide
               important air commuter, air freight and air emergency response to and from the City
               and its citizens.
GOAL 4: COORDINATE LOCAL TRANSPORTATION PLANNING AND
ADMINISTRATION WITH THE ACTIVITIES OF OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
AND CONCERNS OF LOCAL CITIZENS AND BUSINESSES
Policy 4.1: Publicize major transportation issues and solicit public input.
               Program 4.1.1: The City shall provide timely notification to the public through press
               releases, public service radio announcements, television and contact with local
               organizations.
               Program 4.1.2: The City shall conduct public hearings on proposed major actions and
               notify the public through mandated public notices.
               Program 4.1.3: The City shall convene for a duration as needed, a Traffic Committee
               to address specific transportation issues and concerns as they arise within the City.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                  Page 9
City of Grover Beach                                                             R658ce006FinalReport.doc
Policy 4.2: Coordinate transportation planning with regional and local plans.
               Program 4.2.1: The City shall coordinate compatibility of proposed actions with
               transportation plans of adjacent cities, San Luis Obispo County and San Luis Obispo
               Council of Governments.
               Program 4.2.2: The City shall evaluate regional impacts of proposed local
               improvements.
               Program 4.2.3: The City shall coordinate with CALTRANS District 5 and the Federal
               Highway Administration (FHWA) on improvement plans to State/Federal facilities
               within the City’s planning area and its vicinity.
GOAL 5: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT THE CIRCULATION SYSTEM TO PROTECT
NATURAL FEATURES AND CONSERVE ENERGY.
Policy 5.1: Designate local scenic routes and enhance and protect their scenic qualities.
               Program 5.1.1: The City shall control the quality of improvements through design
               standards and review.
               Program 5.1.2: The City shall investigate public or private agency acquisition of land,
               development rights or open space easements for areas of outstanding scenic value.
Policy 5.2: Protect natural features.
               Program 5.2.1: The City shall strive to minimize the loss of prime agricultural land to
               road construction.
               Program 5.2.2: The City shall investigate public or private agencies’ acquisition of
               land, development rights or open space easements for agricultural areas.
               Program 5.2.3: The City shall strive to minimize grading for new roads and
               improvements, conserve prominent land forms and minimize tree removals.
               Program 5.2.4: The City shall comply with the Clean Air Act.
               Program 5.2.5: The City shall evaluate circulation improvements and traffic control
               as to their effect on air and noise pollution.
Policy 5.3: Conserve energy.
               Program 5.3.1: The City shall provide for bikeways, pedestrian ways, and public
               transit as energy conserving, non-polluting alternatives to auto travel.
               Program 5.3.2: The City shall strive to provide for smooth traffic flow and a compact
               urban pattern to maximize efficient movement between residential, commercial and
               public areas.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                  Page 10
City of Grover Beach                                                              R658ce006FinalReport.doc

PART B - PRIMARY CIRCULATION SYSTEM
B.1 CIRCULATION MASTER PLAN AND STREET CLASSIFICATION
In response to the first circulation goal, a Circulation Master Plan has been created to guide the
future expansion of the City’s circulation system and to define the functional classification of
the system to meet the travel needs to the community. Shown on Figure CE-1 is the City’s
Circulation Master Plan.
Functional classification designates all streets and highways within the City’s planning area and
vicinity into several broad categories. These categories include Freeway, Highway, Arterial
(Major and Minor), Collector, and Local streets. Each classification has specific standards and
criteria through which design and route are developed. These criteria include:
          1. Existing and potential development and land use intensities;
          2. Expected peak traffic loads;
          3. Potential physical improvements such as road widening; and
          4. Special designations such as scenic routes.
Below are the standard street right-of-way widths for each classification used in the City of
Grover Beach. Design cross-sections can be found in the City's Standards and Specifications.
          Street Classification           Standard R-O-W Width
          Major Arterial                  100' Minimum
          Minor Arterial                  70’ Minimum
          Collectors                      60’ Minimum
          Local                           52' Minimum
As shown on the following Table CE-2, Level of Service criteria and thresholds are provided for
each classification of roadway within the City. A description of each Level of Service grade is
provided in the Appendix.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                               Page 11
City of Grover Beach                                                           R658ce006FinalReport.doc


                                                            TABLE CE-2
                           LEVEL-OF-SERVICE (LOS) CRITERIA FOR ROADWAY SEGMENTS
                                                              Total Two-way Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
  Roadway Segment Type
                                           LOS “A”            LOS “B”             LOS “C”           LOS “D”             LOS “E”
  4-Lane Divided Freeway                     28,000            43,200               61,600            74,400              80,000
  2-Lane Highway                             11,000            12,500               14,500            16,000              18,000
  4-Lane Major Divided Arterial
                                             22,000            25,000               29,000            32,500              36,000
  (with left-turn lane)
  4-Lane Minor Undivided
  Arterial                                   18,000            21,000               24,000            27,000              30,000
  (no left-turn lane)
  2-Lane Major Arterial
                                             11,000            12,500               14,500            16,000              18,000
  (with left-turn lane)
  2-Lane Minor Arterial
                                              9,000            10,500               12,000            13,500              15,000
  (no left-turn lane)
  2-Lane Collector                            6,000             7,500                9,000            10,500              12,000
  2-Lane Local Street                         2,000             3,000                4,000             5,000               6,000
  Note: 1. Based on "Highway Capacity Manual", Transportation Research Board, 2000.
          2. All traffic volumes are approximate and assume ideal roadway characteristics. Actual threshold volumes for each
              Level of Service listed above may vary depending on a variety of factors including (but not limited to) roadway
              curvature and grade, intersection or interchange spacing, driveway spacing, percentage of trucks and other heavy
              vehicles, travel lane widths, signal timing characteristics, on-street parking, volume of cross traffic and
              pedestrians, etc.
Freeway: Freeways are high-speed and high-capacity vehicle corridors with no “at-grade”
crossings interrupting the flow of traffic, and provide entrance/exit opportunities through
various forms of interchanges.
The City of Grover Beach is currently served by US 101, a four-lane divided freeway, two lanes
in each direction. US 101 is a major inter-regional link of Statewide importance that connects
between the San Francisco Bay Area and Los Angeles urban basin and traverses through most
of San Luis Obispo County. There are two interchanges from US 101 that serve the City of
Grover Beach, Fourth Street and Oak Park Boulevard. Land near these interchanges is valuable
because of its visibility and accessibility to the freeway. Interchanges are focal points for
commercial activity and, as such, may encourage future development.
The effect that freeway interchange development has had on the City of Grover Beach has not
been great. The Fourth Street interchange is in Pismo Beach, and only one corner of the Oak
Park Boulevard interchange is within the City of Grover Beach. Most of the land between these
interchanges along the Frontage Road is sensitive and is within the 100-year flood plain.
State Highways: State Route One (SR 1) passes through Grover Beach and Pismo Beach and the
unincorporated community of Oceano. In the City of Grover Beach, SR 1 is a 2-lane facility with
Class II bike lanes on either side. This highway carries local traffic as well as tourist-related
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                                               Page 13
City of Grover Beach                                                                                      R658ce006FinalReport.doc

traffic. As with most major routes within the area, traffic volumes increase significantly during
peak summer months.
Major Arterial: A major arterial provides for the movement of large volumes of through traffic
between major traffic generators. Grand Avenue is classified as a major arterial street that runs-
east-west the width of the City. Year 2003 traffic counts on Grand Avenue indicate an average
daily traffic (ADT) volume of over 21,600 vehicles on the segment just west of the City’s eastern
limits and 13,300 ADT on the Grand Avenue segment between 9th and 10th Streets, well within
the capacity of the current five-lane arterial (four-lane-arterial with two-way left-turn median
lane) cross-section. Direct driveway access onto Grand Avenue should be kept to a minimum.
In order to protect the integrity of this “major arterial” left turn egress from adjoining property
onto Grand Avenue should be restricted. The exceptions would be considered “special
circumstances”, and would only be granted following the provision of a traffic engineering
analysis that documents that this movement would not degrade capacity and/or safety now
and into the future.
To enhance safety and downtown character, but not still lose needed travel capacity, the City
will implement the “Downtown Project”. This project, which initially extended from 8th to 11th
Street, will add median landscaping, intersection bulb-outs and bike lanes, but not reduce the
number of travel lanes on Grand Avenue. A more complete description of the planned
improvements is provided in the following section.
Minor Arterial: Minor arterials provide for the movement of traffic to and from collector
streets, major arterial streets and the freeway. Minor arterials take some of the load off the
major arterial streets, and also help provide transition from major arterials to collector streets.
Minor arterials are the foundation of an efficient, attractive, and safe circulation system. The
following streets are designated as minor arterial streets:
          1. Oak Park Boulevard (US 101 to The Pike)
          2. North and South 4th Street (All segments)
          3. The Pike (All segments)
Collectors: Collector streets represent the transition from arterial streets to local streets.
Collectors should be designed to move traffic safely and efficiently, minimizing direct access to
property. In most cases, a 60’ minimum right-of-way is sufficient to accomplish these
objectives. With these widths, traffic flow may be regulated by placing stop signs on local
streets. This right-of-way width would accommodate two lanes of traffic (one per direction),
on-street parking, sidewalks, and public utility easements. This street could accommodate four
lanes of traffic (two per direction) if on-street parking were restricted and the street restriped.
The following streets are designated as collector streets:
          1. North and South 8th Street (Atlantic City Avenue to Farroll Avenue)
          2. North 12th Street (Atlantic City Avenue to El Camino Real)
          3. North and South 13th Street (Atlantic City Avenue to Farroll Avenue)
          4. El Camino Real (North 4th Street to Oak Park Boulevard)
          5. Atlantic City Avenue (North 4th Street to Oak Park Boulevard)
          6. Mentone Avenue (South 4th Street to the Ash Street connection)
          7. Farroll Road (South 4th Street to Oak Park Boulevard)
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                 Page 14
City of Grover Beach                                                             R658ce006FinalReport.doc

          8. Highland Avenue (South 4th Street to South 13th Street)
          9. Newport Avenue (North 4th Street to Oak Park Boulevard)
Local Streets: Local streets carry traffic between collector streets and the actual traffic-
generating land uses (residential, commercial, industrial etc. in nature). Local streets provide
direct driveway access to public/private property. Local streets are not intended to carry
through traffic except in instances where they are located in commercial or industrial areas. To
carry as little traffic as possible, local streets are often designed to turn, curve or cul-de-sac. The
use of signage, signals, speed bumps, street striping and other “traffic calming” measures are all
valid ways to discourage through traffic on local streets.
The purpose of local streets is to provide direct access to/from adjacent property. Local streets
serving residential areas should ideally carry small volumes of traffic so that neighborhood
residents’ “livability” thresholds are not exceeded. The City may also consider implementing
physical traffic calming measures and/or enforcing ordinance measures to restrict through
truck traffic on local streets serving residential areas. Local streets should exhibit sound design
qualities and should provide easy access to all emergency vehicles. City standards for the
design of local streets should be strictly adhered to. At specific locations, the City may prohibit
the design of cul-de-sac local streets, from a fire and emergency access standpoint.
In establishment of a “livability” threshold for the City of Grover Beach, a reasonable standard
was difficult to derive because of the design of the current “grid” street system. Typical
“livability” thresholds for neighborhoods in other communities range between 1000 to 3000
average daily trips (ADT) on a local residential street. However, within the City of Grover
Beach, because of the “grid” design, traffic within the residential areas is spread fairly evenly
over the various neighborhood streets within a current range of about 1,500 to 3,000 ADT. In
the future however, this range will be within the 2,500 to 4,000 ADT range. To set the
“livability” threshold too low, a number of residential streets would become eligible for traffic
calming measures. Unfortunately, with implementation of those measures on any given
neighborhood street within a “grid” street system, would only force traffic to the adjacent
neighborhood street, creating or aggravating a traffic volume and speeding problems on that
street. Ultimately, one could end up traffic calming all of the neighborhood streets only to find
the resulting traffic volumes to be the same as if none of the streets received traffic calming
measures. Therefore, for Grover Beach, the threshold of 4,000 ADT was established.
Future Street Improvement Projects
The future street improvement projects to be included in the City’s Transportation Capital
Improvement Program are as follows:
          Grand Avenue –
               • Construct “Downtown Project” improvements between 8th and 11th Streets
               • Plan and Construct similar “Downtown Project” improvements between SR 1
                   and 8th Streets, including enhancements to the 4th Street intersection to facilitate
                   truck travel movement as it is at the crossroads of both the east-west and north-
                   south truck routes through the City.
               • Plan and Construct similar “Downtown Project” improvements between 11th
                   Street and Oak Park Boulevard
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                   Page 15
City of Grover Beach                                                               R658ce006FinalReport.doc

          North Oak Park Boulevard - Widen between Brighton and Ramona Avenues to 4 lanes
          4th Street – Widen and extend to 4 lanes, including realignment to align with The Pike
          between Trouville Avenue and The Pike
          The Pike – Widen and extend to 4 lanes between 4th Street and Oak Park Boulevard
B.2 TRAFFIC CONTROLS
Traffic can be controlled using various methods. Signal lights, signs and striping are all
effective ways of directing and controlling traffic. The design of the circulation system, in itself,
can also help control traffic. The width of the roadway, hills, and corners are all ways in which
the design of the road system influences traffic movement.
It is essential that the design of a roadway reflect the intended speed of the traffic the roadway
will carry. If the operational speed of traffic on the roadway is intended to be relatively low,
say 25 m.p.h., then the roadway width should be kept relatively narrow and the use of curves
should be considered. If the intended operational speed of the traffic is higher, say 40 or 45
m.p.h., then a wider, straighter roadway should be used.
Studies have shown that over 80% of drivers exceed the speed limit at some time in their lives.
As a safety factor, roads are currently designed to carry traffic at operational speeds 10-20%
higher than the posted speed shown on speed limit signs. This is to ensure that, in the event
that people do speed, they won't lose control of their vehicle and injure themselves and others.
The relative safety that a driver feels influences the actual driving speed at least as much as the
posted speed limit. Many people speed consciously, risking a speeding citation because they
feel the posted speed is too low or they are just in a hurry. The majority of people will not drive
faster than a speed at which they feel safe, regardless of the posted speed limit. The City shall
consider implementation of traffic calming measures and additional traffic control measures as
potential ways to control traffic speeding.
At present, there are nine traffic signals located within the City of Grover Beach. These traffic
signals are primarily located along Grand Avenue; at the intersections with SR 1, 4th Street, 8th
Street, 9th Street, 10th Street, 13th Street 16th Street and at Oak Park Boulevard and at the Oak
Park Boulevard/El Camino Real intersection. Other intersections are controlled by two way or
all-way "Stop" signs or "Yield" signs.
Over the next 20 years, the life span of a General Plan Element, additional traffic signals will be
needed to ensure the continued flow of traffic on the City's major streets. Based on Citywide
traffic projections, additional signals, as shown on Figure CE-1, may be needed at the following
intersections and elsewhere on the City’s street system as determined from traffic signal
warrant analysis based on the Caltrans’ Traffic Manual:
          Atlantic City Avenue/North 4th Street
          Oak Park Boulevard/ Street North of Grand Avenue between Atlantic City Avenue and
          Brighton Avenue
          Oak Park Boulevard/Farroll Road
          Oak Park Boulevard/The Pike
          Oak Park Boulevard/Mentone Avenue
          Farroll Avenue/4th Street
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                  Page 16
City of Grover Beach                                                              R658ce006FinalReport.doc

Obviously, land use decisions, growth trends and funding capabilities can and will play a major
factor in the timing of the above improvements.
B.3 TRUCK ROUTES
Many communities have established truck routes as a means of reducing conflicts between
incompatible uses. By prohibiting or restricting trucks from some residential streets, the noise,
safety and structural pavement deterioration problems caused by trucks can be eliminated or
minimized. At the same time, it is essential to ensure adequate truck access to all commercial
and industrial locations.
Presently, trucks are prohibited by Ordinance only on Atlantic City Avenue. This Ordinance
was adopted in response to numerous citizen complaints regarding the safety of children
traveling to and from Grover Heights Elementary School. While this Ordinance may make
Atlantic City Avenue safer for school children, it does nothing toward achieving the citywide
goal of establishing a system of truck routes whereby trucks and all other uses can peacefully
coexist. The problem of trucks in residential neighborhoods occurs in many areas throughout
the City, not just in the Grover Heights area.
It must be understood that trucks play an important role in the movement of goods and the
delivery of services. Regulations establishing truck routes must not be so strict that they
prohibit efficient movement of trucks within and through the City. On the other hand, as the
City and neighboring communities continue to grow, the need for regulations prohibiting
trucks from interfering with residential livability will also continue to grow. Therefore, in
establishing a system of truck routes, careful balance between focusing trucks to primary routes
that minimized community impacts and maintain reasonable truck accessibility was needed.
Shown in Figure CE-2 are the proposed truck routes within and through the City and include
the following City streets:
               •   Grand Avenue - within City Limits
               •   North and South Oak Park Boulevard – from Longbranch Avenue to US 101
               •   Farroll Road – from South 4th Street to 14th Street
               •   Highland Way – from South 4th Street to 13th Street
               •   North and South 4th Street – within City Limits
               •   El Camino Real – from North 4th Street to North Oak Park Boulevard
               •   The Pike – from South 4th Street to 13th Street
               •   State Route 1 Highway – within and through the City
               •   Ramona Avenue – from North 4th Street to Front Street
               •   3rd Street – from Grand Avenue to Ramona Avenue
               •   Front Street – from Ramona Avenue to Newport Avenue
The most widely used system of establishing truck routes is to install signs indicating the streets
that trucks are allowed to use. Usually, ordinances regarding truck routes are worded to allow
"reasonable access" to all businesses requiring the use of trucks. "Reasonable access" usually
means that trucks are allowed to deviate from designated routes in order to reach a destination
that is not located along a truck route.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                               Page 17
City of Grover Beach                                                           R658ce006FinalReport.doc

The above truck routes have largely been long established serving existing industrial areas. The
most significant change in truck routing is the planned use of Ramona Avenue and 3rd Street to
gain truck access to the Front Street industrial area. Previously, Front Street access was via 1st
Street from/to Grand Avenue. Due to left turn access concerns both inbound and outbound
associated with the adjacent Union Pacific railroad, the designated truck route has been
changed. Although this new route passes existing residences, no other alternative, after much
review, was determined to be better. Along with this change in truck route designation, to
further protect other existing neighborhoods from truck intrusion, a Circulation Element
Program has been proposed recommending traffic calming measures to further deter trucks in
the neighborhood, including at minimum, Saratoga Avenue, Newport Avenue and Brighton
Avenue. Additionally, to assure trucks will not use the 1st Street access, a median is proposed
along Grand Avenue to restrict movement at the intersection to right turn movement only.
B.4 SCENIC HIGHWAYS/SCENIC ROUTES
The designation “scenic routes” requires a judgment of the visual qualities of an area as special
and worthy of attention. There are many factors that contribute to one’s visual experience in a
particular area. Therefore, the criteria below was developed to measure the scenic importance
of specific routes. The following apply both to the natural environment and the urban
environment: (For a detailed description of each item consult the City of Grover Beach Scenic
Routes Element.)
          1. Aesthetic judgment
          2. Angle and duration of vision
          3. Topography
          4. Distant views
          5. Landscape character
          6. Visual impact
Using this criteria, the following have been classified as scenic routes:
          1. California State Route 1 (entire length within City limits)
          2. US 101
          3. Grand Avenue (entire length within the City of Grover Beach)
          4. Fourth Street (from Grand Avenue north)
          5. Oak Park Boulevard (entire length)
          6. El Camino Real (4th Street to Oak Park Boulevard)
It is the intent of this element to provide consistency with the Scenic Routes Element. Therefore, this
element provides for the adoption of all the Goals, Policies, and Objectives of the Scenic Routes Element
by reference.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                     Page 18
City of Grover Beach                                                                 R658ce006FinalReport.doc


PART C - SECONDARY CIRCULATION SYSTEM
C.1 TRANSIT/BUS
          C.1.1. South County Area Transit
          The South County Area Transit (SCAT) is designed to serve the incorporated
          communities of Arroyo Grande, Grover Beach, and Pismo Beach; and the
          unincorporated community of Oceano. SCAT operates four routes, Monday through
          Friday, 7:30 AM to 5:30 PM. No service is provided on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays.
          The SCAT system was established by a Joint Powers Agreement in 1978 involving the
          County Board of Supervisors, the City of Grover Beach, City of Arroyo Grande and the
          City of Pismo Beach. The SCAT program is administered by a board of elected officials
          made up of one from each of the four agencies.
          SCAT operates on a fixed-route system. Buses arrive at a given stop at a given time past
          the hour. SCAT currently operates 4 routes, all of which serve Grover Beach. A future
          SCAT station is planned at Ramona Park or Ramona Avenue near 9th Street.
          C.1.2. Greyhound
          The Greyhound Bus Company provides regional transit service to San Luis Obispo
          County but does not have a bus stop in the City nor in the entire South County area.
          The nearest bus depots are located in the City of San Luis Obispo or in the City of Santa
          Maria Connection to Greyhound is provided by SCAT’s Route 10 that maintains
          scheduled weekday and weekends service between south County communities,
          including Grover Beach, to both downtown San Luis Obispo and Santa Maria where the
          Greyhound stations are located. Route 10 can be boarded at the Grover Beach Multi-
          modal station
C.2 RIDESHARING
The Federal Highway Administration started giving serious consideration to the concept of
ridesharing in 1967. The desire to reduce air pollution and urban congestion together have
maintained the ridesharing program.
The San Luis Obispo Regional Ridesharing Program was authorized by the San Luis Obispo
Council of Governments in October of 1979. The program got underway in early 1980. The
County Engineering Department was assigned the operation of the program. Caltrans funds
the program including a full-time ridesharing manager. It is reasonable to expect a 10%
increase in carpooling.
C.3 BICYCLE CIRCULATION
For the past 50 years the extensive road networks constructed to serve the automobile-based
transportation system have included only marginal provisions for bicycle use. However, a
resurgence of the bicycle as a vital mode of transportation is occurring as a result of automobile-
General Plan Circulation Element                                                               Page 20
City of Grover Beach                                                           R658ce006FinalReport.doc

oriented transportation difficulties, economics, recreation, leisure time availability, physical
fitness needs and concern for the environment. This interest is reflected in increasing public
pressure for pathways and routes where bicycles can be ridden in relative safety.
Senate Bill 277 (Statutes of 1975} established the California Bikeways Act. The Act included
provisions requiring the State Department of Transportation to establish "recommended
minimum general design criteria for the development, planning, and construction of
bikeways..."
Safety is one of the most important aspects to consider when planning bicycle facilities. Most
bikeway-related accidents occur because of unsafe or illegal practices by bicyclists, which are
usually compounded by poor road conditions, and motorists who are not aware of bicyclists.
The leading violations of bicyclists are: 1) riding on the wrong side of the road, 2) failure to
yield when entering the roadway, 3) failure to obey traffic signs and signals; and 4) riding at
night without lights.
Bikeway Designations: The term "Bikeway" is used to define all facilities that explicitly provide
for bicycle travel. The Department of Transportation has developed different definitions that
are used to systematically categorize different types of bicycle facilities. Bikeways, then, can be
anything from fully grade-separated facilities to, simply, signed streets. The three classes of
bikeways are Bike Paths (Class I), Bike Lanes (Class II), and Bike Routes (Class III).
          1. Bike Paths (Class I): Class I Bike Paths are completely separated right-of-ways
          designated for the exclusive use of bicycles. Cross-flows by pedestrians and motorized
          vehicles are minimized.
          2. Bike Lanes (Class II): Class II Bike Lanes are restricted right-of-ways designated for
          the exclusive or semi-exclusive use of bicycles. Travel by motor vehicles or pedestrians is
          not allowed; however, vehicle parking may be allowed if there is sufficient space
          available for both the bicycle lane and the parking lane. Cross flows by motorists are
          allowed, for example, to gain access to parking facilities or adjacent land uses. In most
          cases, Class II Bikeways require a lane of at least four feet of well-maintained pavement
          for the cyclist to ride on.
          3. Bike Routes (Class III): Class III Bike Routes are shared right-of-ways either on the
          street or on the sidewalk, and are designated by signs placed on vertical posts or
          markings stenciled on the pavement. Any bikeway which shares a through-traffic right-
          of-way with motor vehicles and pedestrians is considered a Class III bikeway.
The City currently has no Class I Bike Paths. With the City largely built out, it is not anticipated
that new Class I Bike Paths will likely be planned and constructed. In addition, in that the City
is composed of many wide streets on a grid pattern, the opportunity to create a safe and
efficient system of Class II Bike Lanes and Class III Bike Routes is immense. Although a Class I
Bike Path may not be built within the City, as indicated by San Luis Obispo Council of
Governments (SLOCOG) regional bikeway master plan, use of the Highway 1 and Union
Pacific railroad corridor and right of way for a regional Class I bike path is in the planning for
which funding is being sought.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                  Page 21
City of Grover Beach                                                              R658ce006FinalReport.doc
Shown on Figure CE-3 is a proposed Bikeway Master Plan that identifies likely bicycle travel
corridors throughout the City. A determination of whether these bicycle travel corridors should
be improved as Class II bike lanes or Class III bike routes is subject to a separate study.
The differences between Class II and Class III bikeways are primarily the factors of safety and
cost. Class II bikeways are considered somewhat safer because motor vehicle and bicycle lanes
are separated by a 6" solid white line. Class III bikeways, however, need not be separated from
motor vehicle lanes. They may use signing or markings on the pavement to alert motorists to
the presence of bicyclists. Because the installation of Class II bikeways may involve moving,
sandblasting and repainting vehicle lanes and center divider striping, it can be considerably
more expensive than the Class III alternative.
Should the City decide to undertake the installation of a bikeway system, prioritizing of routes
would be essential. The most heavily traveled routes would need to be improved first.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                Page 22
City of Grover Beach                                                            R658ce006FinalReport.doc

C.4 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
Providing a safe and convenient system for pedestrian circulation is an important concern of the
Circulation Element. Sidewalks provide a relatively safe area for pedestrian movement because
they are separated from most other forms of transportation. Consistent with recent legislation
under the American Disabilities Act (ADA), all existing and planned pedestrian improvements
should allow access to all people and comply with the design guidelines as set forth within the
Act.
The first priority access for sidewalk improvements should be near schools and school bus
stops. Sidewalk improvements should be constructed in these areas first if capital improvement
projects are undertaken by the City or if assessment districts are formed. Assessment districts
and capital improvement projects for other purposes, such as street widening, may include the
installation of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
The second priority areas for sidewalk improvements shall be in commercial districts. A
considerable network of sidewalks exists in commercial areas of the City. To further encourage
and enhance pedestrian circulation, conditional approval of any development proposal by the
Planning Commission and City Council needs to include a requirement that the applicant install
curbs, gutters and sidewalks where they do not currently exist. To provide for easier access for
wheelchairs, City standards, consistent with ADA requirements, call for ramps at all street
corners.
C.5 OTHER TRAVEL MODES
Grover Beach can actively encourage the public to use alternative forms of transportation
which, in turn, will both improve vehicular traffic circulation and reduce traffic congestion,
noise and air pollution.
The nearest full service general aviation airport is the San Luis Obispo County Airport. A
County airport is located in Oceano, serving as both a general aircraft and recreational aircraft
facility. Additionally, airport facilities are located in Santa Maria and Paso Robles.
Currently rail service for freight (Union Pacific) is in the City of San Luis Obispo. For
passengers, AMTRAK has stations in the Cities of Grover Beach and San Luis Obispo. There is
both a northerly and southerly train each day connecting to Seattle and Los Angeles,
respectively.
Port San Luis provides both commercial and sport fishing as well as facilities for pleasure
boating.
A number of car rental and recreational vehicle rental companies serve this area.
The San Luis Obispo region contains an extensive network of pipe and utility transmission
lines. The plans for the major portion of those utilities can be found in the Safety and Seismic
Safety Element as well as on file in the Public Works Department.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                Page 24
City of Grover Beach                                                            R658ce006FinalReport.doc
PART D – CIRCULATION ISSUES OF CONCERN
The following are circulation issues of concern obtained from the community within the City of
Grover Beach (through Public Workshops, communications with Grover Beach Citizens, and
City staff meetings). A brief discussion describing each circulation issue and potential
solutions/concepts, strategies, suggestions and recommendations has also been included,
where applicable.
• Grand Avenue Corridor Improvements – Grand Avenue serves as the most important
    “backbone” travel corridor that traverses within and through the City. A study report and
    Environmental Impact Report, entitled City of Grover Beach – Downtown Project (Rincon
    Consultants, April, 2000) presented a proposed West Grand Avenue improvement project to
    beautify and enhance traffic safety between 8th Street and 11th Street. Subsequent to that
    study report, a follow-up traffic operations study, entitled West Grand Avenue Traffic
    Mitigation Project (TPG Consulting, June, 2002) was prepared that studied traffic signal
    timing and coordination along that same segment of West Grand Avenue to further assure
    that good traffic flow is being maintained.
    The proposed improvements along West Grand Avenue between 8th Street and 11th Street are
    as shown in Figure CE-4 and are planned for construction in Spring of 2004. The proposal, as
    shown, includes median landscaping that would eliminate the existing two-way left-turn
    median lane along that stretch of West Grand Avenue and incorporate intersection “bulb-
    outs”. Specifically, the entire project would include the following:
         ¾ Mid-block pedestrian crossing without an activated signal in the 900 block of West Grand
             Avenue;
         ¾ Bulb-outs at all intersections from 8th Street (a total of 16), so that the length of any pedestrian
             crossing on Grand Avenue would be no more than 54 feet;
         ¾ Decorative pavers at intersections from 8th Street to 11th Street;
         ¾ A new traffic signal at 10th Street and 11th Street;
         ¾ Timing of the signals at 8th, 9th, 11th and 13th Streets to achieve a target vehicle speed of 25
             miles per hour; and
         ¾ Landscaped median, repaired sidewalks and upgraded street furniture.
    Also, within the Downtown Project, many existing features of West Grand Avenue would
    not be revised. The following summarizes these features:
         ¾ Four-lane traffic would continue along the length of Grand Avenue;
         ¾ Existing on-street parallel parking would remain; and
         ¾ All side streets perpendicular to West Grand Avenue would remain as two-way facilities.
    This Downtown Project in many ways accomplishes the bridging of two very divergent goals
    for West Grand Avenue, that is to increase the pedestrian friendliness of the downtown,
    while still serving the high traffic flow demand on West Grand Avenue at acceptable Levels
    of Service.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                         Page 25
City of Grover Beach                                                                     R658ce006FinalReport.doc


     As for the balance of West Grand Avenue, upgraded, pedestrian treatments should be
     pursued. It is recognized that along other segments of West Grand Avenue, between
     Highway 1 and Oak Park Boulevard, mid-block off-street parking does desire left-turn
     access, however, intersection bulb-outs and sidewalk widening opportunities are desirable.
     The full character of downtown will change to help create a “sense of place”.
     Further, on the perpendicular streets to West Grand Avenue, consideration for angled
     parking should also be studied. Typically, these perpendicular streets are also wide, in
     excess of 50 feet curb to curb. Angled parking would enhance downtown parking
     availability and reduce the need for off-street parking. Additionally, with angled parking
     the West Grand Avenue intersection bulb-outs could be further enlarged to reduce the
     pedestrian crossing distance of the side streets. With reduced pedestrian crossing distances,
     traffic operations could also be further enhanced to maximize travel flow.
 • South County Family Educational and Cultural Center – To take advantage of some
     existing community facilities and park site, the City, partnered with a local non-profit
     agency to create a family educational and cultural center that would span two blocks on the
     north side of Ramona Avenue between 8th and 10th Streets. To take advantage of existing
     community facilities along this two block area, 9th Street is proposed to be terminated on
     the north side of Ramona Avenue to enhance pedestrian cross circulation.A cul-de-sac is
     proposed for 9th Street south of Brighton Avenue to provide local access for adjacent
     residences and parking access for the proposed park.
     With a closure of 9th Street as a continuous residential collector street, some concern was
     raised by the City as to the potential traffic impacts to the adjacent parallel facilities of 8th
     and 10th Streets. Utilizing the Grover Beach traffic model, OMNI-MEANS evaluated the
     potential traffic flow diversions and related traffic impacts resulting with the conceptual 9th
     Street cul-de-sac plan. Current corridor traffic totals along 8th, 9th and 10th Streets north of
     Grand Avenue is about 6,000 ADT, which will grow to about 8,800 ADT by the year 2025.
     Although the three streets in their design and accessibility are very similar, half of the traffic
     among these streets travel along 9th Street, about 3,000 ADT currently and 4,400 ADT by
     year 2025.
     With the 9th Street cul-de-sac plan, the projected year 2025 ADT volumes on 8th Street could
     rise from 3,000 ADT to 4,000 ADT and on 10th Street, from 2,000 ADT to 4,000 ADT. Some
     additional diversion to other parallel north-south streets, such as 7th and 11th Streets, may
     occur that could lessen this increase. Although from a functional street capacity standpoint,
     those levels of traffic do not create any congestion problems, the adjacent neighborhoods
     may be concerned with such increases, particularly since their current levels of traffic on 8th
     and 10th Streets are 2,200 ADT and 1,400 ADT, respectively.
     With the 9th Street cul-de-sac plan, traffic will obviously decrease on 9th Street north of Grand
     Avenue dropping from the projected 4,400 ADT level to likely less than a 1000 ADT. With
     such a diversion of traffic from 9th Street, relocation of the existing traffic signal at the 9th
     Street/Grand Avenue intersection to the 10th Street/Grand Avenue intersection would be
     advantageous. Levels of Service, not only on a daily basis, but also on a peak hour basis,
     will remain high in the LOS A-B range, even with the 9th Street cul-de-sac plan at the Grand
     Avenue intersections.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                    Page 27
City of Grover Beach                                                                R658ce006FinalReport.doc

•    Front Street Commercial/Industrial Truck Access – To the north of Grand Avenue adjacent
     to the Southern Pacific Railroad new commercial/industrial development is occurring along
     Front Street that will likely increase truck travel through adjacent residential areas. This
     area, although planned for commercial/industrial use, has limited regional access without
     traversing through residential development. 2nd Street, its lone commercial/industrial
     connection to Grand Avenue, intersects Grand Avenue less than 100 feet away from the
     Southern Pacific Railroad crossing.
     In evaluating alternative scenarios to improve regional accessibility to this
     commercial/industrial area, 2nd Street was seriously considered for improvement, including
     realignment of 2nd Street to align with Front Street. However, due to the close proximity of
     the railroad crossing on Grand Avenue, use of the 2nd Street/Grand Avenue intersection
     was not considered to be the best regional access solution. Eastbound left turn access from
     Grand Avenue would force left turn vehicles to often wait on the tracks before completing
     their turns. With westbound Grand Avenue traffic stopped for the Highway 1 traffic signal,
     delay in such left turn movement would not be infrequent.
     Therefore, its is suggested that the eastbound to northbound Grand Avenue left turns be
     prohibited and the regional truck access to the commercial/industrial area be directed along
     Ramona Avenue to 4th Street and 3rd Street from Ramona Avenue to Grand Avenue.
     Although upwards of eighteen (18) residences are affected, the flatter terrain and the large
     intersections with Grand Avenue and 4th Street for which proper turn channelization and
     controls can be provided, make these truck routes the safer and more appropriate solution
     for access to this area. With such designation along these portions of Ramona Avenue and
     3rd Street, weight limits and restrictions should be placed on Brighton Avenue, Newport
     Avenue and Saratoga Avenue to discourage use of these residential streets to 4th Street. In
     addition, the City will explore the possibility of placing traffic calming measures on Atlantic
     City Avenue, east of 4th Street, to discourage trucks in residential areas.
•    Griffin Street and Huber Street Industrial Area Truck Access and Circulation – Griffin
     Street and Huber Street were planned industrial streets intended to extend from Farroll
     Road to Highland Way. However, due to the development of a residential subdivision at
     the south end of these streets, that closed their connection to Highland Way, an alternative
     industrial circulation solution needed to be identified. By policy, because large trucks are
     difficult to turn around as well as large emergency service vehicles, such as fire trucks,
     industrial areas should avoid cul-de-sacs and plan continuous streets that connect to
     regional travel ways without impacting residential areas.
     Although Griffin Street and Huber Street were originally planned to be continuous,
     subsequent land use approvals eventually eliminated such possibility with residual impacts.
     With the closure of the opportunity for continuous southerly access, the City identified the
     need for public connections between these streets and Huston Street to the east and Barca
     Street to the west. A public street connection between Barca and Huber and Huber and
     Griffin have not been accomplished.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                 Page 28
City of Grover Beach                                                             R658ce006FinalReport.doc

     1. Public Street Connection between Griffin Street and Huber Street - Because the need
          for the public connection is a mitigation for a change in planned industrial circulation
          for the area, a 50 foot wide public easement should be purchased and assistance
          provided for the road improvement. The center line of the public easement should be
          placed on a property line to minimize impact to any one property owner with respect to
          development and use of their property.
     2. Public Street Connection between Huber Street and Barca Street – An alternative
          public street connection for Huber Street to Griffin Street would be to connect Huber
          Street to Barca Street. Both streets currently have the same limitations for emergency
          and large truck circulation. By connecting Huber Street and Barca Street at the southern
          end of these streets, a continuous circulation street could be achieved. Like the difficulty
          in achieving a connection between Huber Street and Griffin Street no public right of way
          exists and therefore would need to be purchased or received in dedication.
     3. Public Street Connections to Calvin Lane. Apublic street connection could be made
          between the south end of Barca Street to Calvin Lane. The intersection at Calvin Lane,
          however, would be across an existing residence. At Huber Street, a sufficient easement
          was not preserved such that if a connection of Huber Street to Calvin Lane were to be
          made, a curve and offset would be required to avoid an existing residence on the north
          side of Calvin Lane. Like the extension of Barca Street, the intersection with Calvin Lane
          would be across an existing residence. To accomplish the Huber Street extension
          additional right of way would be required.
     4. Public Street Connection Alternatives. In addition to the above public street
          connection alternatives, the above concepts could be mixed and matched to achieve the
          truck and emergency circulation desired for this industrial area.
     5. Cul-de-Sac Huber Street and Provide Private Easement – Placement of a cul-de-sac at
          the south end of Huber Street would provide circulation to turn around large trucks
          around within a public right-of-way, provided parking is prohibited along the cul-de-
          sac. Preference, however, would not be to make this move mandatory and therefore,
          particularly for emergency service vehicles, provision of a 20 foot private easement
          marked “Fire Lane” be required through at least one industrial parcel that straddles
          between Griffin Street and Huber Street. The centerline of the private easement could be
          placed on a property line if the adjacent development coordinated the easement
          construction concurrently.
     Clearly, creating a public street connection for large truck and emergency vehicle circulation
     is by far the most preferred. The allowance of a cul-de-sac and private easement is only a
     retrofit consideration to correct a less acceptable industrial circulation condition. The only
     benefit in accepting a cul-de-sac and private easement solution is to potentially minimize
     cost to resolve the less desirable condition.
•    4th Street – The Pike Vacant Tract Circulation – One of the largest remaining undeveloped
     areas is in the southwest corner of the City bordered by Highland Way to the north, 13th
     Street to the east, The Pike to the south and 4th Street to the west. Due to the adjacent
     railroad tracks to the west, regional access is limited to the west and to the south. Primary
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                  Page 29
City of Grover Beach                                                              R658ce006FinalReport.doc

     regional access to serve this area, that will develop in a mix of commercial, industrial and
     residential uses, will be derived from 4th Street to the northwest and The Pike to the east.
     Secondary north-south access will be derived from 13th Street. 4th Street to the north
     connects to US 101 and is four-lanes wide as far south as Trouville Avenue, where it
     becomes two lanes. For the development of this large remaining tract of land within the
     City, 4th Street should be further widened south of Trouville Road to four-lanes and
     realigned to connect to The Pike in an east-west direction. The southern portion of the
     existing 4th Street would then “T” into this realigned thoroughfare. The realignment of 4th
     Street is important for several reasons, as follows:
         1. Completes a defined arterial “ring road” around the City which starts at the US
             101/4th Street interchange, traverses south to The Pike, heads easterly to Oak Park
             Boulevard and back north to the US 101/Oak Park interchange.
         2. Redirects southbound regional access away from the Highway 1/4th Street
             intersection, which is less safe, to the 13th Street or Oak Park Boulevard intersections
             with Highway 1.
         3. Focuses the development of this area around 4th Street and The Pike and away from
             Highland Way, that has limited right-of-way and topographical constraints that could
             present sight distance problems.
•    Neighborhood Livability-based Traffic Thresholds and Traffic Calming Strategies – The
     ADT capacity thresholds (shown in Table CE-2 of this report) are general indicators of the
     traffic handling capacity of the City’s roadways. However, from a neighborhood livability
     standpoint, the “perceived” traffic thresholds by community residents would likely be
     much less than the physical capacity-based thresholds, and in the order of magnitude of
     3,000 to 4,000 ADT for typical residential streets. The difference between “capacity-based
     thresholds” and “neighborhood thresholds” for traffic on City streets is thus important in
     addressing the real and perceived concerns of the public. As such, it is generally suggested
     that the City investigate strategies to limit daily traffic volumes on all City residential streets
     to less than 4,000 vehicles per day.
     Many of the residential streets in the City, like Long Branch Road and Newport Road in
     particular, are unusually wide, much greater than normal residential street standards.
     These residential streets, theoretically, even have greater physical capacity. However, these
     streets, like others within the residential grid of the Grover Beach circulation system are in
     need to have traffic levels and speeds decreased and safety and “livability” increased.
     To accomplish this goal, neighborhood traffic calming strategies are incorporated into this
     Circulation Element update to help enhance neighborhood safety and to discourage
     excessive speeding and volumes of cut-through traffic on residential neighborhoods.
     Specifically, the City should further pursue implementation of traffic calming measures,
     such as speed bumps, traffic circles, partial/full road closures, narrowing roads by adding
     buld-outs and or medians to slow and/or divert travel from residential neighborhoods.
•    Intra-City Connections – The City of Grover Beach currently has intra-city connections with
     Pismo Beach and Arroyo Grande and additionally with the community of Oceano.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                                   Page 30
City of Grover Beach                                                               R658ce006FinalReport.doc

     The Cities of Pismo Beach and Grover Beach are connected by SR 1, North 4th Street and El
     Camino Real (Frontage Road). The Cities of Arroyo Grande and Grover Beach are
     connected by Oak Park Boulevard, Grand Avenue, El Camino Real (Frontage Road),
     Newport Avenue, Brighton Avenue, Mentone Avenue/Ash Street, Farroll Road and The
     Pike. The community of Oceano and the City of Grover Beach are connected by South 4th
     Street, South 13th Street, South Oak Park Boulevard/22nd Street, and SR 1. These localized
     circulation connections between the South County (or “Five Cities” area) communities and
     Cities are very important. Continued coordination of improvement projects between these
     neighboring Cities and communities of the County will be critical to the continued success
     of creating a safe, efficient and uncongested City circulation system.
General Plan Circulation Element                                                              Page 31
City of Grover Beach                                                          R658ce006FinalReport.doc

APPENDI
                                LEVEL OF SERVICE CONCEPT
Level of Service A
   1. Free flow conditions
   2. Individual users are virtually unaffected by the
       presence of others in the traffic stream
Level of Service B
   1. Stable traffic flow
   2. Freedom to select desired speeds is relatively
       unaffected, but there is a slight decline in the
       freedom to maneuver
Level of Service C
   1. Stable and acceptable flow but speed and
       maneuverability somewhat restricted due to higher
       volumes
   2. Operation of individual users becomes
       significantly affected by the presence of others
Level of Service D
   1. High density but stable flow
   2. Driver experiences a generally poor level of
       comfort and convenience
   3. Small increases in traffic flow will cause operational problems
   4. Maneuverability restricted
Level of Service E
   1. Speeds reduced to low, but relatively uniform
       value
   2. Freedom to maneuver is extremely difficult,
       frustration is high
   3. Volume at or near capacity
   4. Unstable flow
Level of Service F
   1. Forced or breakdown flow conditions
   2. Stoppage for long periods due to congestion
   3. Volumes drop to zero in extreme cases
CITY OF
GROVER BEACH
2014-2019
HOUSING ELEMENT
UPDATE
JUNE 16, 2014
RESOLUTION NO. 14-40
Prepared by
           ®
860 Walnut Street, Suite B
San Luis Obispo, CA 93401


                                                                                                                           Table of Contents 
C h a p t e r   1 :   I n t r o d u c t i o n  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1  
1.1 Overview ................................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.2 Public Participation ................................................................................................................................. 1
1.3 Housing Element Organization .............................................................................................................. 3
C h a p t e r   2 :   G o a l s ,   P o l i c i e s   a n d   P r o g r a m s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5  
2.1 Goals ......................................................................................................................................................... 5
2.2 Policies....................................................................................................................................................... 5
2.3 Programs ................................................................................................................................................... 7
2.3 Quantified Objectives .......................................................................................................................... 16
C h a p t e r   3 :   H o u s i n g   N e e d s   A s s e s s m e n t  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 7  
3.1 Demographic Characteristics ............................................................................................................. 17
         Population ....................................................................................................................................... 17
         Age Characteristics ....................................................................................................................... 20
         Employment .................................................................................................................................... 21
         Household Income ......................................................................................................................... 24
         Commute ........................................................................................................................................ 25
3.2 Housing Conditions ............................................................................................................................... 26
         Tenure and Vacancy .................................................................................................................... 27
         At-Risk Dwelling Units...................................................................................................................... 28
         Overcrowding ................................................................................................................................. 29
         Regional Housing Needs Plan ...................................................................................................... 30
         Housing Costs .................................................................................................................................. 31
         Overpayment ................................................................................................................................. 32
         Housing Affordability ...................................................................................................................... 33
3.3 Special Housing Needs ......................................................................................................................... 34
         Disabled Households ..................................................................................................................... 34
         Developmental Disabilities ........................................................................................................... 35
         Elderly Households.......................................................................................................................... 36
         Farmworkers .................................................................................................................................... 37
         Large Families and Female Heads of Household...................................................................... 37
         Housing Problems ........................................................................................................................... 38
         Homelessness .................................................................................................................................. 39
C h a p t e r   4 :   L a n d   A v a i l a b i l i t y   a n d   H o u s i n g   R e s o u r c e s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4 1  
4.1 Regional Housing Needs Allocation ................................................................................................... 41
         Vacant Land Inventory ................................................................................................................. 42
         Other Trends and Opportunities .................................................................................................. 47
         Demolitions ...................................................................................................................................... 47
4.2 Infrastructure Constraints...................................................................................................................... 47
         Water Service .................................................................................................................................. 48
         Wastewater ..................................................................................................................................... 48
                                                                                                                                                                                         i

Table of Contents 
4.3 Financial and Administrative Resources ............................................................................................ 48 
         Financing Resources ...................................................................................................................... 48
         Local Resources.............................................................................................................................. 50
4.4 Energy Conservation ............................................................................................................................ 51
C h a p t e r   5 :   H o u s i n g   C o n s t r a i n t s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5 3  
5.1 Governmental Constraints ................................................................................................................... 53
         Local Land Use Controls ................................................................................................................ 53
         Planned Development Overlay Zone ......................................................................................... 58
         Planned Unit Developments ......................................................................................................... 59
         Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks ..................................................................................... 60
         Transitional and Supportive Housing ........................................................................................... 60
         Emergency Shelters ....................................................................................................................... 60
         High Occupancy Residential Uses .............................................................................................. 61
         Parking Standards .......................................................................................................................... 62
         Second Dwelling Units ................................................................................................................... 63
         Mixed Use ........................................................................................................................................ 64
         Affordable Housing Density Bonuses and Concessions/Incentives ....................................... 64
5.2 Land Use Element Growth Management Policy .............................................................................. 65
        Permit Processes and Timelines...................................................................................................... 66
        Environmental Review ..................................................................................................................... 67
        Design Review .................................................................................................................................. 67
        Use Permits ........................................................................................................................................ 68
5.3 Codes and Enforcement ..................................................................................................................... 68
        On- and Off-Site Improvement Requirements ............................................................................ 68
        Fees and Exactions .......................................................................................................................... 69
        Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types........................................................................................... 72
5.4 Non-Governmental Constraints .......................................................................................................... 74
         Availability of Financing ................................................................................................................ 75
         Price of Land ................................................................................................................................... 76
         Cost of Construction ...................................................................................................................... 76
         Infrastructure Constraints .............................................................................................................. 77
         Environmental Constraints ............................................................................................................ 77
         Faults ................................................................................................................................................ 78
         Flooding ........................................................................................................................................... 78
C h a p t e r   6 :   R e v i e w   o f   P r e v i o u s   H o u s i n g   E l e m e n t  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7 9  
6.1 Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element .................................................................................................. 79
Appendix A – Land Inventory 
 
Appendix B – Public Outreach List 
                                              
ii

                                                                                                          Table of Contents 
List of Figures 
Figure 4-1 Vacant Land Inventory Map ................................................................................................... 45
List of Tables 
Table 2-1 Quantified Objectives for the 2014–2019 Housing Element ................................................. 16
Table 3-1 Population Trends ....................................................................................................................... 18
Table 3-2 Trends in Population Growth..................................................................................................... 18
Table 3-3 Household Growth, 2000–2010 ................................................................................................. 18
Table 3-4 Households by Tenure and Age, 2007–2011 .......................................................................... 19
Table 3-5 Population Projections, 2010–2040........................................................................................... 20
Table 3-6 Household Projections, 2010–2040 ........................................................................................... 20
Table 3-7 Trends in Population Age .......................................................................................................... 21
Table 3-8 Industry Trends of Employed Grover Beach Residents ......................................................... 22
Table 3-9 Annual Median Income for Top Industries of Grover Beach Residents ............................. 23
Table 3-10 San Luis Obispo County Industry Projections, 2010–2040 ................................................... 23
Table 3-11 Household Income Groups in Grover Beach....................................................................... 24
Table 3-12 Households by Income Group in Grover Beach ................................................................. 25
Table 3-13 Travel Time to Work .................................................................................................................. 25
Table 3-14 Trends in Housing Type............................................................................................................. 26
Table 3-15 Housing Units by Age ............................................................................................................... 26
Table 3-16 Trends in Housing Tenure ......................................................................................................... 28
Table 3-17 Vacant Units by Type ............................................................................................................... 28
Table 3-18 Occupants per Room in Grover Beach................................................................................ 30
Table 3-19 San Luis Obispo County HCD Income Limits ........................................................................ 30
Table 3-20 Regional Housing Needs Allocation ...................................................................................... 31
Table 3-21 Median Home Sales Price 2000–2014 .................................................................................... 31
Table 3-22 Typical Rental Prices by Bedroom Count ............................................................................. 32
Table 3-23 Households Overpaying by Income and Tenure ................................................................ 32
Table 3-24 Housing Affordability ................................................................................................................ 33
Table 3-25 Persons with Disabilities by Type ............................................................................................. 34
Table 3-26 Persons with Work, Mobility, and Self-Care Limitations by Age ........................................ 34
Table 3-27 Developmentally Disabled Residents by Age ..................................................................... 36
Table 3-28 Developmentally Disabled by Residence Type .................................................................. 36
Table 3-29 Householder by Age ................................................................................................................ 37
Table 3-30 Female-Headed Householders in Grover Beach ................................................................ 38
Table 3-31 Household Size by Tenure in Grover Beach ......................................................................... 38
Table 3-32 Housing Problems for All Households ..................................................................................... 39
Table 3-33 Homelessness Services ............................................................................................................. 40
Table 4-1 Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2014–2019.................................................................... 42
Table 4-2 Vacant Land Inventory ............................................................................................................. 43
Table 4-3 Federal, State and Private Funding Sources .......................................................................... 49
Table 5-1 Residential Site Development Standards by Zone (Non-Coastal Zone)........................... 55
Table 5-2 Residential Site Development Standards by Zone (Coastal Zone) .................................... 56
Table 5-3 Allowable Residential Uses by Zoning Category (Non-Coastal Zone) ............................... 57
                                                                                                                                                     iii

Table of Contents 
Table 5-4 Allowable Residential Uses by Zoning Category (Coastal Zone) ....................................... 58
Table 5-5 Parking Standards by Residential Type ................................................................................... 62
Table 5-6 Permit Processing Timelines ....................................................................................................... 67
Table 5-7 Planning and Building Services Fee Schedule ....................................................................... 69
Table 5-8 Development Impact Fees ....................................................................................................... 70
Table 5-9 Example Fee Payment for Residential Development ........................................................... 71
Table 5-10 Fee Proportion in Development Costs for a Typical Residential Development ............. 72
Table 5-11 Interest Rates ............................................................................................................................. 75
Table 5-12 Construction Costs ................................................................................................................... 77
Table 6-1 Progress During Previous Planning Period, 2007-2014 ........................................................... 79
Table 6-2 Review of Previous Housing Element Matrix ........................................................................... 80
iv

                                                                                   Chapter 1
                                                                       Introduction
1.1      Overview
The City of Grover Beach is located in southern San Luis Obispo County, California. The City
covers 2.25 square miles, bounded by the Pacific Ocean to the west, Pismo Beach to the north,
Arroyo Grande to the east, and the unincorporated urban area of Oceano to the south. Grover
Beach is located approximately 10 miles south of San Luis Obispo and 15 miles north of Santa
Maria.
The Grover Beach Housing Element is one of the seven mandated elements of the City’s
General Plan. It is the only element that is statutorily required to be updated and certified by the
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The planning period for
this Housing Element is June 30, 2014, to June 30, 2019.
California law requires HCD to project statewide housing needs and allocates those needs to
each region in the State. After consultation with the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments
(SLOCOG), HCD provided the regional need to SLOCOG, which then distributed the Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) to San Luis Obispo County and the incorporated cities within
the SLOCOG region. SLOCOG allocates housing production goals for the County and
incorporated cities based on their “fair share” of the region’s population and employment,
which is outlined in the SLOCOG 2013 Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP). Of the 4,090 housing
units allocated to SLOCOG, Grover Beach will need to accommodate 165 units. One of the
primary purposes of the Housing Element update is to demonstrate the City’s ability to
accommodate residential development to meet the RHNA.
The projected housing needs in the RHNA are categorized by affordability based on the
standards of extremely low-, very low-, low-, moderate-, and above moderate-income
households established by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
(California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5). According to the 2013 SLOCOG RHNP,
Grover Beach will need to accommodate 20 extremely low-income, 21 very low-income, 26 low-
income, 29 moderate-income, and 69 above moderate-income housing units.
1.2 Public Participation
Public participation is an important component of the Housing Element update. This section
presents the process undertaken by the City to receive public input and encourage public
participation in the process.
The City held a public workshop to receive input and provide an overview of the Housing
Element process on March 19, 2014. The workshop was noticed in the newspaper, posted at the
City bulletin boards (City Hall, Post Office, and 180 South Highway 1) and on the City’s website,
ads were run on local television and radio stations, and on the City’s public access channel. The
consultant (PMC) and City staff discussed the progress so far on the Housing Element and the
data gathered. In addition, attendees were encouraged to participate by signing up to be
                                                                                                   1

Chapter 1 Introduction
included on the mailing list for future notices.
Five people from the community and three City staff members attended the workshop. The
following comments were made:
     -  Service industry workers were identified as a growing segment of the City’s population
        and may have contributed to the increased percentage of renters in the City between
        2000 and 2010.
     -  A group in need of housing in the City is young families. They often don’t have the
        incomes to afford market-rate housing.
     -  There are a lot of extremely low-income people in the City.
     -  One local mobile-home park where a community member at the workshop lives includes
        a transitional housing situation for chronically or temporarily homeless people. The
        number of people coming and going from one housing unit and their activities are
        disturbing to their neighbors.
     -  Cost of land is very high making it impossible for market-rate single-family homes to be
        affordable.
     -  Prefer affordable housing to be spread out throughout the community rather than in
        complexes with large numbers of units.
     -  The Career One-Stop center in Grover Beach provides services including job search
        assistance. It is a good resource for those looking for work or to improve their job skills.
        They have programs for adults and youth.
     -  Senior housing is needed in Grover Beach.
The City received input during a meeting with the Economic Vitality Corporation (EVC) about
the EVC’s work to survey employers and employees regarding workforce housing needs.
Those who took EVC’s survey identified that the San Luis Obispo County region has a highly
educated workforce, rising home costs, a growing problem with access to housing, there is a
need for solutions from government and industry. The survey also found that employees prefer
traditional detached homes, housing with three bedrooms, two bathrooms, and a two car
garage. 81 percent of those surveyed prefer to live and work in the same community and find a
30 minute commute acceptable.
PMC made a presentation on the public review draft Housing Element at the Planning
Commission meeting on April 8, 2014, and also made a presentation at the City Council meeting
on April 21, 2014. Both the Commission and the Council recommended that the draft be
submitted to HCD for review. Everyone on the mailing list received notice of these meetings to
encourage participation in the hearings and to provide input on the draft Housing Element.
Despite this outreach, no members of the public provided input at the Planning Commission or
City Council meetings.
The Planning Commission made the following recommendations for revisions and additions to
the public review draft Housing Element:
2

                                                                            Chapter 1 Introduction
    -   Add a footnote to Table 2-1 explaining which new construction objectives are
        associated with specific programs in Chapter 2.
    -   Add an explanation to page 17 of Chapter 3 of the difference between a household
        and a housing unit.
    -   Add clarifying language to page 24 of Chapter 3 reflecting that household incomes in
        Grover Beach kept pace with inflation between 2000 and 2010.
    -   Replace the conclusion in the Overcrowding section on page 30 with the conclusion
        that overcrowding is not an issue in Grover Beach.
The City Council made the following comments on the public review draft Housing Element:
    -   What is the significance of the term shall in the programs in Chapter 2?
    -   Are all the programs in Chapter 2 shaded in green new or modified?
    -   On page 61 the words “in height” should be added after 15 feet.
    -   On page 62 consider revising the Emergency Shelter Overlay standard regarding
        buffering.
    -   Under High Occupancy Residential Uses on page 63 is parking actually allowed in the
        setback?
    -   On page 65 check that sentence about where live/work is not allowed is correct.
    -   On page 67, clarify bullet regarding the percentage of a project that can be increased
        up to 50 percent.
    -   On page 93 under the review of previous Housing Element Program 4.6.2, can the City
        share reasonable accommodation information on their website?
    -   On page 98 under the review of previous Housing Element Program 6.1.1 was increasing
        density through right of way vacation actually infeasible?
    -   Related to the review of previous Housing Element Program 7.1.3, what is a parking
        district?
In response to the City Council’s comment the following revision has been made to the public
review draft Housing Element:
    -   On page 61 the words “in height” has been added after 15 feet.
The Housing Element was revised to address comments from HCD, the Planning Commission and
City Council and was presented to the Planning Commission on June 9, 2014 and the City
Council on June 16, 2014. The City Council adopted the Housing Element and authorized
submitting it to HCD for final review and certification.
                                                                                                 3

Chapter 1 Introduction
Notices were sent to interested parties for all of the public meetings. Lists of those noticed are
included in Appendix B.
1.3 Housing Element Organization
The Housing Element is organized as follows:
    -  Chapter 1 provides the introduction and overview.
    -  Chapter 2 identifies goals, policies, and programs that are designed to achieve the City’s
       quantified housing objectives and ultimately accommodate the City’s housing
       production goals.
    -  Chapter 3 includes the Housing Needs Assessment, which identifies community
       characteristics and demographics relating to housing needs in the City. Most of the data
       comes from the 2000 and 2010 United States Census, or from the most current information
       available.
    -  Chapter 4 evaluates the availability of land in the City to support and accommodate
       future residential development. This chapter identifies vacant land in the City that can
       be anticipated to support new residential development in order to demonstrate Grover
       Beach’s ability to meet its RHNA.
    -  Chapter 5 discusses housing constraints (governmental and non-governmental) that
       affect the feasibility of additional future residential development. Energy conservation
       opportunities are also discussed.
    -  Chapter 6 evaluates the 2009 Housing Element, its effectiveness, progress in
       implementation, and appropriateness of goals, objectives, and policies.
4

                                                                                   Chapter 2
                              Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goals identify the direction the City intends to pursue to address housing issues facing the
community. Policies establish a link between goals and programs and guide program
implementation. Programs are the specific actions the City will undertake to implement the
Housing Element.
2.1 Goals
    1. Provide an adequate supply of sound housing affordable to all residents of Grover
         Beach.
    2. Maintain the coastal character of housing to enhance the livability and quality of each
         neighborhood.
    3. Provide a variety of housing choices and increase the supply of new housing to meet the
         community’s fair share of regional needs.
    4. Encourage special needs housing to meet the needs of senior citizens, large families,
         single parents, the disabled (including the developmentally disabled), and the homeless.
    5. Conserve existing sound 1 housing and support the maintenance, improvement, and
         rehabilitation of existing housing when feasible.
    6. Reduce development constraints, where appropriate, encourage creativity, and provide
         incentives for the development of affordable housing.
    7. Ensure energy efficiency in new and existing housing stock.
    8. Ensure equal housing opportunities for all persons regardless of age, race, sex, religion, or
         national origin, and remove potential barriers that prevent choice in housing.
2.2 Policies
The following policies implement the Housing Element goals.
Policy 1.1         The City shall ensure there is an adequate supply of vacant or underutilized
                   residential land for development or redevelopment at specific densities to meet
                   the housing objectives for affordable housing. This will include meeting or
                   exceeding the Regional Housing Needs Allocation. The City shall also explore
                   effective developer incentives for affordable housing, especially if the
                   development is 100 percent affordable.
1. A building that appears new or well maintained and structurally intact.
                                                                                                   5

Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Policy 1.2   The City shall encourage development of a mix of different housing types
             including multi-family and single-family homes, mixed-use developments, second
             units, caretaker units, manufactured homes, transitional housing, emergency
             shelters, and farmworker and employee housing, in appropriate locations.
Policy 2.1   Multifamily housing developments shall incorporate interesting architectural and
             structural design features, including but not limited to varied roof lines, recessed
             second and third stories, courtyard housing, horizontal and vertical wall offsets,
             and other features to enrich the livability and attractiveness of these
             developments.
Policy 3.1   The City shall support new affordable housing development by working with
             developers to identify appropriate locations for their projects and facilitate the
             use of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) grants, and City Affordable
             Housing Fund money to help offset the cost of affordable housing development.
Policy 4.1   Housing for senior or disabled persons shall be encouraged in affordable housing
             developments.
Policy 4.2   Senior housing development shall be supported in locations near public services,
             such as transit stops, medical services, retail centers, and community recreation
             areas.
Policy 4.3   The City shall encourage barrier-free development for disabled or special needs
             individuals by providing reasonable accommodations from the strict application
             of the Development Code. This will be accomplished by implementing programs
             that meet the requirements of Government Code Section 65583.
Policy 4.4   The City shall support the redevelopment of residential or commercial property
             for farmworker housing, transitional housing, and other special needs housing, in
             appropriate locations.
Policy 5.1   The City shall consider applying for CDBG funding to obtain funds for
             rehabilitation of homes for extremely low-, low-, and very low-income households.
Policy 5.2   The City shall continue to implement demolition restrictions to conserve sound
             housing.
Policy 5.3   Where code enforcement activities result in identifying homes that need
             rehabilitation or other structural work to provide safe, standard housing, owners
             will be provided reasonable time frames in which to correct deficiencies.
Policy 6.1   The City shall review site development standards, development review
             procedures, and development fees and shall modify them if necessary, to ensure
             they do not unreasonably constrain the development, conservation, and
             rehabilitation of housing.
6
                                                          Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Policy 6.2  The City shall provide expedited permit processing for affordable housing
            developments.
Policy 6.3  The City shall provide a set of incentive programs to encourage the development
            of second units as potential affordable housing stock.
Policy 7.1  All new dwelling units shall be required to meet current State requirements for
            energy efficiency. The retrofitting of existing units during remodeling shall be
            encouraged.
Policy 8.1  The City shall support efforts to eliminate housing discrimination on the basis of
            age, race, sex, religion, age, marital status, national origin, family size, disability, or
            other potential barriers.
2.3 Programs
Program 1.1         The City shall prepare an inventory of State, federal, and City-owned land
                    and shall analyze that land for possible housing sites. If appropriate sites
                    are identified, the City shall approach developers and funding agencies
                    to facilitate development of the sites for affordable housing and provide
                    priority permit processing. (Policy 1.1)
                    Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                    Time Frame:             Update the database of vacant and underutilized
                                            land annually
                    Funding:                General Fund
                    Housing Objective:      Not applicable
Program 1.2         The City has a Planned Development Overlay Zone that applies City-wide.
                    The purpose of this overlay zone is to facilitate better designed projects
                    (e.g., innovative site planning, superior design) by allowing flexible and
                    relaxed development standards, beyond what is permitted in the
                    underlying zone. (Policy 1.1)
                    Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                    Time Frame:             As development applications are submitted
                    Funding:                General Fund
                    Housing Objective:      Not applicable
                                                                                                      7
Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Program 1.3           The City shall continue to work with other agencies and nonprofits that
                      meet the needs of extremely low-income households, including financial
                      assistance and affordable housing projects. Potential local partnership
                      opportunities include, but are not limited to, the Housing Authority of San
                      Luis Obispo (HASLO), the San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund, and
                      People’s Self-Help Housing. (Policy 1.1)
                      Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                      Time Frame:             Meet with agencies and nonprofits annually and
                                              ongoing
                      Funding:                General Fund
                      Housing Objective:      Assist other agencies and nonprofits in providing
                                              financial assistance and affordable housing for the
                                              extremely low-income households.
Program 1.4           The City shall consider revising the Planned Unit Development standards to
                      encourage development of small, underutilized parcels in the R-3 zone
                      The process to determine whether revisions to the standards are needed
                      shall include review of development standards including guest parking
                      and lot coverage. (Policy 1.2)
                      Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                      Time Frame:             Within two years of Housing Element adoption
                      Funding:                General Fund
                      Housing Objective:      Not applicable
Program 1.5           To remove constraints associated with only allowing a density of 20 units
                      per acre, the City shall amend the allowed density on parcel 060-031-005
                      in the 1700 Block of Atlantic City to allow the range of density allowed in
                      the R-3 zone of 10 to 20 units per acre. (Policy 1.1)
                      Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                      Time Frame:             Within two years of Housing Element adoption
                      Funding:                General Fund
                      Housing Objective:      Not applicable
8

                                                 Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Program 2.1 Multifamily housing developments shall be reviewed during the
            development review process for consistency with Policy 2.1. (Policy 2.1)
            Responsible Dept:       Community Development
            Timeframe:              As multifamily housing applications are submitted
            Funding:                General Fund
            Housing Objective:      Not applicable
Program 3.1 The City shall update the Affordable Housing Development Guidebook
            identifying funds available and the process for applying to use any City
            funds available for affordable residential projects, as needed. This
            guidebook shall be made available at City Hall and on the City website.
            (Policy 3.1)
            Responsible Dept:       Community Development
            Time Frame:             Update guidebook when information included
                                    needs updating
            Funding:                General Fund
            Housing Objective:      Not applicable
Program 3.2 The City shall provide support and assistance when feasible for new
            affordable housing to be developed by affordable housing developers. If
            any City funds become available, the City shall prioritize funding for
            developments that incorporate extremely low-income units. Developers
            who receive financial assistance from the City for their project shall be
            required to record a covenant on the project deed(s) that requires the
            units to be rented or for resale at below-market, affordable rates as
            established in the County of San Luis Obispo Affordable Housing
            Standards. (Policy 3.1)
            Responsible Dept:       Community Development
            Time Frame:             When applications are submitted
            Funding:                Project applicant and/or City
            Housing Objective:      8 extremely low-, very low- or low-income dwelling
                                    units
                                                                                      9
Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Program 4.1           The City shall encourage residential developers of five or more dwelling
                      units to offer an optional accessible design to homebuyers whose
                      households include one or more disabled persons. (Policy 4.1)
                      Responsible Dept:        Community Development
                      Time Frame:              As development applications are submitted
                      Funding:                 Project applicant
                      Housing Objective:       5 accessible units
Program 4.2           Underutilized motels or other commercial structures located in
                      appropriate areas that are in need of rehabilitation that have the
                      potential to be converted and/or upgraded for permanent special needs
                      housing that could serve disabled, elderly, extremely low income-, and
                      very low-income persons shall continue to be identified. City staff shall
                      annually provide nonprofit housing developers with a list of potential
                      properties. (Policy 4.1)
                      Responsible Dept:        Community Development
                      Time Frame:              Annually
                      Funding:                 General Fund
                      Housing Objective:       Not applicable
Program 4.3           The City shall publish informational handouts for those seeking a
                      reasonable accommodation from the strict interpretation of the zoning
                      regulations. These informational handouts shall be made available at City
                      Hall and on the City Website. (Policy 4.3)
                      Responsible Dept:        Community Development
                      Time Frame:              Within one year of Housing Element adoption
                      Funding:                 General Fund
                      Housing Objective:       Not applicable
Program 4.4           The City shall amend the Development Code to allow transitional and
                      supportive housing in all zones allowing residential uses and define
                      transitional and supportive housing as residential uses subject to the same
                      restrictions that apply to other housing (including design/architectural
                      review). The City shall also amend the standards for the emergency
                      shelter overlay in the Development Code to comply with State law
                      regarding the minimum distance between emergency shelters. (Policy
                      4.4)
10
                                                  Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
            Responsible Dept:       Community Development
            Time Frame:             Within one year of Housing Element adoption
            Funding:                General Fund
            Housing Objective:      Not applicable
Program 4.5 The City shall work with housing providers to ensure that special housing
            needs and the needs of lower-income households are addressed for
            seniors, large families, female-headed households with children, persons
            with disabilities (including developmental disabilities), extremely low-
            income households, and homeless individuals and families. The City shall
            seek to meet these special housing needs through a combination of
            regulatory incentives, zoning standards, new housing construction
            programs, and supportive services programs. The City shall promote
            market-rate and affordable housing sites, housing programs, and financial
            assistance available from the City, County, State, and federal
            governments. In addition, as appropriate, the City shall apply for or
            support others’ applications for funding under State and federal programs
            designated specifically for special needs groups. (Policy 4.1)
            Responsible Dept:       Community Development, City Council
            Time Frame:             Seek funding opportunities beginning in 2014–2015
                                    and annually thereafter; meet annually with
                                    housing and special needs providers; all program
                                    components are ongoing
            Funding:                Federal Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS,
                                    California Child Care Facility Financing Program,
                                    and other state and federal programs designated
                                    specifically for special needs groups
            Housing Objective:      Apply for or support at least two funding
                                    opportunities serving special needs groups
Program 4.6 The City shall amend the Development Code to allow Farmworker
            housing without a use permit in the Urban Reserve (UR) zone per Health
            and Safety Code Section 17021.6. (Policy 4.4)
            Responsible Dept:       Community Development
            Time Frame:             Within one year of Housing Element adoption
            Funding:                General Fund
            Housing Objective:      Not applicable
                                                                                      11

Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Program 5.1           The City shall continue seeking funds for loans and grants through the
                      Community Development Block Grant program to assist in financing and
                      rehabilitating affordable residential projects (extremely low-, very low-,
                      and low-income). In addition, the City shall conduct a housing condition
                      survey prior to the beginning of the 6th Housing Element planning period.
                      The City shall continue to distribute information on the rehabilitation
                      program to citizens in the City Seabreeze newsletter and on the City’s
                      public access cable channel when funds are available. (Policy 5.1)
                      Responsible Dept:        Community Development
                      Time Frame:              Apply for funding annually; conduct           housing
                                               condition survey prior to June 30th 2019
                      Funding:                 CDBG, HOME Program
                      Housing Objective:       20 rehabilitated units
Program 5.2           The City shall identify existing owner-occupied housing that received
                      financial subsidy(ies) through programs such as CDBG for gap financing
                      and track the term remaining on the financing. If funds are received at
                      the end of financing terms, the City shall develop a program to reallocate
                      the funds into new affordable housing units or programs to assist lower
                      and moderate income families.
                      Responsible Dept:        Community Development
                      Time Frame:              Ongoing as funds become available
                      Funding:                 CDBG program,
                      Housing Objective:       Not applicable
Program 5.3           Housing that provides living accommodations for low- and moderate-
                      income households shall not be demolished unless any of the following
                      criteria apply: It is necessary to demolish the structure for health and
                      safety reasons, as evidenced by the determination of the Building Official
                      that it is substandard (in accordance with the criteria set forth in Chapter
                      10 of the Uniform Housing Code as amended from time to time) and that
                      the cost of remediating the code violations would: 1) result in housing that
                      is not affordable to low- and moderate-income households; or 2) exceed
                      50 percent of the assessed value of the structure in its present condition; It
                      is necessary to carry out a public project that would improve coastal
                      access or other direct public benefit; The unit to be demolished is owner-
                      occupied housing; The unit to be demolished is a non-conforming use
                      according to the requirements of the General Plan or Development
12

                                                Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
            Code; The unit to be demolished shall be replaced with a rental unit
            available to low- or moderate-income households. (Policy 5.2)
            Responsible Dept:     Community Development
            Timeframe:            Ongoing
            Funding:              General Fund
            Housing Objective:    Not applicable
Program 6.1 When updates are needed to respond to regulation and policy
            amendments, the City shall update housing, planning, and building public
            handout materials. These handouts shall be made available at City Hall
            and on the City website. (Policy 6.1)
            Responsible Dept:     Community Development
            Time Frame:           As zoning regulations are amended
            Funding:              General Fund
            Housing Objective:    Not applicable
Program 6.2 The City shall consider revising parking standards to remove potential
            constraints and provide incentives for the development of affordable
            housing, including:
            •  Reducing parking for one bedroom dwellings.
            •  Reducing guest parking standards.
            •  Reducing parking standards for affordable dwellings consistent with
               State standards. (Policy 6.1)
            Responsible Dept:     Community Development
            Time Frame:           Within two years of Housing Element adoption
            Funding:              General Fund
            Housing Objective:    Not applicable
                                                                                    13

Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Program 6.3           The City shall monitor housing development as part of the annual General
                      Plan review and identify if there are potential standards, procedures or
                      fees constraining affordable housing development. (Policy 6.1)
                      Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                      Time Frame:             Annually
                      Funding:                General Fund
                      Housing Objective:      Not applicable
Program 6.4           To remove potential constraints for the entitlement of multi-family housing
                      projects associated with the findings required for a Development Permit,
                      the City shall remove the terms “density” and “public interest” from the
                      findings in Development Code Section 6.20.060. The City shall also
                      consider adding language to clarify what is meant by the term “location”
                      in the findings. Clarifying language the City shall consider includes safe
                      ingress and egress, whether the site has existing access or is landlocked,
                      and the proposed locations of buildings on the site. Alternatively, if the
                      term “location” cannot be sufficiently clarified, the term “location” shall
                      also be removed from the findings. (Policy 6.1)
                      Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                      Time Frame:             Within two years of Housing Element adoption
                      Funding:                General Fund
                      Housing Objective:      Not applicable
Program 6.5           The City shall continue to evaluate the City’s development fee structure
                      and consider the reduction of fees for affordable housing units where
                      possible. (Policy 6.2)
                      Responsible Dept:       Community Development
                      Time Frame:             Within two years of Housing Element adoption
                      Funding:                General Fund
                      Housing Objective:      Not applicable
14

                                                  Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
Program 6.6 The City shall continue to encourage the development of second units as
            affordable housing and report new second units as part of the Annual
            Housing Element Report. The City encourages and promotes second units
            by providing information on the City’s website about second unit
            standards and options, and informing people at the public counter of
            second units as an option and informing property owners with an existing
            unpermitted second unit of the option to bring the unit up to code as a
            legal second unit. (Policy 6.3)
            Responsible Dept:        Community Development
            Time Frame:              Annually
            Funding:                 General Fund
            Housing Objective:       5 second units
Program 7.1 The City shall continue to provide information about water conservation
            programs, energy rebates, and water retrofits, and low-income assistance
            energy programs available through local utility providers. This information
            shall be available to the public at City Hall and/or on the City website.
            (Policy 7.1)
            Responsible Dept:        Community Development
            Time Frame:              Ongoing
            Funding:                 Not applicable
            Housing Objective:       Not applicable
Program 8.1 The City shall continue to disseminate information in Spanish and English
            on Housing Program assistance available from HASLO and the
            Department of Fair Employment and Housing regarding fair housing laws.
            The City shall post fair housing information on the City website.
            The City has acted and shall continue to act as an information station for
            people who experience housing discrimination, referring them to HASLO,
            the Department of Employment and Housing, and the California Rural
            Legal Assistance center for assistance. (Policy 8.1)
            Responsible Dept:        Community Development
            Time Frame:              Ongoing
            Funding:                 General Fund
            Housing Objective:       Not applicable
                                                                                      15

Chapter 2 Goals, Policies and Programs
2.3 Quantified Objectives
Identifying quantified objectives refers to the number of new units that may potentially be
constructed over the planning period, the number of existing units that can be expected to be
rehabilitated, and the conservation of existing affordable housing stock. This information is
presented in Table 2-1.
               Table 2-1 Quantified Objectives for the 2014–2019 Housing Element
                                             Quantified Objectives by Income Group
    Housing Program              Extremely Low          Very Low          Low       Moderate Above                    Totals
                                     Income              Income        Income        Income Moderate
New Construction                        20                   21            26             29               69          1652
Rehabilitation                           0                   10            10              0                0           20
Housing Conservation1                    0                    0             0              0                0            0
Source: PMC and Grover Beach 2014
Note 1: No housing units have been identified as at risk of conversion to market rate in Grover Beach within 10 years of
the beginning of the 5th cycle planning period Additional detail on the potential for at-risk units is provided in the At Risk
Dwelling Units section of Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment.
Note 2: The 8 extremely low, very low, and low units under the objective for Program 3.2, the 5 accessible units under the
objective for Program 4.1, and the 5 second units under the objective for Program 6.6 are included in this total new
construction objective.
16

                                                                                     Chapter 3
                                 Housing Needs Assessment
The Housing Needs Assessment identifies factors related to housing needs in Grover Beach,
including population and employment characteristics, income levels, household characteristics,
housing stock characteristics, affordable housing needs, the condition of housing, groups with
special needs, and the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). For the purposes of this
document a household means all those persons, related or unrelated, who occupy a single
housing unit. A housing unit means the place of permanent or customary abode of a person or
family. A housing unit may be a single family dwelling, a multi-family dwelling, a condominium, a
modular home, a mobile home, a cooperative, or any other residential unit considered real
property under State law. At times housing units may not be occupied by a household due to
seasonal use or vacancy.
The California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) developed a data
packet for jurisdictions in San Luis Obispo County that contains much of the information required
for the Housing Needs Assessment of this Housing Element and is the primary source of data for
this document. Where additional information is required, the US Census, which is completed
every ten years, is the preferred data source, as it provides the most reliable and in-depth data
for demographic characteristics of a locality. This report uses the 2010 US Census for current
information and the 2000 US Census to track changes since the year 2000. The California
Department of Finance (DOF) is another source of data that is more current than the Census.
However, the DOF does not provide the depth of information that can be found in the US
Census. Whenever possible, the San Luis Obispo County data packet, DOF data, and other local
sources were used in the Housing Needs Assessment in order to provide the most current profile
of the community.
The 2010 US Census did not collect information in several categories that are required for the
Housing Needs Assessment. Where this is the case, historical DOF data is used. Where DOF data
is not available, information from the 2000 US Census is retained. In cases where this is not
feasible or useful, this assessment references US Census Bureau American Community Survey
(ACS) data. The ACS provides estimates of numerous housing-related indictors based on
samples averaged over a five-year period. Whereas the US Census provides complete counts of
various demographic indicators, the ACS provides estimates based on statistically significant
samples. Due to the small size of the sample taken in Grover Beach, the estimates reported by
the ACS have large margins of error. Where ACS data is used, the numbers should not be
interpreted as absolute fact, but rather as a tool to illustrate general proportion or scale.
3.1 Demographic Characteristics
Population
This section provides current and future population information for Grover Beach based on data
from the US Census Bureau and the State of California Department of Finance. According to
DOF estimates, the population for Grover Beach was 13,211 in 2013.
                                                                                               17
Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
The Grover Beach population more than doubled from 1970 to 2000 However, growth has
dramatically slowed since then. Between 2000 and 2010, the City’s population only grew less
than one percent. Annual population estimates from 1970 through 2013 for Grover Beach are
shown in Table 3-1.
                                       Table 3-1 Population Trends
                         Year                      Population            Percentage Change
               1970                                   5,939                       —
               1980                                   8,827                      49%
               1990                                  11,656                      32%
               2000                                  13,067                      12%
               2010                                  13,156                      <1%
               2013                                  13,211                      <1%
             Source: US Census 2000, 2010; DOF E-5 Report
Grover Beach’s population grew about 12 percent from 1990 to 2000 and less than one percent
from 2000 to 2010. For both periods, the population growth in Grover Beach has been below that
of San Luis Obispo County as a whole, which experienced a 14 percent increase in population
from 1990 to 2000 (US Census 2000) and a nine percent increase from 2000 to 2010. See Table 3-2
for a comparison in population trends for Grover Beach and the surrounding communities.
                                Table 3-2 Trends in Population Growth
                                             2000                  2010
                                                                                 Percentage Change
                                          Number                 Number
     Pismo Beach                             8,551                 7,655                -12%
     Grover Beach                           13,067                13,156                 1%
     Arroyo Grande                          15,851                17,252                 9%
     San Luis Obispo County                246,681               269,637                 9%
     Source: US Census 2000, 2010
Table 3-3 shows the change in number of households in Grover Beach between 2000 and 2010,
according to the DOF. Over the 10–year period, the number of households increased by
approximately 2 percent.
                               Table 3-3 Household Growth, 2000–2010
                                               2000        2010
                                            Number        Number       Percentage Change
                   Grover Beach                5,023       5,111              2%
                   Source: US Census 2000, DOF 2010,
Table 3-4 reports the number of households by tenure, a term used to describe renting versus
owning a housing unit, in Grover Beach and in San Luis Obispo County as a whole. It also shows
18

                                                                Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
age by householder, which is another way of illustrating how age is distributed in the City. As
shown, the majority of renters are in the 35 to 44 age range, which is an older age bracket than
the majority of renters in the rest of the County. This may be a product of housing prices in the
City, which will be discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. This may also be a result of the
City having lower cost rentals as compared to the surrounding areas based on the smaller size
and older housing stock within the City.
The majority of owners in Grover Beach are 45 to 59 years of age, with a significant number of
owners also over the age of 75.
                      Table 3-4 Households by Tenure and Age, 2007–2011
                                            San Luis Obispo County                Grover Beach
                                                              Percentage                 Percentage
                                             Number                          Number
                                                                of Total                    of Total
 Total                                       101,993                          5,291
 Owner occupied                               61,628             100%         2,266          100%
 Percent owner occupied                           -               60%            -            43%
 Householder 15 to 24 years                     374                1%           19             1%
 Householder 25 to 34 years                    3,807               6%          144             6%
 Householder 35 to 44 years                    7,718              13%          277            12%
 Householder 45 to 54 years                   13,768              22%          525            23%
 Householder 55 to 59 years                    7,807              13%          317            14%
 Householder 60 to 64 years                    7,469              12%          271            12%
 Householder 65 to 74 years                   10,207              17%          209             9%
 Householder 75 to 84 years                    7,446              12%          388            17%
 Householder 85 years and over                 3,032               5%          116             5%
 Renter occupied                              40,365             100%         3,025          100%
 Percent renter occupied                          -               40%                         57%
 Householder 15 to 24 years                    8,470              21%          327            11%
 Householder 25 to 34 years                    8,798              22%          579            19%
 Householder 35 to 44 years                    6,363              16%          744            25%
 Householder 45 to 54 years                    7,099              18%          596            20%
 Householder 55 to 59 years                    3,318               8%          325            11%
 Householder 60 to 64 years                    1,936               5%          186             6%
 Householder 65 to 74 years                    2,025               5%          122             4%
 Householder 75 to 84 years                    1,351               3%           71             2%
 Householder 85 years and over                 1,005               2%           75             2%
Source: 2007–2011 ACS (B25007)
Population projections for Grover Beach were made in 2011 as part of a countywide study
prepared for the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG). That report shows a range
of potential growth forecasts, from low to high. Table 3-5 shows the low-level population
estimates for both Grover Beach and San Luis Obispo through 2040 which SLOCOG has
                                                                                                     19

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
adopted. Based on these projections, Grover Beach is expected to experience an annual
growth rate of less than half of one percent, which is slightly lower than the County as a whole.
                             Table 3-5 Population Projections, 2010–2040
                                                 2010           2020          2030           2040
           Grover Beach                         12,967         13,432        13,925         14,486
           San Luis Obispo County              269,637        285,106       287,473        309,529
           Source: San Luis Obispo County 2040 Population, Housing & Employment Forecast, August 2011
Estimates for household growth in this report were only conducted for subregions, so data
specific to Grover Beach was not available. Table 3-6 shows the low-level estimated household
growth in the incorporated South County, which includes Grover Beach.
                             Table 3-6 Household Projections, 2010–2040
                                            2010           2020          2030          2040
                 South County              37,687         39,376        41,412        43,730
                Source: San Luis Obispo County 2040 Population, Housing & Employment Forecast,
                August 2011
Age Characteristics
According to 2010 Census data, Grover Beach residents had a median age of 36.9 years in
2010, slightly lower than the median age in San Luis Obispo County of 38 years. The largest
growth in the Grover Beach population occurred in the 55 to 59 year cohort. This age group
represented 7 percent of the population in 2010, having grown over 66 percent during the
previous decade. The 60 to 64 year cohort increased by approximately 47 percent, while the 35
to 44 cohort shrank by nearly 22 percent. There was also a 28 percent growth in the population
of those 85 years of age or older, a group with specialized needs. Table 3-7 provides a summary
of the population by age group for 2000 and 2010.
20

                                                               Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                                   Table 3-7 Trends in Population Age
                                           2000                   2010            Percentage
             Age Group
                                   Persons   Percentage   Persons   Percentage     Change
       Under 5 years                  910         7%         873          7%          -4%
       5 to 9 years                   956         7%         794          6%         -17%
       10 to 14 years                 938         7%         774          6%         -17%
       15 to 19 years                 859         7%         843          6%          -2%
       20 to 24 years                 871         7%         908          7%           4%
       25 to 34 years                1,953       15%        2,057        16%           5%
       35 to 44 years                2,233       17%        1,752        13%         -22%
       45 to 54 years                1,807       14%        1,973        15%           9%
       55 to 59 years                 563         4%         936          7%          66%
       60 to 64 years                 472         4%         694          5%          47%
       65 to 74 years                 818         6%         821          6%           0%
       75 to 84 years                 521         4%         518          4%          -1%
       85 years and over              166         1%         213          2%          28%
       Total                        13,067      100%       13,156       100%          1%
      Source: US Census 2000, 2010
Employment
Employment of Grover Beach residents was spread over a number of sectors in both 2000 and
2010. However, there were some major shifts in workers in each sector over that time. As is true of
many communities over the last decade, employment in the Wholesale Trade and
Manufacturing sectors declined, while jobs in the Professional and Retail sectors increased in
Grover Beach. Overall, employment across all industries increased by 20 percent during this
period. See Table 3-8 for Grover Beach industry trends (note that the table shows only employed
civilians 16 years and older).
                                                                                                 21
Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
               Table 3-8 Industry Trends of Employed Grover Beach Residents
                                           2000                   2010            Percentage
          Employment Sector
                                    Number   Percentage   Number    Percentage      Change
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing and
                                      138       2.20%       120           2%         -13%
 hunting, and mining
 Construction                         489       7.70%       386           6%         -21%
 Manufacturing                        426       6.70%       174           3%         -59%
 Wholesale trade                      198       3.10%        78           1%         -61%
 Retail trade                         819       12.90%     1,111         17%          36%
 Transportation and warehousing,
                                      351       5.50%       241           4%         -31%
 and utilities
 Information                          n/a         n/a       180           3%           —
 Finance and insurance, and real
                                      377       6.00%       303           5%         -20%
 estate and rental and leasing
 Professional, scientific, and
 management, and administrative       539       8.50%       803          13%          49%
 and waste management services
 Educational services, and health
                                     1,172      18.50%     1,344         21%          15%
 care and social assistance
 Arts, entertainment, and
 recreation, and accommodation        930       14.70%      857          13%          -8%
 and food services
 Other services, except public
                                      411       6.50%       418           7%           2%
 administration
 Public administration                336       5.30%       366           6%           9%
 Total                               5,326       100%      6,381        100%         20%
Source: 2007–2011ACS (DP-03)
Table 3-9 provides information on median income for the most common industries within which
Grover Beach residents work. The greatest number of employed residents were in the
Educational services, and Health Care and Social Assistance industry in 2011, with a median
income of $33,733. The lowest median income among the top industries in Grover Beach are the
Arts and Entertainment-related and Other services industries, both with less than $16,000 in
median income.
22

                                                                      Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
       Table 3-9 Annual Median Income for Top Industries of Grover Beach Residents
                                  Industry                                     Number         Median Income
 Educational services, and health care and social assistance                     1,323           $33,733
 Retail trade                                                                    1,134           $16,722
 Professional, scientific, and management, and administrative                     775            $27,404
 Arts, entertainment, and recreation, and accommodation                           763            $15,846
 Other services, except public administration                                     407            $15,231
 Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                                    362            $71,316
 Construction                                                                     336            $45,156
 Manufacturing                                                                    288            $37,941
 Public administration                                                            277            $48,052
 Finance and insurance, and real estate                                           225            $37,404
 Information                                                                      209            $47,048
 Total employed population                                                       6,306           $31,147
Source: 2007–2011 ACS (B24031)
Estimates for future employment by industry were made in 2011 as part of a countywide study
prepared for SLOCOG. That report shows a range of potential growth forecasts, from low to
high. Table 3-10 shows the mid-level countywide estimates for each industry and the expected
annual growth rate. The professional and business service industry and the transportation and
warehousing industries are expected to the see the most annual growth through 2040, while
manufacturing, information, and financial activities are expected to decline.
              Table 3-10 San Luis Obispo County Industry Projections, 2010–2040
                                                                                                   Percentage
                     Industry                         2010       2020        2030          2040
                                                                                                     Change
 Mining, Logging, and Construction                   4,900      5,200        5,300         5,400       0.32%
 Manufacturing                                       5,800       5,600       5,300         5,000      -0.49%
 Wholesale Trade                                     2,500       2,900       3,300         3,700       1.32%
 Retail Trade                                       12,900      14,400      15,600        16,900       0.90%
 Utilities                                           2,000       2,200       2,300         2,500       0.75%
 Transportation and Warehousing                      1,500       1,800       2,100         2,400       1.58%
 Information                                         1,200       1,200       1,200         1,100      -0.29%
 Financial Activities                                3,900       3,900       3,800         3,700      -0.18%
 Professional and Business Services                  9,800      11,600      13,400        15,600       1.56%
 Education Services, Health Care and
 Social Assistance                                  11,300      13,300      15,300        17,500       1.47%
 Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                 1,500       1,700       1,900         2,100       1.13%
 Accommodation                                       3,500       4,200       4,400         4,900       1.13%
 Food Services and Drinking Places                   9,700      11,000      12,100        13,400       1.08%
 Other Services                                      4,500       5,000       5,400         5,900       0.91%
 Government                                         20,900      22,900      24,300        25,800       0.70%
 Total                                              95,900     106,700     115,700       125,800      0.91%
Source: San Luis Obispo County 2040 Population, Housing & Employment Forecast, August 2011
                                                                                                             23

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
Household Income
The 2014 median income figure published by HCD for San Luis Obispo County is $75,400 for a
family of four.
According to the Census, Grover Beach household income kept pace with inflation and
increased 29 percent in the period from 2000 to 2010. The most significant increase was in the
group with an income of $100,000 or more, especially for those who make over $200,000. This
income group grew by 181 percent (see Table 3-11 for trends in household income).
                     Table 3-11 Household Income Groups in Grover Beach
                                  Grover Beach 2000          Grover Beach 2010       Percentage
       Income Group            Households   Percentage   Households    Percentage      Change
 Less than $10,000                 337           7%           219           4%          -35%
 $10,000 to $14,999                341           7%           448           9%           31%
 $15,000 to $24,999                753          15%           698          13%           -7%
 $25,000 to $34,999                716          14%           515          10%          -28%
 $35,000 to $49,999               1,040         21%           739          14%          -29%
 $50,000 to $74,999               1,022         20%          1,104         21%            8%
 $75,000 to $99,999                416           8%           661          13%           59%
 $100,000 to $149,999              224           5%           510          10%          128%
 $150,000 to $199,999              101           2%           172           3%           70%
 $200,000 or more                   50           1%           141           3%          181%
 Total Households                 5,000        100%          5,207        100%            4%
 Median Household
                                 $38,087         —          $49,010         —            29%
 Income
Source: US Census 2000, 2010
The State of California publishes annual income limits for each county that are used to
determine eligibility for assisted housing programs within that county. The California Health and
Safety Code requires that the State limits for the low-, very low-, and extremely low-income
categories will be the same as those in the equivalent levels established by the US Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for its Section 8 program. Table 3-12 illustrates the
number of households in Grover Beach in each HCD income group based on 2007–2011 ACS
Five-Year Estimates. Nearly 37 percent of all households fall into the above moderate-income
category. However, 57% of the City’s households have extremely low, very low or low incomes.
24

                                                                        Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                    Table 3-12 Households by Income Group in Grover Beach
                                                       Owner             Renter       Households
          Income Group                 Income                                                          Percentage
                                                     Households      Households           Total
Extremely Low
(Below 30% of Median                  <$17,350           355               681            1,036             20%
Income)
Very Low                              $17,350–
                                                         241               632              873             17%
(30–50% of Median Income)              $28,949
Low                                   $28,950–
                                                         426               626            1,052             20%
(50–80% of Median Income)              $46,299
Moderate                              $46,300–
                                                         308               427              735             14%
(80–120% of Median Income)             $69,500
Above Moderate
(Over 120% of Median                  >$69,500          1,058              501            1,559             29%
Income)
        Total Households                                2,388             2,867           5,255            100%
Source: HCD 2013; 2007–2011 ACS Five-Year Estimates (Table B25118)
Note: Estimates are based on 2010 income distribution data as reported in the 2007–2011 ACS Five-Year Estimates (Table
B25118).
Commute
Commute distance is an important factor in housing availability and affordability and is also an
indicator of jobs/housing balance. Communities with extended commute distances generally
have a poor jobs/housing balance, while those with short average commutes tend to have a
strong jobs/housing balance. The burden of the additional costs associated with extended
commuting disproportionately affects lower-income households who must spend a larger
portion of their overall income on fuel. This in turn affects a household’s ability to occupy decent
housing without being overburdened by cost. Table 3-13 indicates that the vast majority of
Grover Beach residents travel less than 30 minutes from home to work. This figure indicates that
many of the jobs are within 20 miles of the City and that there is a strong jobs/housing balance,
meaning that the available jobs are within relatively close distance to the employees’ places of
residence.
                                     Table 3-13 Travel Time to Work
                                 Travel Time to Work                      Percentage
                        Less than 30 minutes                                   81%
                        30 to 59 minutes                                       16%
                        60 or more minutes                                      3%
                        Total                                                 100%
                        Source: ACS 2008–2012 Five-Year Estimates Household Characteristics
                                                                                                                   25

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
3.2 Housing Conditions
Grover Beach had 5,757 housing units in 2013, according to DOF, representing a seven percent
increase in the number of units in the City from 2000 to 2013. The majority of housing units in
Grover Beach are single-family houses, which account for 72 percent of all housing units. Refer
to Table 3-14 for information on housing units by type in Grover Beach.
                                   Table 3-14 Trends in Housing Type
                                                              2000                           2013
                Housing Type
                                                      Units       Percentage           Units   Percentage
   Single-Family Detached                             3,060             57%           3,393        59%
   Single-Family Attached                              784              15%             736        13%
   Multiple Family 2–4 Units                           701              13%             871        15%
   Multiple Family 5–19 Units                          447               8%
                                                                                        549        10%
   Multiple Family 20+ Units                           130               2%
   Mobile Homes                                        222               4%             208         3%
                                                                                       Not
   Other (e.g., RV park)                                24              <1%                        N/A
                                                                                    reported
   Total                                              5,368            100%           5,757       100%
  Source: US Census 2000, DOF 2013
The age and structural condition of the City’s housing stock is an indicator of the quality of
existing housing. Table 3-15 identifies the age of homes in the City.
Housing over 30 years old is more likely to be dilapidated and in need of repairs and upgrades.
Over 55 percent of housing stock in Grover Beach was built prior to 1980 and is over 35 years old.
                                    Table 3-15 Housing Units by Age
                                  Year Built                Units          Percentage
                            2000–2014                       611                 10%
                            1990–2000                       894                 15%
                            1980–1999                      1,193                20%
                            1970–1979                      1,358                22%
                            1960–1969                       811                 14%
                            1940–1959                       949                 16%
                            1939 or earlier                 163                  3%
                            Total                          5,979               100%
                           Source: US Census 2000, 2008-2012 ACS, City of Grover Beach 2014
A residential survey of homes to identify substandard or dilapidated and deteriorated structures
was conducted by City staff in August 2003. Staff used specific State criteria for this survey. Less
than two percent of the housing stock was identified as dilapidated or deteriorated. A
dilapidated dwelling unit does not provide safe and adequate shelter and its condition may
26

                                                                Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
endanger the health, safety, and well-being of the occupants. Such housing has one or more
critical defects, has a combination of intermediate defects of sufficient number or extent to
require considerable repair or rebuilding; or it is of inadequate original construction. The defects
in a dilapidated unit are either so critical or so widespread that the structure should be
extensively repaired, rebuilt, or torn down.
A deteriorated dwelling unit needs more repair than would be provided in the course of regular
maintenance. Such housing has one or more defects that must be corrected if the unit is to
continue to provide safe and adequate shelter. Examples of intermediate defects include:
holes, open cracks; rotten, loose or missing materials over a small area of the foundation, walls,
roof or ceiling; shaky or unsafe porch steps or railings; broken or missing window panes, rotten or
loose window frames; sashes that are no longer rain-proof or wind-proof; broken or loose stair
treads or loose or missing risers, loose or missing banisters or railing of stairs; deep wear on the
door sills, door frames, outside steps or floors; missing brick or cracks in the chimney that are not
serious enough to be fire hazards; and makeshift chimneys, such as a stove pipe or other
uninsulated pipe leading directly from the stove to the outside through a hole in the roof, wall or
window. Such defects are signs of neglect that lead to serious structural deterioration or
damage if not corrected.
The 2003 survey identified a minimum of 69 housing units (less than one percent of the housing
stock) that are deteriorated and should be rehabilitated. However, the survey data is outdated
and the number of deteriorated units may have increased.
Overall, housing conditions have remained the same or improved since 2003, as a number of
new housing projects removed dilapidated housing. Staff does not believe that there is a serious
issue with housing conditions in the City. As a result, the City recognizes the need to update
information regarding the condition of the City’s housing stock and shall undertake a housing
condition survey prior to completion of the 6th cycle Housing Element update (see Program 5.1).
Tenure and Vacancy
Housing tenure refers to the occupancy of a housing unit—whether the unit is owner-occupied
or renter-occupied. Housing tenure is influenced by demographic factors (e.g., household
income, composition, and age of the householder), as well as the cost of housing. The inventory
of housing units in Grover Beach is fairly equally divided between owner and renter groups, with
43 percent owner-occupied and 57 percent renter-occupied units. Table 3-16 provides the total
number of housing units, sorted by tenure (owner- versus renter-occupied), in Grover Beach. Of
note is that between 2000 and 2010, the City’s housing stock went from a majority of owner-
occupied units to a majority of renter-occupied units.
                                                                                                   27

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                                  Table 3-16 Trends in Housing Tenure
                                                 2000                      2010
                    Tenure
                                        Number      Percentage     Number     Percentage
          Owner                           2,539          51%         2,219         43%
          Renter                          2,471          49%         2,981         57%
          Total Occupied Units            5,010         100%         5,200        100%
         Source: US Census 2000, 2010
The “market vacancy rate” is an important indicator for determining shortages and surpluses in
the housing market. This term refers to the number of vacant units that are for sale or rent as a
percentage of the market (all occupied units and all vacant units for sale or rent). According to
“Raising the Roof, California Housing Development Projections and Constraints, 1997–2020,” the
desirable vacancy rate in a community is considered to be 5 percent. Generally, when the
vacancy rate drops below 5 percent, the demand for housing exceeds the supply of housing.
Subsequently, prospective buyers and renters may experience an increase in housing costs.
In areas with a substantial number of second homes or seasonal units, such as Grover Beach, a
total vacancy rate of between 6 and 7 percent is necessary to ensure sufficient market
vacancies, because other vacant units typically account for about 2 to 3 percent of the housing
stock. In 2010, Grover Beach had a vacancy rate of 11 percent, a 57 percent increase since
2000. Of vacant units, approximately 53 percent were for seasonal, recreational, or occasional
use. See Table 3-17 for vacant units by type.
                                     Table 3-17 Vacant Units by Type
                                                             2000                     2010
                                                      Number   Percentage   Number      Percentage
 For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use          211        59%        329           53%
 For rent                                                69        19%        114           19%
 Rented or sold, not occupied                            17        5%          31           5%
 For sale only                                           22        6%          56           9%
 Other vacant                                            40        11%         86           14%
 Total Vacant Units                                     359       100%        616          100%
 Percentage of All Housing Units                         —         7%          —            11%
Source: US Census 2000, 2010
At-Risk Dwelling Units
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583(a)(8), this section of the Housing Element analyzes
existing assisted housing developments that are eligible to change from low-income housing
uses during the next ten years due to termination of subsidy contracts, mortgage prepayment,
or expiration of restrictions on use.
The City has participated in development of an affordable housing project that includes eleven
single-family residences in the Santa Carmela development. For this project, the City assisted the
developer with incentives and use of the CDBG program. Finances obtained through this
28

                                                              Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
program made it possible for the City to be a silent second mortgage holder (with specific
terms) for low-income first-time homebuyers. These units are not at risk of converting to market
rate within the next ten years.
Grover Beach has the following deed-restricted units. However, none of these units are assisted,
and they are not known to be at risk of converting to market rate within the next ten years.
        #1:     248 North 14th Street (16-unit development) – Two units were anticipated to be
                sold to very low-income households. However, the property owner decided to
                keep the units and rent them instead of selling (rented to very low-income
                households).
        #2:     178 South 4th Street (9-unit development) – Two units were anticipated to be sold
                to moderate-income households. However, the property owner decided to keep
                the units and rent them instead of selling (rented to moderate-income
                households).
        #3:     367 South 7th (6-unit development) – One unit sold to moderate-income buyer.
        #4:     1510 Brighton Avenue (12-unit development) – Five new for-sale townhomes/PUDs
                and rehabilitation of an existing seven unit apartment development. Three
                apartments were identified for moderate income households.
        #5:     South 9th and Farroll Road (11-unit development) – The Santa Carmela
                development is an 11 units development. Two units remain at moderate income.
        #6:     506 Longbranch Avenue (4-unit development) – This Habitat for Humanity
                development consists of four units for very-low income households.
On the for-sale unit listed above (#3), if the buyer sells the difference between the market rate
and restricted sale amount is split between the City and the property owner 75 percent (City)
and 25 percent (property owner).
The City of Grover Beach currently has 135 households using Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers
issued through the Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo.
Overcrowding
Overcrowding can occur when housing costs are so high relative to income that families double
up or reside in smaller units, which tend to be more affordable, to devote income to other basic
living needs. Households with more than one person per room are considered overcrowded.
According to 2011 five-year ACS information, 6 percent of owner-occupied households and 4
percent of renter-occupied households in Grover Beach have one or more persons per room
and thus are considered overcrowded. See Table 3-18 for information on the number of
occupants per room. Overcrowding is not an issue in Grover Beach.
                                                                                               29

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                          Table 3-18 Occupants per Room in Grover Beach
                                              Owner Occupied           Renter Occupied
               Occupants per Room
                                            2011     Percentage      2011       Percentage
            0.50 or less                    1,710        75%         1,718          57%
            0.51 to 1.00                     420         19%         1,199          40%
            1.01 to 1.51                     106          5%           68           2%
            1.51 or more                      30          1%           40           1%
            Total                           2,266       100%         3,025         100%
          Source: 2007–2011 ACS (B25014)
Regional Housing Needs Plan
The San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) adopted a Regional Housing Needs
Plan (RHNP) in June 2013. The RHNP provides the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for
the unincorporated county and the cities in the SLOCOG region. State law requires that the
RHNA for an area be divided into four income groups. The income groups are defined as
percentages of county median income groups as follows.
         Very Low Income – up to 50 percent of the area median family income
         Low Income – between the very low-income limit and 80 percent of the area median
         family income
         Moderate Income – between the low-income limit and 120 percent of the area median
         family income
         Above Moderate Income – exceeding the moderate income limit adjusted for household
         size
Household income limits are adjusted by household size. For 2014, the median family income
(MFI) for San Luis Obispo County was $75,400 for a family of four. Using the above-mentioned
definitions, the income limits for a family of four in San Luis Obispo County were calculated and
are listed in Table 3-19. While the RHNA does not include the extremely low-income category (30
percent or less of median family income), the State requires that the City include this income
category in the overall analysis.
                     Table 3-19 San Luis Obispo County HCD Income Limits
    Persons in          Extremely        Very Low         Lower         Median          Moderate
       Family         Low Income         Income         Income          Income           Income
  1                      $15,850          $26,400        $42,250         $52,800         $63,350
  2                      $18,100          $30,200        $48,250         $60,300         $72,400
  3                      $20,350          $33,950        $54,300         $67,850         $81,450
  4                      $22,600          $37,700        $60,300         $75,400         $90,500
  5                      $24,450          $40,750        $65,150         $81,450         $97,750
  6                      $26,250          $43,750        $69,950         $87,450        $105,000
  7                      $28,050          $46,750        $74,800         $93,500        $112,200
  8                      $29,850          $49,800        $79,600         $99,550        $119,450
 Source: HCD 2014
30

                                                                  Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
The housing allocation distributed by income group for Grover Beach over the 2014–2019
planning period is 165 dwelling units, or an average of 33 units per year. See Table 3-20 for the
allocation.
                            Table 3-20 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
                              Income Group              Housing Units    Percentage
                      Extremely Low                          20              12%
                      Very Low                               21              13%
                      Lower                                  26              16%
                      Moderate                               29              17%
                      Above Moderate                         69              42%
                      Total                                 165             100%
                    Source: SLOCOG 2013
Housing Costs
According to the 2010 Census, the median home value in Grover Beach was $402,800. Current
information, provided by DQNews Reports, indicates that sales prices have dropped since 2010,
with the median sales price in 2012 at $290,500 but rose again in 2013 to $335,000. As of January
2014, the median home sales price was $365,000, a nine percent increase over the previous year
in the same month. Grover Beach home prices have consistently remained below the San Luis
Obispo County median. See Table 3-21 for Grover Beach median home prices over recent
years.
                           Table 3-21 Median Home Sales Price 2000–2014
                              Year             Median Price     Percentage Change
                       2000                      $284,800                —
                       2010                      $402,800               41%
                       2012                      $290,500              -28%
                       2013                      $335,000               15%
                       2014                      $365,000                9%
                      Source: US Census 2010; DQNews
According to the Census, the median gross rent in Grover Beach was $760 in 2010. To determine
the 2014 market rent, a point-in-time survey was conducted of 51 listings on two popular online
rental listing sites, Craigslist and Padmapper. The survey indicated that early 2014 rental prices in
Grover Beach range from a median of $650 for studio units to $1,300 for two-bedroom units to
$2,600 for four-bedroom units. See Table 3-22 for typical rental prices by the number of
bedrooms in the unit.
                                                                                                  31

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                       Table 3-22 Typical Rental Prices by Bedroom Count
   Number of Bedrooms               Median             High      Low     Number of Units Surveyed
  Studio                               $650            $775      $240               4
  1 bedroom                            $900           $1,325     $800              14
  2 bedrooms                         $1,300           $2,000     $995              26
  3 bedrooms                         $1,698           $2,500    $1,650              5
  4 bedrooms                         $2,600           $3,400    $1,950              2
Source: Padmapper and Craigslist, retrieved February 2014
Overpayment
Overpayment compares the total shelter cost for a household to the ability of that household to
pay. Specifically, overpayment is defined as monthly shelter costs in excess of 30 percent of a
household’s income. Shelter cost is defined as the monthly owner costs (mortgages, deed of
trust, contracts to purchase or similar debts on the property and taxes, insurance on the
property, and utilities) or the gross rent (contract rent plus the estimated average monthly cost
of utilities).
Related to the high housing costs in Grover Beach, the number of households overpaying for
housing continues to make up a significant percentage of total households. According to data
provided by the 2010 Census, 48 percent of owners and 72 percent of renters in Grover Beach
are using more than 30 percent of their monthly income to pay for housing costs. This is a
dramatic increase from 2000 when only 30 and 48 percent were overpaying, respectively. See
Table 3-23 for housing costs as a percentage of income for owners and renters.
                   Table 3-23 Households Overpaying by Income and Tenure
                           Extremely          Very                       Above                Lower
        Household                                         Low  Moderate             Total
                               Low            Low                       Moderate             Income
 Ownership
                               355            241         426    308      1,058     2,387      1,022
 Households
 Overpaying owner
                               217            130         138    255       223       963        485
 households
 Percentage of
                             61.1%           53.9%       32.3%  82.8%     21.1%     40.3%     47.5%
 overpaying owners
 Renter Households             681            632         626    427       501      2,868      1,940
 Overpaying renter
                               628            521         247    221         0      1,617      1,396
 households
 Percentage of
                             92.2%           82.4%       39.4%  51.8%      0.0%     56.4%     72.0%
 overpaying renters
 Total Households             1,036           873        1,052   735      1,559     5,255      2,961
 Overpaying
                               845            651         385    476       223      2,580      1,881
 households
 Percentage of
 overpaying                  81.5%           74.6%       36.6%  64.8%     14.3%     49.1%     63.5%
 households
Source: 2007–2011 ACS (B25106)
32

                                                                           Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
Housing Affordability
Housing affordability in Grover Beach can be inferred by comparing the cost of renting or
owning a home with the income levels of households of different sizes. Table 3-24 shows the
annual income ranges for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households and the maximum
affordable payment based on the standard of 30 percent (as defined by HUD) of monthly
household income going toward housing costs.
                                       Table 3-24 Housing Affordability
                                                                                                  Maximum
                              HCD Income Limits                Monthly Housing Costs
                                                                                              Affordable Price
     Income
                        Maximum           Affordable                         Taxes and
      Group                                                                                Ownership    Monthly
                          Annual         Total Monthly        Utilities1   Insurance (for        2       Rental3
                         Income            Payment                         homeowners)
 Extremely Low
 One Person               $15,850             $396               $75               $31       $82,839      $321
 Two Person               $18,100             $453              $100               $41       $91,950      $353
 Three Person             $20,350             $509              $125               $51       $98,931      $384
 Four Person              $22,600             $565              $150               $61      $107,804      $415
 Very Low
 One Person               $26,400             $660               $75               $71      $122,788      $585
 Two Person               $30,200             $755              $100               $86      $137,773      $655
 Three Person             $33,950             $849              $125              $101      $152,560      $724
 Four Person              $37,700             $943              $150              $116      $165,770      $793
 Low
 One Person               $42,250            $1,056              $75              $131      $185,289      $981
 Two Person               $48,250            $1,206             $100              $160      $200,000     $1,106
 Three Person             $54,300            $1,357             $125              $189      $232,806     $1,233
 Four Person              $60,300            $1,507             $150              $218      $256,465     $1,358
 Moderate
 One Person               $63,350            $1,584              $75              $256      $268,492     $1,509
 Two Person               $72,400            $1,810             $100              $303      $304,179     $1,710
 Three Person             $81,450            $2,036             $125              $350      $339,866     $1,911
 Four Person              $90,500            $2,262             $150              $397      $375,553     $2,113
Sources: Realtor.com; HCD; PMC 2014
Notes:
1. Monthly utility costs are assumed as $75 per person and $25 for each additional person.
2. Total affordable mortgage based a 10% down payment, an annual 5% interest rate, 30-year mortgage, and monthly
payment equal to 30% of income (after utilities, taxes, and insurance).
3. Monthly affordable rent based on 30% of income less estimated utilities costs.
When comparing affordability figures with current median home prices, it is evident that only
moderate-income or above households can afford to own a single-family home of average
price on the market in Grover Beach. Low- and moderate-income households of four could
afford to rent a market-priced two-bedroom apartment. Only a family with a moderate or
above moderate income could afford a market-priced rental unit with more than two
                                                                                                               33
Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
bedrooms. Low- and extremely low-income households cannot afford to rent market-rate units
without potential overpayment or overcrowding.
3.3 Special Housing Needs
This section reviews the characteristics of households with special housing needs, including
disabled persons, the elderly, large families, farmworkers, and female-headed households.
Emergency housing needs, transitional housing, farmworker housing, employee housing, and
homelessness are also addressed in this section.
Disabled Households
Since there is no DOF, 2010 US Census, or reliable ACS data, 2000 US Census information is used
for this analysis. The 2000 Census identified 4,128 persons with disabilities in Grover Beach.
Disabled persons represent about 32 percent of the total population. See Table 3-25 for a list of
persons with disabilities by type.
                           Table 3-25 Persons with Disabilities by Type
                    Total disabilities for people 5 to 64 years    2,966     72%
                 Sensory disability                                 270       9%
                 Physical disability                                711      24%
                 Mental disability                                  505      17%
                 Self-care disability                               229       8%
                 Go-outside-home disability                         368      12%
                 Employment disability                              883      30%
                 Total disabilities for people 65 years and over   1,162     28%
                 Sensory disability                                 185      16%
                 Physical disability                                413      35%
                 Mental disability                                  158      14%
                 Self-care disability                               137      12%
                 Go-outside-home disability                         269      23%
                 Total disabilities for all ages                   4,128    100%
                Source: US Census 2000
Among the disabled population, 2,355 persons had a work, mobility, or self-care limitation.
Approximately 19 percent of the population with this type of disability was between the ages of
21 and 64. See Table 3-26 for disability information by age.
        Table 3-26 Persons with Work, Mobility, and Self-Care Limitations by Age
                             Age                 Number          Percentage
                   5 to 20 years                   275               9.5%
                   21 to 64 years                 1,448             18.8%
                   65 years and over               632              42.9%
                 Source: US Census 2000
34
                                                              Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
There are two major housing needs facing disabled persons: the need for housing that meets
particular physical needs (wheelchair accessible, etc.) and financial needs. Because of limited
job opportunities for the disabled, their incomes are often below the median income.
Physically disabled persons generally require more modifications to housing units, such as
wheelchair ramps, elevators in multi-story buildings, wide doorways, accessible cabinetry, and
modified fixtures and appliances. If the disability prevents the person from operating a vehicle,
then proximity to services and public transportation is particularly important. Severely physically
disabled persons may also require nursing or care facilities.
The physical modification of housing is not necessary to accommodate mentally disabled
persons; however, they will generally require special services and monetary support. Since jobs
and incomes are often limited for such individuals, affordable housing is important. Group homes
with a live-in resident assistant may be one solution to provide the mentally disabled with
affordable housing.
Developmental Disabilities
Senate Bill (SB) 812 requires the City to include the needs of individuals with a developmental
disability within the community in the special housing needs analysis. According to Section 4512
of the Welfare and Institutions Code, a “developmental disability” means a disability that
originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue,
indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which includes mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently in a conventional
housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional
environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because
developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the
developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an
appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The California Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-
based services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their
families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two
community-based facilities. The Tri-Counties Regional Center is one of 21 regional centers in
California that provides point of entry to services for people with developmental disabilities. The
center is a private, nonprofit community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a
wide range of services to individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. Table 3-27
provides information about Grover Beach’s population of developmentally disabled persons;
Table 3-28 provides information about those persons’ place of residence.
                                                                                                  35

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                      Table 3-27 Developmentally Disabled Residents by Age
                                      14–21            22–51
    Zip Code       0–13 Years                                      52–61 Years      62+ Years   Total
                                      Years            Years
  93433                 28               21              32                9            2        92
Source: San Luis Obispo County 5th Cycle Housing Element Data Packet, 2013
                     Table 3-28 Developmentally Disabled by Residence Type
                 Community             Home           Intermediate        Independent
  Zip Code                                                                                Other  Total
                    Care        Parent/Guardian        Care Facility         Living
  93433               2                  69                  6                 16           0      93
Source: San Luis Obispo County 5th Cycle Housing Element Data Packet, 2013
A number of housing types are appropriate for people living with a development disability: rent-
subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary housing, Section 8
vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962 homes (adult
residential facilities for persons with special health care needs). The design of housing-
accessibility modifications, the proximity to services and transit, and the availability of group
living opportunities represent some of the types of considerations that are important in serving
this need group. Incorporating “barrier-free” design in all new multi-family housing (as required
by California and federal fair housing laws) is especially important to provide the widest range of
choices for disabled residents. Special consideration should also be given to the affordability of
housing, as people with disabilities may be living on a fixed income. Program 4.5 addresses the
needs of those with developmental disabilities.
Elderly Households
An analysis of housing needs of the elderly is important for at least three major reasons:
      •  Many elderly persons have fixed incomes.
      •  Many elderly persons live alone in a three- or four-bedroom house.
      •  Many elderly persons have mobility and health problems.
A total of 981 households (19.5 percent of total population) in Grover Beach are headed by
persons 65 years of age or older. As shown in Table 3-29, 713 of those are owner-occupied
households (24 percent of owner occupied) and 268 are renter-occupied households (9 percent
of renter occupied) headed by persons 65 years or older. Total household numbers vary slightly
in different tables due to slight differences in data collection techniques in different data sets.
36

                                                               Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                                     Table 3-29 Householder by Age
                                            Owner Occupied            Renter Occupied
                  Age
                                        Number              %         %              %
        15 to 24 years                      19              1%       327            14%
        25 to 34 years                     144              6%       579            26%
        35 to 44 years                     277             12%       744            33%
        45 to 54 years                     525             23%       596            26%
        55 to 64 years                     588             26%       511            23%
        65 years and over                  713             24%       268             9%
        65 to 74 years                     209              9%       122             5%
        75 to 84                           388             17%        71             3%
        85 years and over                  116              5%        75             3%
       Source: 2007-2011 ACS, Five-Year Estimates (B25007)
Elderly housing needs include affordable housing that is close to commercial shopping areas,
medical facilities, and public transportation services. As seniors are less able to keep up with
demands of larger home ownership and thus, seek apartments, condominiums, or mobile
homes, the housing units they vacate may represent housing stock that could be available to
other buyers. The City has identified the Central Business and Central Business Open Zones as
appropriate locations for senior housing to encourage the development of affordable senior
housing by offering incentives such as density bonuses and relaxed parking standards.
Farmworkers
The 2007–2011 ACS identified 9,175 persons 16 years of age or older employed in farming,
forestry, and fishing occupations in San Luis Obispo County, which represents less than 4 percent
of the population over the age of 16 in the County. Most agricultural land in southern San Luis
Obispo County is in the unincorporated areas. The percentage of individuals employed in
agriculture is likely much lower in urban areas, including Grover Beach. Therefore, the number of
farm laborers in Grover Beach is likely very small. Thus, it has been determined that there is no
identified need for farmworker housing.
If this type of housing becomes an identified need, there is one zoning designation, Urban
Reserve, where this type of housing is allowed.
Large Families and Female Heads of Household
State law identifies large families with children and female-headed households as having special
needs due to their income challenges, child-care expenses, and need for affordable housing.
Female-headed families generally need affordable housing that is in close proximity to child-
care services, educational and employment opportunities, and available social services.
According to 2011 ACS data, 14.7 percent (492 householders) of the householders in the city are
single mothers. Because the earning power of women is generally less than that of men, single
mothers may have more difficulty in finding affordable housing and child-care services. In 2011
                                                                                               37

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
in Grover Beach, 2 percent (75 householders) of female-headed householders were below the
poverty line. See Table 3-30 for a breakdown of the female-headed householder composition in
Grover Beach.
                    Table 3-30 Female-Headed Householders in Grover Beach
                               Householder Type                         Number     Percentage
        Female householder, no children                                   284           8%
        Female householder with children under 18                         492          15%
        Total female-headed households                                    776          23%
        Total householders                                               3,358        100%
        Total families below the poverty level                            271           8%
        Female-headed households below the poverty level                   75           2%
      Source: 2007–2011 ACS (B17012)
A household with five or more persons is considered to be a large family household. In 2011, 5
percent of all households were considered large families. Most of the large households are
owner-occupied households, accounting for 8 percent of owner-occupied households; less than
1 percent of renter-occupied households were considered to be large families. See Table 3-31
for household size, sorted by tenure. Total household numbers vary slightly in different tables due
to slight differences in data collection techniques in different data sets.
                      Table 3-31 Household Size by Tenure in Grover Beach
                                1–4 Persons              5+ Persons                   Total
                                     Percentage               Percentage                 Percentage
                         Number         of All    Number         of All       Number        of All
                                     Households               Households                 Households
  Owner
                          2,086          39%        180            8%          2,266         43%
  Occupied
  Renter Occupied         2,927          56%         98           <1%          3,025         57%
  Total                   5,013          95%        278           5%           5,291        100%
Source: 2007–2011 ACS (B25009)
Housing Problems
According to Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data (Table 3-32), there
were 485 owner households and 990 renter households earning less than 50 percent of the Area
Median Income (AMI) in the City in 2010. Approximately 73 percent of these lower-income
renter-occupied households were identified as having at least one of four housing problems
(which include incomplete kitchen facilities, incomplete plumbing facilities, more than one
person per room, and a cost burden greater than 30%). Conversely, approximately 45 percent
of lower-income owner-occupied households experienced at least one of those four housing
problems. It is important to note that, similar to ACS data, the CHAS dataset uses small samples
and is subject to large margins of error and therefore may have totals and percentages that are
slightly different than other data sources used in this document.
38

                                                                       Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                       Table 3-32 Housing Problems for All Households
                                               At least one       Percent of               Percent of
                                                                              No housing
                                            severe housing          Total                    Total
                                                                               problems
                                                 problem         Households               Households
Renter Occupied Units
0-30% AMI                                           425               8%          125          2%
30-50% AMI                                          295               6%          145          3%
50-80% AMI                                           75               1%          450          9%
80-100% AMI                                          20               0%          305          6%
Total Renter Occupied Households                    835              16%         1,865        36%
Owner Occupied Units
0-30% AMI                                           120               2%           90          2%
30-50% AMI                                          100               2%          175          3%
50-80% AMI                                          110               2%          210          4%
80-100% AMI                                         220               4%          145          3%
Total Owner Occupied Households                     700              13%         1,805        35%
Source: Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) 2010
Homelessness
A point-in-time count of homeless persons and a separate point-in-time count of homeless
households were prepared for San Luis Obispo County in 2013 through HUD’s Continuum of Care
Homeless Assistance Programs. The Homelessness Count Report does not supply data on the city
level but does supply data for the South County region, which includes Grover Beach along with
Pismo Beach, Oceano, Arroyo Grande, and Nipomo. The count identified 2,186 persons and
1,539 homeless households in the County, 829 of which were in the South County region. Only 14
of the 829 homeless persons counted in the South County were in shelters, while the remaining
individuals were unsheltered, primarily on the street, living in cars, or in encampments.
The City participated in the development of the 10-Year Plan to End Homelessness along with
the other cities, the County, and various social service providers. The City has also provided
proportional funding toward the creation of a director for the Homeless Services Oversight
Council (HSOC) who is charged with carrying out the recommendations of the 10-Year Plan. This
program will continue to provide more definitive information on the need for housing,
emergency housing, transitional housing, and supportive services to meet the needs of the
homeless in the City of Grover Beach and the surrounding communities.
Table 3-33 shows the homeless shelters and services available in Grover Beach and the
surrounding area.
                                                                                                       39

Chapter 3 Housing Needs Assessment
                                    Table 3-33 Homelessness Services
          Agency Name                            City                      Services
                                                             Case management, drug
 Captive Hearts                             Grover Beach     counseling, meals, groceries,
                                                             temporary housing
 Five Cities Christian Women                Grover Beach     Meals
                                                             Drug counseling, food/groceries,
 Casa Solano                                Grover Beach
                                                             meals, temporary housing
                                                             Case management, drug
                                                             counseling, meals, medical
 Healthcare for the Hopeless                   Multiple      assistance, mental health,
                                                             permanent housing, temporary
                                                             housing
 Maxine Lewis Memorial
                                           San Luis Obispo   Meals, temporary housing
 Homeless Shelter
 Central Coast Rescue Mission
                                                             Drug counseling, food/groceries,
 Substance Abuse and                         Santa Maria
                                                             meals, temporary housing
 Homeless Services
                                                             Case management, clothing,
 Community Action                                            educational services, emergency
 Partnership of San Luis Obispo            San Luis Obispo   assistance, meals, groceries,
 County                                                      temporary housing, permanent
                                                             housing
                                                             Medical assistance, mental health
 Community Health Centers of
                                            Grover Beach     services, temporary housing, social
 the Central Coast
                                                             services
                                                             Case management, clothing,
                                                             educational services, emergency
 Department of Social Services             Arroyo Grande     assistance, meals, groceries,
                                                             temporary housing, permanent
                                                             housing
                                                             Case management, clothing,
 South County SAFE                         Arroyo Grande     food/groceries, mental health
                                                             services
 Salvation Army                                Multiple      Food/groceries
 People's Kitchen                           Grover Beach     Meals
                                                             Case management, drug
 Drug and Alcohol Services                 Arroyo Grande
                                                             counseling, educational services
                                                             Case management, educational
 Mental Services                           Arroyo Grande
                                                             services, mental health services
Source: Homeless Service Oversight Council
40
                                                                                         Chapter 4
                                                Land Availability and
                                                        Housing Resources
Chapter 4 addresses the resources available for development, improvement, and preservation of
housing in Grover Beach. This includes:
         •   An evaluation of the City’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation.
         •   A sites inventory and analysis, which is an inventory of land suitable for residential
             development.
         •   A summary of potential infrastructure constraints to residential development.
         •   An overview of financial and administrative means for developing and implementing
             City housing programs.
4.1 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
California law requires the Department of Housing and Community Development to project
statewide housing needs and allocate the need to each region in the State. After consulting with
the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG), HCD provides the regional need to
SLOCOG, which then distributes the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) to San Luis Obispo
County and the cities within the SLOCOG region. SLOCOG allocates housing production goals for
the County and member cities based on their projected share of the region’s population and
employment growth.
The projected housing needs in the RHNA are categorized by income based on the standards of
very low-, low-, moderate-, and above moderate-income households established by the US
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) (California Health and Safety Code
Section 50079.5).
Local governments can employ a variety of development strategies to meet their RHNA housing
production goals, as provided in Government Code Section 65583(c)(1)). In addition to identifying
vacant or underutilized land resources, local governments can address a portion of their
adequate sites requirement through the provision of second units.
The City’s RHNA for the 2014–2019 planning period is 165 units. Since the RHNA projection period
began on January 1, 2014, planning and building permits issued since then can count toward the
City’s current RHNA. As shown in Table 4-1, the City has approved two above-moderate housing
units since January 1. This leaves a remaining RHNA of 163 units.
                                                                                                    41

Chapter 4: Land Availability
                       Table 4-1 Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2014–2019
                                                 Extremely    Very                                Above
                                                                       Low      Moderate                       Total
                                                     Low       Low                              Moderate
  2014–2019 RHNA                                      20        21      26           29               69        1652
  Units Permitted/Constructed 2014–
                                                       0         0       0            0                2          2
  2019
  2014–2019 Remaining RHNA                            20        21      26           29               67         163
  Vacant Land Inventory                                     1221                     100              73         295
  Surplus RHNA                                               55                      71                6         132
Source: SLOCOG 2013; City of Grover Beach 2014
Notes:
1. Sites allowing up to 20 dwellings per acre have been combined to address the extremely low, very low and low-
income RHNA.
2. The total RHNA number of 166 in the SLOCOG Regional Housing Needs Plan is off by one unit due to a rounding error.
Per HCD direction the numbers in the income categories were totaled and the total RHNA number used for analysis in
the Housing Element update is 165.
Vacant Land Inventory
Table 4-2 shows that Grover Beach has 76 vacant parcels (just under 30 acres) in zones that allow
residential development. Most of the vacant parcels are outside the Coastal Zone and are
regulated by the 2012 Development Code. Some vacant parcels are in the C-R-1, C-P-R-1, C-R-2,
and C-I zones in the Coastal Zone. The amount of vacant land in these zones is limited consisting of
only eight percent of the total vacant land in the City primarily in the low and medium density
zones. Maximum unit capacity for each vacant parcel is calculated by multiplying the total net
acres by the applicable maximum allowable density. However, the City’s density calculation is
based on the gross acreage (as measured to the centerline of the street) which allows smaller lots
in the medium and high density zones to accommodate more than one unit per lot. This density
calculation has been taken into consideration when estimating maximum unit capacity on
parcels including larger parcels in the medium and high density zones. Many parcels in Grover
Beach can be developed at maximum capacity due to this density calculation methodology. A
detailed table of vacant parcels by APN is shown in Appendix A.
It is estimated that the vacant parcels can realistically yield about 295 units. Of these units, 73 units
could be produced in low density zones, 100 units in medium density zones (allowing up to 9
dwellings per acre), and 122 units on parcels that allow up to 20 units per acre. All of the vacant
parcels zoned for up to 20 units per acre except one are less than a half acre in size. It can be
difficult to build multi-family, lower-income housing on sites of this size. However, trends show that
multi-family housing development is occurring on sites of less than one-half acre. Recent projects
have included the Habitat for Humanity 4-unit project on Longbranch and the 4-unit project at
1263 Mentone (both projects were built at a density of 23 dwellings per acre based on the City’s
density calculation). In addition, the City shall continue to implement Program 1.4 to encourage
higher-density development on small parcels. See Figure 4-1 for a map of vacant parcels.
42

                                                                      Chapter 4: Land Availability
                                   Table 4-2 Vacant Land Inventory
                                                       Maximum        Maximum
                                  Number of   Total                                 Realistic Unit
               Zone                                       Density       Unit
                                    Parcels   Acres                                  Capacity
                                                     (Units per Acre) Capacity
 R-1                                   32     11.38          5           64              64
 C-P-R-1                                4      0.68          5             4              4
 C-R-1                                  5      0.77          5             5              5
 Total Low Density                     41     12.82                       73             73
 C-R-2                                  5      0.77          9             9              9
 R-2                                   13      9.99          9            91             91
 Total Medium Density                  18     10.76                      100            100
 C-B-O                                  3      0.66         20            19             18
 C-I                                    1      0.15         20             2              2
 R-3                                   13      5.47         20           102            102
 Total High Density                    17      6.28                      123            122
 Total All Parcels                     76     29.87                      296            295
Source: City of Grover Beach and PMC 2014
                                                                                                43
Chapter 4: Land Availability
This page intentionally left blank
44
                                     Chapter 4: Land Availability
Figure 4-1 Vacant Land Inventory Map
                                                              45
Chapter 4: Land Availability
This page intentionally left blank
46
                                                                          Chapter 4: Land Availability
Other Trends and Opportunities
Existing development trends demonstrate that intensification of land is occurring in Grover Beach,
with a recent trend toward mixed use. The development standards along the majority of the West
Grand Avenue corridor from Highway 1 in the west to the City limits in the east permit mixed-use
development at up to 20 dwelling units per acre. In the RC Zone mixed-use is only allowed at up to
nine units per acre. From 2001 through 2013, the City permitted several mixed-use projects that
provided 22 apartments and 9 residential condominium units (including two moderate-income
units). In addition, two mixed-use projects providing 15 units (including two very low-income units
and one moderate-income unit) have been approved and are pending building permit review.
To support and encourage these trends, the City has amended the Development Code to modify
the mixed-use residential standards in nonresidential zones to allow the residential component of
the project to be located above, or behind the nonresidential portion and to allow the residential
use of a mixed-use project to be detached from the nonresidential use as long as the
nonresidential use is located entirely along the primary street frontage of the project site. The City
has also included Program 1.5 to relax zoning standards in order to provide increased
development flexibility and incentives.
Another area of opportunity in the City is the Okui property or “Strawberry Field” site. The 30-acre
site is located on the east side of Highway 1 at the southwest corner of Highland Way and South
13th Street. The site is currently designated Urban Reserve and would need to be
redesignated/rezoned to allow residential development. As described in the City’s General Plan
Land Use Element, the site is currently in use for agricultural production but is an island surrounded
on all sides by urban development and lies within the City limits. At some point in the future, it may
be appropriate to convert this land to an urban use, in part to help offset the pressure to convert
larger agricultural holdings elsewhere. If the property owner became interested in the developing
the property for housing and/or other nonagricultural uses, a specific plan would be required (see
Goal LU-15 and Policies LU-15.1 and 15.2 in the Land Use Element).
Demolitions
Demolition records for the City of Grover Beach show that underutilized single-family homes are
being recycled for more intense land uses, either for PUDs or apartments. Between 2009 and 2014,
8 demolitions occurred and were replaced by 14 new units.
4.2 Infrastructure Constraints
Infrastructure adds to the cost of new construction (e.g., major and local streets, water and sewer
lines, and utility undergrounding). In most cases, these improvements are dedicated to the City,
which is then responsible for their maintenance. The following section evaluates water and
wastewater service capacity in Grover Beach as a potential constraint to future housing
development.
                                                                                                    47

Chapter 4: Land Availability
Water Service
Grover Beach’s current water supply of 2,207 acre-feet per year comes from a combination of
approximately 65 percent groundwater and 35 percent surface water. In 2010, the City’s total
water use was 1,788 acre-feet. It is expected that the City’s water demands will reach 1,892 acre-
feet per year by 2030, based on a 20% reduction in water use required by SB7. However, the City
shall continue to monitor water usage and explore other potential water supply sources. Thus,
water capacity is not an immediate constraint to future housing development.
Wastewater
The South San Luis Obispo County Sanitation District (SSLOCSD) is responsible for the collection and
treatment of sewage and wastewater in Grover Beach. Operation of the SSLOCSD is overseen by
a Board of Directors that includes representatives from the City of Arroyo Grande, City of Grover
Beach, and the Oceano Community Services District.
The SSLOCSD’s sewage treatment facility is located on a 7.6-acre site between the Oceano
Airport and the Arroyo Grande Creek Channel, in unincorporated Oceano. The sewage collected
by Grover Beach is transported through its own collection system to the plant via trunk sewers that
are owned and operated by the SSLOCSD.
SSLOCSD wastewater facilities are capable of processing five million gallons of wastewater per
day. In 2000, the average wastewater flow per day was 2.9 million gallons, or 81 gallons per person
per day. Projected population growth for Arroyo Grande, Oceano, and Grover Beach indicates
that at buildout of these three communities, the average flow per day will equal 75 percent of the
system’s capacity. Thus, wastewater capacity is not an immediate constraint to future housing
development.
4.3 Financial and Administrative Resources
Developing affordable housing often requires access to local, state, and federal funding, as well
as organizations with the expertise to build and manage affordable housing. Grover Beach has
the following financial and administrative resources available for affordable housing development
and conservation.
Financing Resources
Federal, State, and Private Funding Sources and Information
Table 4-3 provides federal, state, and private funding sources available in Grover Beach.
48

                                                                               Chapter 4: Land Availability
                      Table 4-3 Federal, State and Private Funding Sources
          Program Name                               Description                      Eligible Activities
1. Federal Programs
                                                                                Acquisition
                                   Grants available to the City on a
                                                                                Rehabilitation
                                   competitive basis for a variety of housing
Community Development Block                                                     Homebuyer Assistance
                                   and community development activities.
Grant (CDBG)                                                                    Economic Development
                                   City competes for funds through the
                                                                                Homeless Assistance
                                   State’s application process.
                                                                                Public Services
                                   Competitive grants to help local             New Construction
Federal Emergency Shelter          governments and nonprofits to finance        Rehabilitation
Grants                             emergency shelters, transitional housing,    Homeless Assistance
                                   and other supportive services.               Public Services
                                   Grants available to the City on a            Homebuyer Assistance
Home Investment Partnership        competitive basis for a variety of housing   Rehabilitation
Program (HOME)                     activities. City competes for funds through  New Construction
                                   the State’s application process.             Rental Assistance
                                   Assistance program that provides direct
Housing Choice Voucher
                                   funding for rental subsidies for very low-   Rental Assistance
Program (Section 8)
                                   income families.
                                   Grants to private nonprofit developers of
Section 202                        supportive housing for very low-income       New Construction
                                   seniors.
                                   Provides financial assistance to low-
Housing Rehabilitation Program     income homeowners for health and safety      Rehabilitation
                                   improvements.
Continuum of Care/Homeless         Funding through the HEARTH Act of 2009
Emergency Assistance and           to provide necessary resources for           Homeless Assistance
Rapid Transition to Housing        development of programs to assist            New Construction
(HEARTH)                           homeless individuals and families.
2. State Programs
                                   Provides lower interest rate CHFA loans to
Affordable Housing Partnership
                                   homebuyers who receive local secondary       Homebuyer Assistance
Program (AHPP)
                                   financing.
                                   A state-funded program administered by
Building Equity and Growth in      HCD which provides low- and moderate-
                                                                                Homebuyer Assistance
Neighborhoods (BEGIN)              income households up to $30,000 for a
                                   down payment.
                                   Grants awarded to jurisdictions for owner-
                                                                                Homebuyer Assistance
CalHome                            occupied housing rehabilitation and first-
                                                                                Rehabilitation
                                   time homebuyer assistance.
                                   Bonds issued to local lenders and
Single Family Housing Bond
                                   developers so that below market interest
Program (Mortgage Revenue                                                       Homebuyer Assistance
                                   rate loans can be issued to first-time
Bonds)
                                   homebuyers.
                                   A 4% annual tax credit that helps owners
Low Income Housing Tax Credits                                                  New Construction
                                   of rental units develop affordable housing.
3. Private Resources/Financing Programs
                                   Nonprofit mortgage banking consortium
California Community               designed to provide long-term debt           New Construction
Reinvestment Corporation           financing for affordable multifamily rental  Rehabilitation
(CCRC)                             housing. Nonprofit and for-profit            Acquisition
                                   developers contact member banks.
                                                                                                          49

Chapter 4: Land Availability
         Program Name                             Description                   Eligible Activities
                                 Fixed-rate mortgages issued by private
                                 mortgage insurers.
                                 Mortgages which fund the purchase and
Federal National Mortgage                                                   Homebuyer Assistance
                                 rehabilitation of a home.
Association (Fannie Mae)                                                    Rehabilitation
                                 Low down payment mortgages for single-
                                 family homes in underserved low-income
                                 and minority cities.
                                 Provides first and second mortgages that
                                 include rehabilitation loan. City provides
Freddie Mac Home Works           gap financing for rehabilitation           Homebuyer Assistance
                                 component. Households earning up to
                                 80% MFI qualify.
Local Resources
Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo (HASLO)
HASLO was created to provide housing assistance for the County’s lower-income residents. HASLO
administers the Section 8 rental assistance program and manages public housing developments.
HASLO also administers the Mortgage Credit Certificate Program, Security Deposit Program, and
other programs. Currently, HASLO provides 135 Section 8 vouchers to very low-income households
in Grover Beach.
People’s Self-Help Housing
People’s Self-Help Housing (PSHH) is a diverse, nonprofit organization committed to furthering
opportunities for decent, safe, affordable housing and support services in San Luis Obispo, Santa
Barbara, and Ventura counties. The PSHH has two primary programs—a Self-Help Homeownership
Program and a Rental Housing Development and Construction Services Program. Since its
inception in the 1960s, the PSHH has developed more than 1,000 homes and 1,200 rental units and
assisted in the rehabilitation and repair of more than 3,000 housing units. The PSHH also provides
free seminars to residents on the Central Coast including those aimed at first-time homebuyers and
foreclosure prevention. Although the PSHH has not constructed any affordable units in Grover
Beach, the City considers the PSHH a partner for future affordable housing development.
Community Action Partnership of San Luis Obispo County (CAPSLO)
CAPSLO provides a wide variety of social services in San Luis Obispo County. Their divisions are
Homeless Services, Head Start, Health Services, and Energy Conservation Services. CAPSLO
operates the Maxine Lewis Memorial Homeless Shelter and the Prado Day Center in San Luis
Obispo. They also operate Head Start and Migrant Head Start programs and two health centers in
San Luis Obispo and Arroyo Grande.
Habitat for Humanity
Habitat for Humanity of San Luis Obispo County has built simple, decent housing in Atascadero,
Paso Robles, and Cambria since its establishment in 1997. Most recently in 2009, Habitat for
Humanity built four homes in Grover Beach for very low-income households. The City provided
50

                                                                         Chapter 4: Land Availability
City-owned property and funds for entitlements and construction permits to aid in the
development of the project.
Habitat for Humanity uses donations of funding, materials, professional services, and volunteer
labor to build simple, decent homes, which are then sold to qualified, very low-income families.
Mortgage payments are used to build more Habitat homes locally on the Central Coast. All
Habitat homebuyers complete a minimum of 500 hours of volunteer labor toward the construction
of their home.
4.4 Energy Conservation
Housing affordability is also influenced by the cost of energy. Energy rates in California and San Luis
Obispo County have increased over the last 10 years, but residential rates have leveled out since
2009 per the California Public Utilities Commission. However, rates remain some of the highest in
the country. Thus, increasing energy efficiency is essential and is especially necessary for lower-
income residents. Energy efficiency has direct application to affordable housing because the
more money spent on energy, the less available for rent or mortgage payments. High energy costs
have particularly detrimental effects on low-income households that do not have enough income
or cash reserves to absorb cost increases and must choose between basic needs such as shelter,
food, and energy. State housing element law requires an analysis of the opportunities for energy
conservation in residential development.
The City is continuing its efforts to encourage energy efficiency in new and existing development.
All new buildings in California must meet the standards contained in Title 24, Part 6, of the
California Code of Regulations (Building Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and
Nonresidential Buildings). These regulations responded to California’s energy crisis and the need to
reduce energy bills, increase energy delivery system reliability, and contribute to an improved
economic condition for the state. They were established in 1978 and most recently updated in
2013 (effective date of January 1, 2014). The City has adopted the 2013 Building Code and also
adopted the voluntary Green Building Code. All new construction must comply with the standards
in effect on the date a building permit application is submitted.
The City partners with SLO Green Build, a local nonprofit, to encourage energy efficiency and
inclusion of incentives for projects that include green-building features. The City is working with the
County and other cities to document the increase in green building activity and provides access
to green building information at City Hall.
The City provides information about conservation programs, rebates, retrofits, and low-income
assistance. The City shall consider participating with the County in development of an Assembly
Bill (AB) 811 implementation program to retrofit existing residences, including solar systems. The
City also has a toilet retrofit program, a washer/dryer energy rebate and a Cash For Grass
program which provides an incentive for residents to remove their lawn and replace it with a low
water use landscape or hardscape.
                                                                                                     51

Chapter 4: Land Availability
The City has developed a Planned Development Overlay. The overlay encourages the
development of LEED certified dwellings, which are more energy efficient providing energy
conservation and efficiency benefits.
As of early 2014, Grover Beach has completed a draft of a Climate Action Plan and is considering
it for adoption. The Climate Action Plan (CAP) is a long-range plan to reduce greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions within Grover Beach and to prepare for the anticipated effects of climate
change. The CAP will also help achieve multiple community goals, including a range of measures
to improve energy conservation in the residential sector. Once adopted, the CAP will guide the
implementation of these policies over the long term.
Pacific Gas and Electric also encourages energy efficiency by offering incentives and rebates for
the use of energy-efficient appliances and air conditioners, and the more efficient use of fuel.
52
                                                                                   Chapter 5
                                                 Housing Constraints
Government policies and regulations impact a number of factors that influence housing
availability and affordability. Governmental constraints include residential development
standards, fees and taxes, and permitting procedures. Providing infrastructure and services also
increases the cost of producing housing. Factors outside of the local government’s control can
also play a major role in a community’s housing situation and should be recognized and
addressed where possible.
This chapter identifies governmental and nongovernmental constraints and challenges in
providing affordable housing.
5.1 Governmental Constraints
The following evaluates City policies and practices that could be barriers to affordable housing.
Local Land Use Controls
Coastal and Non-Coastal Zones
Grover Beach is partially located within the Coastal Zone and thus development in the Coastal
Zone must be consistent with the City’s Local Coastal Program.
Changes in regulation of development activities, which are broadly defined by the Coastal Act
to include (among others) construction of buildings, divisions of land, and activities that change
the intensity or use of land or public access to coastal waters, generally require the approval of
the California Coastal Commission (Coastal Commission) in addition to the City Council.
Additionally, communities with areas within the Coastal Zone are required to review Coastal
Zone affordable housing obligations including the preservation of existing occupied units
affordable to low- or moderate-income households and where feasible, to include low- and
moderate-income housing in new developments. Because of the differing process regulating
the Coastal Zone and areas outside of the Coastal Zone, development standards for City zones
in these two areas are divided and displayed separately in this document.
The Updated Development Code and Coastal Commission Approval
Grover Beach adopted a Development Code update (Article IX of the Grover Beach Municipal
Code) on October 15, 2012. The Development Code included a comprehensive update to the
previous Zoning Code in order to achieve conformance with the updated General Plan Land
Use Element. The update also incorporated the City’s subdivision standards, floodplain
regulations, and sign ordinance, which were previously not part of the Zoning Code. In addition,
in December 2013, standards for stormwater management, as well as grading and drainage,
were added to the updated code. Because a single document was created that will contain all
development regulations, the Zoning Code was renamed the Development Code.
                                                                                                53

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
As of April 2014, the Development Code has not yet been approved by the Coastal
Commission. Therefore, the Development Code currently regulates all areas of the City that are
not in the Coastal Zone (which include the following zones: C-R-1, C-P-R-1, C-R-2, C-R-3, C-C-V,
C-P-C, C-I, and C-I-C). The amount of vacant land in the Coastal Zone is limited, consisting of
only eight percent of the total vacant land in the City primarily in the low and medium density
residential land use designations. All proposed development projects in the Coastal Zone area
will continue to be regulated by the Zoning Code (Article IX.A of the Grover Beach Municipal
Code) until the Development Code receives approval from the Coastal Commission.
Development Standards
Minimum parcel size, density, setback requirements, and height limits for residential uses in
residential zones are governed by the Grover Beach Municipal Code, Article IX and IX.A. Table
5-1 identifies development standards for zones outside of the Coastal Zone (non-coastal). Table
5-2 presents development standards for zones in the Coastal Zone.
54
Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
                        Table 5-1 Residential Site Development Standards by Zone
                                                  (Non-Coastal Zone)
   Zone           Allowed          Minimum        Maximum            Maximum                     Required Yards (feet)
                    Density         Lot Size           Lot        Building Height           Front          Rear           Side
                    Range             (s.f.)     Coverage
                   (du/ac)
                                                                 South of Grand
                                                                 Ave. = 25'; North
                                                                 of Grand Ave. =
                                                                 25' (above 15’                                           5, 10
     R-1             2-5              6,000            45%                                   20              10
                                                                 requires                                                corner
                                                                 approval of a
                                                                 Development
                                                                 Permit
                                                                                                                          5, 10
     R-2             6-9              6,000            50%               25'                 15              10
                                                                                                                         corner
                                                                                                                          5, 10
     R-3            10 - 20           6,000            60%               32'                 15              10
                                                                                                                         corner
                                                                                            0, 10          0, 10          0, 10
                                                                                        adjacent         adjacent       adjacent
    C-B             10 - 20           5,000           100%               40’1               to a           to a           to a
                                                                                       residential      residential    residential
                                                                                            zone           zone           zone
                                                                                            0, 10          0, 10          0, 10
                                                                                        adjacent         adjacent       adjacent
  C-B-O             10 - 20           5,000           100%               40’1               to a           to a           to a
                                                                                       residential      residential    residential
                                                                                            zone           zone           zone
                                                                                                           0, 10          0, 10
                                                                                                         adjacent       adjacent
    NC                6 -9            5,000            75%               30’                 20            to a           to a
                                                                                                        residential    residential
                                                                                                           zone           zone
                                                                                            0, 10          0, 10          0, 10
                                                                                        adjacent         adjacent       adjacent
     RC              6-9             10,000           75%                40’                to a           to a           to a
                                                                                       residential      residential    residential
                                                                                            zone           zone           zone
                                                                                                           0, 10          0, 10
                 Maximum
                                                                                                         adjacent       adjacent
                  of 10 (for
      I                              20,000           50%2               40’3                15            to a           to a
                  live/work
                                                                                                        residential    residential
                     uses)
                                                                                                           zone           zone
Notes:
1Maximum      building height is 50 feet for properties at the corner of West Grand Avenue and 4th Street, and on West
Grand Avenue in the Central Business zone.
 2The   Review Authority may increase the lot coverage to 100% and/or the FAR to 1.5 if a finding is made that the project
will provide a substantial economic benefit to the City.
3Structures  that exceed 18 feet in height and are located within 100 feet of a residential zone require a Use Permit.
Source: City of Grover Beach Development Code
                                                                                                                         55

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
         Table 5-2 Residential Site Development Standards by Zone (Coastal Zone)
   Zone          Allowed       Minimum    Maximum        Maximum           Required Yards (feet)
                  Density       Lot Size       Lot    Building Height  Front      Rear        Side
                  Range           (s.f.)  Coverage
                 (du/ac)
C-P-R-1            2-5           6,000    40% (total  2 stories and    N/A        N/A         N/A
                                         impervious   25' (above 15’
                                           lot area)  requires
                                                      architectural
                                                      approval)
C-R-1              2-5           6,000        40%     2 stories and     20         10         5, 10
                                                      25' (above 15’                         corner
                                                      requires
                                                      architectural
                                                      approval)
C-R-2              6-9           6,000        40%            25'        20         10         5, 10
                                                                                             corner
C-R-3             10 - 20        6,000        75%            40’        15         10         5, 10
                                                                                             corner
Source: City of Grover Beach Zoning Code
Minimum parcel size and setback requirements in Grover Beach are not unusually strict and are
not considered a constraint to the development of affordable housing. The height limits for
single-family homes are slightly restrictive but attempt to protect views. Surrounding communities
have height restrictions that are similar to Grover Beach.
Table 5-3 indicates whether each development type is a permitted use (X) by right or whether it
requires a use permit with conditions (UP), which are enumerated in the Development Code for
areas outside the Coastal Zone. Table 5-4 similarly indicates permitted uses in the Coastal Zone
as enumerated in the Zoning Code. All development in the Coastal Zone requires a Coastal
Development Permit except those developments exempted by Public Resources Code Sections
30106 and 30610, and those types specified by the Coastal Commission in Title 14 of the
California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6, Sections 13250, 13252, and 13253, and any
amendments thereafter adopted.
56

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
       Table 5-3 Allowable Residential Uses by Zoning Category (Non-Coastal Zone)
                                            Residential
                                                                     Other zones allowing residential uses
                                              Zones
         Zoning Category                                                                                   Emergency
                                        R-1    R-2    R-3 C-B C-B-O NC              RC       I      UR        Shelter
                                                                                                             Overlay
Single Family1                            X     X       X
Multiple Family                                 X       X             UP
Secondary Dwelling                        X     X       X
Mobile Home                               X     X       X
Residential Care (under 7
                                          X     X       X    UP       UP
clients)
Residential Care (7 or more
                                                       UP
clients)
Day Care Home, Large                   AUP AUP AUP
Day Care Home, Small
                                          X     X       X
Family
Live/Work Unit                                                        UP      UP            UP
Emergency       Shelters2                                                                                         X
Transitional/Supportive
                                          X     X       X
Housing2
SROs                                            UP     UP             UP
Farm Labor/Labor Camps
(Employee Housing of 12                                                                              X
units or 36 beds)
Senior Housing                                  UP     UP    UP       UP      UP
Mixed Use                                                    UP       UP      UP    UP
 Source: Grover Beach Development Code (accessed March 2014)
 X=Permitted by right
 UP=Allowed with a conditional use permit
 1. Single-family includes “factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building
 Code (UBC), and mobile homes/manufactured housing units that comply with the National Manufactured Housing
 Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, placed on permanent foundation systems” per 09.10.020.
 2. Program 4.4 is proposed to amend the Development Code to allow transitional and supportive housing in all zones
 allowing residential uses.
                                                                                                                      57

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
           Table 5-4 Allowable Residential Uses by Zoning Category (Coastal Zone)
                                               Residential Zones               Other zones allowing residential uses
          Zoning Category
                                                                                                   Emergency Shelter
                                          C-P-R-1 C-R-1 C-R-2 C-R-3             CVS     CI/CIC
                                                                                                         Overlay
Single Family1                               X        X         X       X
Multiple Family                                                 X       X
Secondary Dwelling                           X        X         X       X
Mobile Home                                  X        X         X       X
Group Residential                                              UP      UP
Residential Care (under 7
                                             X        X         X       X
clients)
Residential Care (7 or more
                                                                       UP
clients)
Day Care Home, Large                        UP       UP        UP      UP
Day Care Home, Small Family                  X        X         X       X
Live/Work Unit                                                                            UP
Employee Housing
Mixed Use                                                                        UP
Source: Grover Beach Zoning Code (accessed March 2014)
X=Permitted by right
UP=Allowed with a conditional use permit
1. Single-family includes “factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code
(UBC), and mobile homes/manufactured housing units that comply with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, placed on permanent foundation systems” per 09.10.020.
2. Program 4.4 is proposed to amend the Development Code to allow transitional and supportive housing in all zones
allowing residential uses.
Planned Development Overlay Zone
The City has adopted a Planned Development (PD) Overlay zone (Development Code Section
2.90.020) to promote flexible and relaxed standards beyond what is permitted in the underlying
zone. In addition, innovative site planning and other aspects of project design are encouraged
to facilitate the development of small parcels in the area by allowing more effective design
responses to site features. The proposed development must demonstrate that the development
is of significantly higher quality than would be achieved through the application of the City’s
standard development standards. The PD Overlay encourages mixed-use projects, which
include residential uses and encourage redevelopment of underutilized land.
Rezoning to PD occurs concurrently with the approval of a specific project and requires City
Council approval. Any use or combination of uses allowed by Chapter 2 of the Development
Code (Zones and Allowable Land Uses) within the applicable zone may be established within
the PD Overlay zone, subject to any additional limitations on specific land uses provided by the
PD Overlay as adopted. No PD Overlay will allow a land use that is not allowed in the applicable
zone.
Projects requesting the rezoning to PD Overlay must include at least one of the following project
features:
58

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
    •  A minimum of 25 percent of the residential units within the project are affordable to
       households of very low, low or moderate incomes (See Development Code Section 3.20
       Affordable Housing Density Bonuses).
    •  The project will provide a substantial public amenity, for example, a public plaza, a
       public park, or a similar improved open space feature, including provisions for
       guaranteed long-term maintenance not at the expense of the City.
    •  The project will achieve at least a silver rating on the LEED or other equivalent rating
       system.
    •  The project will preserve, enhance, and/or create a significant natural feature.
The PD Overlay implements more flexible development standards, including:
    •  Reduced front, rear, and side yard setbacks.
    •  Reduced parking requirements.
    •  Increased building heights.
    •  Increased residential floor area ratios in mixed-use projects.
Planned Unit Developments
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) are allowed in multiple zones subject to the development
standards provided in Subsection 4.30.040 of the Development Code and in Subsection 9140 of
the Zoning Code. PUDs are considered one of several types of residential common area
developments, which also include condominiums. PUDs are small-lot subdivisions that allow
detached or attached single-family homes on individual lots. Similar to condominiums, these
developments often share a common driveway and may have a homeowners association, if
necessary, to maintain any shared property.
PUDs are common in the R-2, C-R-2 and R-3 zones, as many small lots meet the minimum lot
requirements (3,500 square feet) for this type of development and provide flexible development
standards. Section 4.30 of the Development Code sets forth the following development
standards pertaining to PUDs:
    •  Approval of a Development Permit and a tentative tract or parcel map (depending on
       project size) are required from the City Council. All approvals are processed
       concurrently.
    •  Minimum lot size is 3,500 square feet.
    •  Lot coverage may not exceed 35 percent of the total lot area.
    •  Open space shall be a minimum of 35 percent of the total lot area.
    •  Private yards are a minimum of 300 square feet per unit; additional square footage is
       added incrementally for larger units.
    •  Setbacks and density must meet the underlying zoning designation.
                                                                                             59

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
    •    Developments must meet specific requirements for unit size, interior laundry facilities, and
         storage.
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
Non-Coastal Zone
Outside the Coastal Zone, mobile homes or manufactured homes on individual lots are
permitted by right in any residential zone unless they exceed 15 feet and are located in the R-1
zone north of West Grand Avenue.
Coastal Zone
In the Coastal Zone, mobile homes or manufactured homes on individual lots are permitted by
right in any residential zone unless they exceed 15 feet in height and are located in the C-P-R-1,
or C-R-1 zones north of West Grand Avenue.
In the Coastal Zone mobile home parks are permitted in all residential zones as well, subject to
approval of a use permit from the Planning Commission. Mobile home parks are subject to
Zoning Code Part 39, Mobile Home Park Development Standards. Part 39 requires a minimum
building site of 5 acres in residential zones and 3 acres in the C-V zone. Allowed density is 10
dwelling units per acre in residential zones and 12 dwelling units per acre in the C-V zone.
Minimum lot size is 3,200 square feet, and there must be a general storage area for the park of
1,000 square feet, plus an additional 150 square feet for each mobile home.
Transitional and Supportive Housing
In the updated Development Code, the City allows transitional and supportive housing by right
in all residential zones in both the Coastal Zone and the non-Coastal Zone, including in the R-1,
R-2, R-3, C-P-R-1, C-R-1, C-R-2, and C-R-3 zones. These amendments will be final once the
Development Code is approved by the Coastal Commission. Transitional housing is defined in
Government Code Section 65582(h) as rental housing for stays of at least six months but where
the units are recirculated to another program recipient after a set period. Supportive housing is
defined in Government Code Section 65582(f) and has no limit on the length of stay, is linked to
on- or off-site services, and is occupied by a target population as defined in Government Code
Section 65582(g). Program 4.4 is proposed to amend the Development Code to allow
transitional and supportive housing in all zones allowing residential uses.
Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters are defined in the Development Code (Section 9.10.020) as facilities for the
temporary overnight shelter of indigents operated by a public or nonprofit. The City has
adopted an Emergency Shelter Overlay to allow emergency shelters to be permitted by right in
certain areas of the City. The overlay is located on the southwestern edge of the City and is
bounded by 4th Street on the west, including parcels just past Griffin Street to the east, Farroll
Road to the north, and Highland Way to the south. The Emergency Shelter Overlay zone has 90
total parcels, 2 of which are vacant and 16 of which are underutilized. The vacant and
60

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
underutilized area on these parcels is approximately 9.8 acres. The Emergency Shelter Overlay
zone is located in areas of the City close to transit and services.
The Development Code (Section 2.90.030) provides standards for emergency shelters within the
Emergency Shelter Overlay zone. Emergency shelters must abide by the following standards:
    •    The shelter must be operated by a responsible agency or organization, with experience
         in managing or providing social services.
    •    The shelter must provide at least one qualified on-site supervisor at all times, plus one
         attendant for each 50 occupants.
    •    A shelter will not be approved when another homeless shelter exists within 1,000 feet of
         the proposed site.
    •    Nearby residential neighborhoods must be adequately buffered from potential impacts
         of the proposed shelter.
    •    Parking is required to be supplied at a ratio of one vehicle space per ten beds, and one
         secured bicycle parking area designed to accommodate up to one bicycle per ten
         beds.
    •    Each shelter is limited to a maximum occupancy of 50 persons, including warming
         shelters and daytime facilities.
    •    A management plan is required to address how the immediate sheltering needs of
         individuals who may be turned away from the shelter will be handled. The management
         plan establishes a maximum length of time for which clients may be accommodated.
Program 4.4 is proposed to amend the Development Code for consistency with Senate Bill 2
regarding the distance between emergency shelters.
High Occupancy Residential Uses
The City’s Development Code provides standards for high-occupancy residential uses that are
intended to maintain and promote neighborhood quality, character, and livability in residential
zones where allowed (Section 4.10.060).
High-occupancy residential use means occupancy by six or more adults. This category does not
include residential care facilities, senior housing, or transitional care facilities.
High-occupancy residential uses are allowed in the R-3 and C-R-3 zones, with approval of a use
permit. To qualify for a use permit, high-occupancy developments must abide by the following
standards.
    •    A minimum of 300 square feet of living area shall be provided per adult.
    •    The minimum parking requirement is one off-street parking space per adult occupant,
         less one. The parking of two vehicles is allowed within the required front setback.
    •    The review authority may allow a maximum of two tandem parking areas.
                                                                                                61

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
     •   A minimum of one bathroom shall be provided for every three adult occupants.
     •   The dwelling must meet all current City Building and Fire Codes.
The use permit process is viewed as a constraint to development of high-occupancy residential
development.
Parking Standards
Table 5-6 lists parking requirements for various types of residential uses. Parking standards are
reasonable and are not considered constraints to residential development. Single-family
dwelling units must have a two- or three-car garage, depending on the number of bedrooms.
Multi-family projects of three units or less are required to provide, at a minimum, one-car garage
space plus one open parking space per unit. Multi-family projects of four units are more are
required to provide, at a minimum, two open parking spaces per unit. In addition, multi-family
projects require one guest parking space for every two units. Parking requirements are described
in Section 3.50, of the Development Code. A land use not specifically listed in Table 5-5 is still
required to provide parking as required by the review authority for the proposed project.
                        Table 5-5 Parking Standards by Residential Type
             Type of Use                                      Parking (per unit)
                                        1–4 bedrooms: 2-car garage
  Single-family
                                        >5 bedrooms: 3-car garage
  Mobile homes on individual lots       2-car garage
                                        <4 units: 1-car garage and 1 uncovered space per
                                        dwelling, plus 1 uncovered space per 2 dwellings for guest
  Multifamily                           parking
                                        4+units: 2 uncovered spaces per dwelling, plus 1 space per
                                        2 dwellings for guest parking
                                        uncovered space per bedroom, not to exceed 2 parking
  Second residential units
                                        spaces
  Residences within mixed use
                                        1.5 uncovered spaces per unit
  projects
  Mobile home parks                     2 covered spaces plus 1 per 4 units for guest parking
                                        1 uncovered space per dwelling, plus 1 space per 2
  Senior housing
                                        dwellings for guest parking
                                        Based on the area of commercial/industrial use or a
  Live/work units
                                        minimum of 2 spaces, whichever is greater
  Condominiums or planned unit
                                        2 car garage plus 1 guest parking space per unit
  developments
Source: Grover Beach Development Code, accessed March 2014
The City currently offers parking reductions of one space per dwelling unit for multi-family
projects (Development Code Section 3.50.060 D 1) located within 500 feet of a transit station or
center. Shared parking is allowed for commercial projects under certain conditions.
62

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
To encourage the development of rental units, the parking requirements for apartments should
be evaluated and reduced, where appropriate. The City proposes Program 6.2 to consider
reducing parking requirements in the Development Code.
Second Dwelling Units
Second units are permitted through ministerial approval by City staff as enumerated in Section
4.10.170 of the Development Code. A second residential dwelling may be constructed
simultaneously with or after the primary residence. An application for a second unit is processed
as a building permit application for a residential alteration or addition. Second units are subject
to building permit fees, development impact fees, and school fees. All two-story structures in the
Low Density Residential Zones north of West Grand Avenue are subject to approval of a use
permit.
Second units are permitted on residential lots where there is an existing single-family residence,
with no more than one second unit per lot, subject to the following:
    •   The second unit must be in compliance with the underlying zoning requirements, except
        for zoning standards for density calculations.
    •   If the property owner lives on the property, the second unit may become a rental. If both
        the primary house and the second unit are rentals, a rental rate restriction is placed on
        either the primary or second unit reserving the unit for low- -income persons for a period
        of 30 years.
    •   The second unit may not be sold separately from the primary unit.
    •   Existing guest homes may be converted to a second unit, provided compliance with
        these standards is demonstrated.
    •   Total lot coverage may not exceed the coverage allowed in the zone.
    •   Total living area for second units may not exceed either (a) 1,000 square feet for
        detached second units, or (b) 30 percent of the existing living area of the primary unit for
        attached second units.
    •   Off-street parking requirements are one space per bedroom, not to exceed two spaces.
        Parking for second units is subject to the following standards:
             •   Off-street parking may be enclosed, covered, or uncovered.
             •   Tandem parking may be permitted on a case-by-case basis.
             •   Off-street parking is not permitted in the front or side yard setback.
    •   Second units must be subordinate in size and appearance to the primary single-family
        dwelling units and are required to be compatible with the primary residence or a superior
        design.
In addition to the second unit ordinance, the City has included Housing Element Program 6.6 to
further encourage the development of second units.
                                                                                                 63

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
Mixed Use
Mixed residential and commercial uses are encouraged in an effort to provide housing in areas
closer to jobs, to capitalize on infill housing opportunities, and to promote pedestrian-friendly
development. Mixed-use developments with residential dwellings are allowed in all commercial
zones with a use permit, both Coastal and non-Coastal. A mixed-use project may combine
residential uses with any other uses allowed in the applicable zone. In addition, the City allows
live/work residential units subject to approval of a Use Permit in all commercial zones except in
the C-B, RC, VS and CVS zones.
Mixed-use standards allow up to 20 residential dwelling units per acre in most commercial zones,
developments up to three stories in height, and flexible parking standards.
Affordable Housing Density Bonuses and Concessions/Incentives
The City adopted a density bonus ordinance in July 2007 to help develop housing for very low-,
low-, and moderate-income households. Details of the density bonus standards are in Chapter 3,
Section 3.20 of the Development Code. The purpose of the ordinance is to ensure that
affordable developments are consistent with the surrounding neighborhoods and that the units
are kept affordable for an extended period of time. This ordinance is designed to increase
affordable housing opportunities by offering incentives for smaller housing projects. In addition,
density bonuses may be applicable to mixed-use development projects that include a housing
component. To encourage development, the City offers the following incentives and
concessions:
    •   For projects meeting or exceeding the state minimum threshold of 5 units or more, the
        provisions dealing with California Government Code Section 65915, as amended from
        time to time, shall apply, pursuant to Government Code Section 65915.
    •   For projects not meeting the state minimum threshold of 5 units, the applicant may
        request specific incentives and/or concessions that would contribute significantly to the
        economic feasibility of providing affordable units as set forth below.
    •   One (1) or more units for moderate income. One incentive may be requested from the
        following:
        •    Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private usable open space requirements in total
             square feet (up to 20 percent reduction).
        •    Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private usable open space requirements in
             dimension (up to 20 percent reduction).
    •   One (1) or more units for low income. Two incentives may be requested from the
        following:
        •    Any incentive listed under the “moderate income” subsection.
        •    Increased maximum lot coverage (up to percentage permitted in underlying zone).
        •    Increase in the allowable first- to second-floor square footage ratio from 80 percent
             to 100 percent.
64

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
         •     Allowance for required guest parking requirement to be located in tandem to the
               garage or in a required setback.
     •   One (1) or more units for very low income. Three incentives may be requested from the
         following:
         •     Any incentive listed under the “moderate income” and “low income” subsections.
         •     Reduced minimum building setbacks from property lines and building separation
               requirements that exceed minimum building code standards and fire code
               standards.
         •     Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.
The City’s density bonus ordinance requires compliance with California Government Code
Section 65915. The City’s zoning requirements are found to be consistent with current State
density bonus law.
5.2 Land Use Element Growth Management Policy
In April 1991, the Grover Beach City Council adopted an ordinance establishing growth
management regulations. The General Plan Land Use Element incorporated this ordinance into
Program LU-18.1, which states, “The City could regulate its housing supply so that it grows no
faster than 123 dwelling units annually or at a rate of two and one-half percent of the 4,933
dwelling units counted in the city by the 1990 Federal Census.” 1
In adopting the Growth Management Ordinance, findings were made related to resource
delivery capabilities of water and sewer services and aesthetic and neighborhood character
concerns. The ordinance states that low- and moderate-income housing that is resale restricted
by recorded deed or other means is exempt from the growth management regulations. The
Land Use Element, however, includes a program that allows affordable housing units (type not
specified) to be exempted from the growth management limitations. The City has interpreted
this program to include both for-sale and rental housing that is restricted to low- or moderate-
income residents.
The City allows a one-year carryover of the annual allocation of 123 dwelling units, if the actual
growth rate is less than the rate established by the ordinance. However, since the Growth
Management Ordinance was passed, Grover Beach has never built up to or exceeded its
annual growth management allocation.
As discussed in the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) section, 165 new housing units
need to be accommodated over the five-year life of the RHNA. In order to accommodate the
RHNA, approximately 33 residential dwelling units would need to be planned for annually. Thus,
1 Residential Permit Cap – Using the 1990 Census as a base year, an annual growth rate of 2.5 percent was set using the
number of household dwellings in 1990. This 2.5 percent growth rate results in the allotment of 123 dwelling unit permits
per year. Ordinance 91-3 states that the base year is fixed at the 1990 Census and is not periodically adjusted.
                                                                                                                      65

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
the Growth Management Ordinance does not constrain development of or conflict with the
RHNA numbers.
Permit Processes and Timelines
Permit processing requirements have increased at all levels of government in recent years.
Developers are required to follow a number of City procedures. Although the permit approval
process must conform to the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920 et seq.),
housing proposed in Grover Beach is subject to one or more of the following review processes:
environmental review, zoning, design review, use permit control, and building permit approval.
In addition, for the portion of the City located in the Coastal Zone, a Coastal Development
Permit may also be required.
City staff achieves timely permit procedures by implementing an approach that streamlines the
process. Examples of this include:
    •   Environmental review occurs concurrently with project processing.
    •   Project review and comment by other City departments is coordinated by the
        Community Development Department, which provides a consistent and timely
        development review process.
    •   Pre-application meetings are encouraged by City staff. Procedural handouts are
        available from the Community Development Department.
Because of the service-oriented attitude of the Community Development Department, permit
processing times in Grover Beach are among the shortest in the region.
Building permit applications must go through the plan check process and may take about one
to two months from the time the plans are submitted until the permit is issued. The City has a
consultant that examines building plans. The time needed for plan check is determined by the
completeness of the plans submitted and the turnaround time from the applicant when
responding to comments. Table 5-6 provides a summary of permit processing times.
Environmental review, design review, and use permit procedures are discussed in more detail.
Development Permits require a public hearing before the Planning Commission for review but
are less discretionary than Use Permits. Use Permits can include conditions that run with the land
or with the use, while Development Permits may only be conditioned to require a project to
comply with required findings. The Planning Commission decides on approval of a Development
Permit based on the following required findings from Development Code Section 6.20.060:
•   The proposed development is consistent with the General Plan, the Development Code, and
    other City goals, policies, and standards, as applicable.
•   The subject site is physically suitable in terms of design, location, operating characteristics,
    shape, size, and topography.
•   The site’s suitability ensures that the type, density, and intensity of use being proposed will not
    constitute a hazard to the public interest, health, safety, or welfare.
66

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
•     For development in the R1, CR1, and CPR1 zones that exceed 15 feet in height, the
      proposed development will not substantially obstruct views from adjacent properties.
Program 6.4 is proposed to address possible constraints associated with some of the language in
the Development Permit findings.
Time included does not include the time it takes applicants to make revisions.
                                Table 5-6 Permit Processing Timelines
                 Permit Type                    Planning Commission Review Building Permit Review
 Administrative Development Permit                              None               8 weeks
 Administrative Use Permit                                      None               8 weeks
 Development Permit                                      6 to 12 weeks 2           8 weeks
 Use Permit                                              6 to 12 weeks 2           8 weeks
 General Plan Amendment                                  4 to 6 months 2          8 weeks 1
 Environmental Review                                    4 to 6 months 2           8 weeks
Source: City of Grover Beach Community Development Department
1. If development project accompanies a General Plan Amendment
2. Depending on the size/complexity of the project and staffing workload
Environmental Review
As required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the City’s permit processing
procedures include an assessment of the potential environmental impacts of a proposed
project. The majority of projects in the City meet the requirements for a categorical exemption
as an “infill project.” If a project requires a negative declaration or an environmental impact
report, additional processing and time is required. Many of the environmental regulations have
protected the public from significant environmental degradation and the location of certain
developments on inappropriate sites and have given the public an opportunity to comment on
project impacts. This process does, however, increase the time and cost of project approval.
Design Review
Design review takes place as part of the Development Permit process (see Development Code
Section 6.20.060). The Planning Commission is the approval authority for a Development Permit.
The purpose of design review is to ensure that the architectural and general appearance of
buildings and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood. Design standards
include the provision of landscaping for all areas not used for parking, walkways, or ramps. In
addition, all exterior wall elevations of buildings visible from or facing streets are to have
architectural treatment with the intent of avoiding flat, featureless surfaces. The Planning
Commission may require the use of specific materials, colors, or design elements. Overall, the
design review process does not appear to have a significant effect on housing affordability.
                                                                                                  67

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
A Development Permit is required for single family residences only if located north of West Grand
Avenue and in the R-1, C-R-1, and C-P-R-1 zones, and is greater than 15 feet in height; and any
new multi-family development.
Use Permits
The Planning Commission is responsible for reviewing and approving use permits. The Planning
Commission may approve use permits when the proposed use complies with the provisions of
the General Plan and the Development Code. In reviewing a proposal, the Planning
Commission must make the following findings:
    •   Consistent with the General Plan, this Development Code, and other City goals, policies,
        and standards, as applicable.
    •   The subject site is physically suitable in terms of design, location, operating
        characteristics, shape, size, and topography.
    •   The type, density, and intensity of use being proposed will not constitute a hazard to the
        public interest, health, safety, or welfare.
Use permits require public hearings. This process necessitates public noticing in accordance with
the Brown Act and noticing of property owners within 300 feet of the project.
The City’s entitlement process for residential projects has almost a 100% approval rate although
projects are sometimes modified in order to make the appropriate findings for approval. Through
the affordable housing incentives, residential projects have increased flexibility from
development standards.
5.3 Codes and Enforcement
The Grover Beach Building Code is based on the California Building Code (CBC), which
determines the minimum residential construction requirements in California. The CBC ensures
safe housing and is not considered a significant constraint to housing production. The City has a
Code Enforcement Officer who responds to problems on a complaint-driven basis.
On- and Off-Site Improvement Requirements
Site improvement costs include the cost of providing access to the site, clearing the site, and
grading the pad area. In the case of a subdivision, such costs may also include major subdivision
improvements such as road construction and installation of sewer, water, and other utilities. As
with land costs, several variables affect the amount of such costs, including site topography and
proximity to established roads, sewers, and water lines.
The City requires that curbs, gutters, and sidewalks be installed along the frontage of every lot on
which new construction or significant alteration occurs. The absence of curbs and gutters may
contribute to unsafe pedestrian and vehicular travel. In addition, potential flooding problems
may result due to the lack of infrastructure improvements. Curb, gutter, and sidewalk
improvements are typical of all cities in California and do not impose a significant constraint to
the development of housing in Grover Beach.
68

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
Fees and Exactions
Fees for developing residential housing in Grover Beach include planning, building, and
development impact fees. All jurisdictions charge for the processing of applications. If these fees
are excessive, they can have a significant impact on a developer’s ability to provide affordable
housing. Government Code Section 66020 requires that planning and permit processing fees
do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing the service, unless approved by the voters;
agencies collecting fees must provide project applicants with a statement of amounts and
purposes of all fees at the time of fee imposition or project approval. Table 5-7 lists the City’s
processing fees for planning applications.
                      Table 5-7 Planning and Building Services Fee Schedule
               Description of Service/Permit                        Fee or Deposit
  Development Permit (single-family)                                     $2,000
  Development Permit (multi-family)                                      $1,500
  Administrative Development Permit                                       $300
  Administrative Use Permit                                               $750
                                                              Existing Structure: $1,000
  Use Permit
                                                               New Structure: $2,500
                                                                     Minor: $300
  Pre-Application Review Meeting
                                                                     Major: $1,000
  Negative Declaration                                                  $10,000
  Mitigated Negative Declaration                                        $15,000
  Environmental Impact Report                                           $50,000
  General Plan/Code/Coastal Program
  Amendment                                                              $4,000
  Final Map Approval                                                     $2,500
  Lot Line Adjustment, Lot Merger, Certificate of
  Compliance                                                             $1,000
  Tentative Parcel Map                                                   $1,500
  Tentative Tract Map                                                    $2,500
  Source: City of Grover Beach Master Fee Schedule, May 2013
Government Code Section 66000 et seq. (Mitigation Fee Act) sets forth procedural
requirements for adopting and collecting development impact fees and exactions, and
requires they be supported by a report establishing the relationship between the amount of
the fee and the use for which it is collected. Table 5-8 shows the development impact fees in
Grover Beach.
                                                                                                 69

 Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
                                   Table 5-8 Development Impact Fees
                                                               Multi-Family
             Type               Single-Family (per unit)                                Mobile Home
                                                                 (per unit)
Administrative                              $128                   $106                       $70
Transportation                             $1,586                  $974                      $927
Law Enforcement                             $103                   $128                      $85
Fire Protection                             $230                   $115                      $138
Water (one-inch)                           $2,896                 $2,896                    $2,896
Wastewater                                 $5,158                 $5,158                    $5,158
Water Conservation                         $2,775                 $2,775                    $2,775
Stormwater (2,500 s.f.)                     $675                   $675                      $675
Park Land Dedication                       $2,751                 $2,751                    $2,751
Recreation Facility                         $585                   $482                      $320
Park Improvement                           $3,273                 $2,698                    $1,790
 Source: City of Grover Beach Master Fee Schedule, May 2013
 Considering development impact fees and all other building related fees, the average single-
 family home in Grover Beach requires a total of $27,442 in fees. Total fees for a mid-size multi-
 family fourplex, typical in Grover Beach, is $71,077, resulting in a per unit charge of $23,692. Table
 5-9 lists the total fees for a single family residence and a typical four unit multi-family project.
 70
Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
                    Table 5-9 Example Fee Payment for Residential Development
                   Fee Type                    Single-Family Residence             Multi-Family (Four Units)
Plan Check
          Building                                        $955                               $1,844
          Fire                                            $160                                $240
          Planning (Deposit)                              $250                                 $350
          Engineering (Deposit)                           $500                               $1,000
           Sewer (Deposit)                                 $52                                  $52
           Water (Deposit)                                 $52                                  $52
Inspection
          Building                                       $1,470                              $2,837
          Plumbing                                        $236                                 $544
          Mechanical                                      $195                                 $576
          Electrical                                      $212                                 $344
          Fire Sprinkler                                  $256                                 $512
          Sewer Hook-Up                                    $99                                  $99
Development Impact Fees
          So. SLO Sanitation District                    $2,475                              $7,425
          City Sewer/Sanitation                             $0                               $1,300
          Wastewater                                     $2,683                              $9,121
          Stormwater                                      $540                               $1,194
          Water Conservation                             $2,775                              $8,325
          Water                                          $2,896                              $9,847
          Park Improvement                               $3,273                              $7,517
          Recreation Facility                             $585                               $1,343
          Parkland Dedication                            $2,751                              $8,253
          Transportation                                 $1,586                              $2,309
          Law Enforcement                                 $103                                 $409
          Administration                                  $128                                 $295
          Fire Protection                                 $230                                 $228
Miscellaneous
          Administration                                 $1,022                              $1,916
          S.M.I.P.                                         $15                                  $37
                                                                                   $687 (x5 if each unit and
          Water Service                                   $687                        common area gets
                                                                                       separate meters)
          Address Notification                             $50                                 $150
          Green Building Fee                               $74                                 $141
          General Plan Maintenance                         $55                                 $107
           Technology Fee                                  $55                                 $107
          Records Retention                              $1,022                              $1,916
Total                                                   $27,442                             $71,077
Per Unit                                                $27,442                             $23,692
Source: City of Grover Beach 2013
Based on a 3-bedroom/2.5-bath single-family home and four unit apartment building (assumes fee credit for demolition
of an existing residence).
                                                                                                                 71
Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
Total fees constitute approximately six percent of the average cost to build a single-family unit of
$222,935, based on an estimate using Building-Cost.net and approximately seven percent of a
multi-family apartment unit (see Table 5-10). Given the prices of housing in the City and fees in
other jurisdictions, fees charged for residential development are not a significant factor
contributing to high housing costs in Grover Beach.
Table 5-10 Fee Proportion in Development Costs for a Typical Residential Development
                     Development Cost for Typical Unit                          Single-Family           Apartment
  Total estimated fees per unit                                                    $27,4421               $23,6921
  Estimated cost of development per unit                                          $461,9352              $332,1432
  Estimated proportion of fee cost to cost of development per
                                                                                      6%                    7%
  unit
Source: Based on City of Grover Beach, Master Fee Schedule and building permit forms completed December 2013;
Building-cost.net
Notes:
1Assumes (the project was exempt from CEQA as an “in-fill development”. Also assumes a 2,000 sq. ft. surface area home
and a 4,500 sq. ft. surface area for multi-family.
2 Cost for vacant lot included in these numbers and assumed as $239,000 based on search of listings on Trulia.com for
Grover Beach on April 3, 2014.
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Housing Constraints for Persons with Disabilities
Housing element law and the Government Code (Section 65008) were amended by Senate Bill
520, which requires localities to include the following in the preparation and adoption of a
Housing Element:
     •    As part of a governmental constraints analysis, an element must analyze potential and
          actual constraints on the development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for
          persons with disabilities and demonstrate local efforts to remove governmental
          constraints that hinder a locality from meeting the need for housing for persons with
          disabilities (Section 65583(a)(4)).
     •    As part of the required constraints program, the element must include programs that
          remove constraints or provide reasonable accommodations for housing designed for
          persons with disabilities (Section 65583(c)(3)).
This legislation was made effective on January 1, 2002. Any jurisdiction adopting a Housing
Element after this date must comply with the requirements of this law.
An example of a reasonable accommodation is when a municipal jurisdiction allows a deviation
from the strict interpretation of zoning standards for someone with a demonstrated need
resulting from a disability.
The City of Grover Beach currently processes any request for a reasonable accommodation that
includes a modification or exception to the practices, rules, and standards for the development
that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity
to housing of their choice (see Development Code Section 3.10.060). A permit that allows such
72

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
modification or exception requires the approval of the Community Development Director. For a
reasonable accommodation to be approved, the following must be determined:
    •   Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual
        defined as disabled under the Americans with Disability Act (ADA).
    •   Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific
        housing available to an individual with a disability under the ADA.
    •   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial
        or administrative burden on the City.
    •   Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental
        alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use
        and zoning.
    •   Whether there are alternatives to the requested waiver or exception that could provide
        similar benefits to the applicant with less potential detriment to surrounding owners and
        occupants or to the general public.
    •   Documentation of the physical attributes of the property and structures; and Section 3-12
        City of Grover Beach Development Code Adopted October 15, 2012 3.10.070 Standards
        for All Development and Land Uses.
    •   Consideration of alternate reasonable accommodations that may provide an
        equivalent level of benefit.
Zoning
Grover Beach has always endeavored to provide sufficient housing for people of all needs. The
Development Code does not have occupancy standards specifically for unrelated adults that
are different from families, with the exception of high occupancy residential uses (see below for
a more detailed description). Aside from parking, the City does not have a separate set of
particular conditions or use restrictions for group homes and residential care facilities. Also,
neither the General Plan Land Use Element nor the Development Code regulates the location of
special needs housing in relationship to one another, and neither specifies minimum distances
that must separate two different special needs housing developments.
                                                                                               73

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
Building Codes
The City of Grover Beach has adopted the 2013 California Building Code (CBC) with no local
amendments. It uses the Building Standards Administrative Code, California Residential Code,
and California Electrical, Planning, and Mechanical Codes for its building regulations. The City
also adopted the California Energy Code and Green Building Code. Additionally, it has
strengthened the California Building Code with respect to accommodating persons with
disabilities by adopting the California Disabled Accessibility Guidelines (CALDAG). If there is a
difference between the CBC and federal accessibility regulations when implementing the code,
the City’s practice is to defer to the stricter of the two regulations. For example, if a wheelchair-
accessible ramp were to be installed, the slope required would be whichever is the least steep.
Grover Beach has not adopted any universal design elements into its building code. However,
with respect to the enforcement of building codes, the City currently provides reasonable
accommodation by enforcing all accessibility regulations.
The City does act, and will continue to act, as an information station to refer those with
complaints of discrimination or violations of fair housing laws to the California Department of Fair
Employment and Housing. In previous Housing Element implementation, the City acted
effectively in its role to refer people experiencing housing discrimination to the appropriate
agencies and in distributing fair housing information to the public.
As part of its information distribution, the City shall post information for any person who has
experienced discrimination or a violation of fair housing laws, referring them to the California
Department of Fair Employment and Housing. This information shall be posted in the following
locations:
     •   City of Grover Beach website
     •   Grover Beach City Hall
     •   Seabreeze newsletter – published by Grover Beach City Hall
     •   Ramona Park Community Center
     •   Trouville Community Center
In addition, the City will help ensure new residential development in Grover Beach is barrier-free.
The Housing Element includes Program 4.1 that requires new development to provide accessible
housing for the disabled.
5.4 Non-Governmental Constraints
This section examines constraints to producing affordable housing that result from the forces of
the housing market. The analysis evaluates the availability of financing, the price of land, and
the cost of construction in Grover Beach.
74

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
Availability of Financing
Interest-rate fluctuations impact the ability of buyers to afford housing and the ability of builders
to construct new housing. Because both buyers and builders must finance the purchase of a
project, housing production is extremely sensitive to fluctuations in interest rates. Interest rates are
determined by national policies and economic conditions, and there is little that local
governments can do to affect these rates. Jurisdictions can, however, offer interest rate write-
downs to extend home purchase opportunities to lower-income households. In addition,
government-insured loan programs may be available to reduce mortgage down-payment
requirements.
First-time homebuyers are the group most impacted by financing requirements. Lower initial
rates are available with graduated payment mortgages, adjustable rate mortgages, and buy-
down mortgages; however, the subprime crisis affected the availability of money for home
mortgages. Variable interest rate mortgages on affordable homes may increase to the point
where the interest rate exceeds the cost of living adjustments, which is a constraint on
affordability. Although interest rates are currently relatively low, they can change significantly
and substantially impact the affordability of housing stock. Variable rate mortgages are not
ideal for low- and moderate-income households that live on tight budgets. In addition, the
availability of variable rate mortgages has declined in the last few years due to greater
regulation of housing lending markets. Variable rate mortgages may allow lower-income
households to enter into homeownership, but there is a definite risk of monthly housing costs
rising above the financial means of that household. Therefore, the fixed interest rate mortgage
remains the preferred type of loan, especially during periods of low, stable interest rates. Table
5-11 illustrates interest rates as of March 2014. The table presents both the interest rate and the
annual percentage rate (APR) for different types of home loans. The interest rate is the
percentage of an amount of money that is paid for its use for a specified time, and the APR is
the yearly percentage rate that expresses the total finance charge on a loan over its entire
term. The APR includes the interest rate, fees, points, and mortgage insurance and is therefore a
more complete measure of a loan’s cost than the interest rate alone. However, the loan’s
interest rate, not its APR, is used to calculate the monthly principal and interest payment.
                                           Table 5-11 Interest Rates
                                                                 Interest                       APR
  Conforming
  30-year fixed                                                  4.500%                       4.586%
  15-year fixed                                                  3.625%                       3.772%
  5-year adjustable rate                                         3.250%                       3.001%
  Jumbo
  30-year fixed                                                  4.250%                       4.278%
  5-year adjustable rate                                         2.875%                       2.819%
Source: www.wellsfargo.com, March 2014
Notes: A conforming loan is for no more than $417,000. A jumbo loan is greater than $417,000.
                                                                                                      75

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
Another major constraint on housing development, which local government cannot control, is
banking industry regulations and institutional reluctance to fund large phases of residential
developments. For a hypothetical 100-unit subdivision, banks finance only small (10–15 units)
phases. When 80 percent of the first phase is sold, the next phase receives funding. Effectively,
this restricts housing supplies and keeps housing prices high.
Currently, local banks provide construction loans in the range of the prime rate plus 2 to 3
percent. The prime rate is the interest rate that large banks charge to their best customers and is
currently around the recent 20-year low of 4 percent. Over the previous five-year period, 30-year
fixed-rate homeowner loans have averaged an annual interest rate of approximately 4 to 5
percent.
Many programs in California exist to provide cities, communities, and counties financial
assistance in the development, preservation, and rehabilitation of residential development,
primarily affordable units. The California Department of Housing and Community Development
identifies and provides detailed information on the grants and loans available for affordable
housing.
Price of Land
Land costs vary substantially and are based on a number of factors. The main determinants to
land value are location and zoning. The size of a parcel will also affect price. Land that is
conveniently located in a desirable area zoned for residential uses will likely be more valuable,
and thus more expensive, than a remote piece of land zoned for agricultural uses. The price for
a vacant lot in Grover Beach ranges from $438,000 to $3.9 million per acre. The average price
per acre for residential zoned land is $2.2 million. These prices are based on a point-in-time
survey conducted in March 2014 of online land sales listed on the website landwatch.com and
included nine properties.
Cost of Construction
Costs incurred in actually constructing a dwelling unit vary according to the amenities built into
the unit, materials used, prevailing labor rate, and the difficulty of building on the site. Residential
construction costs can range from $100 to $200 per square foot depending on the quality and
type of construction.
An even greater constraint to residential development is financing the cost of infrastructure.
Since the passage of Proposition 13, local jurisdictions can no longer pass on infrastructure costs
to the taxpayer through property tax–backed general or special obligations bonds. The
incremental cost of these facilities has been partially financed through impact fees; however,
these costs are typically passed along by increasing the cost of housing and rents.
According to an Internet source of construction cost data (www.building-cost.net) provided by
the Craftsman Book Company, a wood-framed single-story four-cornered home in Grover
Beach is estimated to cost approximately $222,935, excluding the cost of buying land. This cost
estimate is based on a 2,000-square-foot house of good quality construction including a two-car
garage and forced air heating. Table 5-12 summarizes the projected construction costs.
76

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
                                      Table 5-12 Construction Costs
                       Item Name                     Materials     Labor     Equipment    Total
 Direct Job Costs (e.g., foundation, plumbing,
                                                      $93,691     $87,946      $3,345  $184,982
 materials)
 Indirect Job Costs (e.g., insurance, plans and
                                                      $10,448       $853         —      $11,301
 specifications)
 Contractor Markup                                     26,652        —           —      $26,652
 Total Cost                                          $ 130,791    $88,799      $3,345  $222,935
Source: Building-Cost.net (accessed February 2014)
Infrastructure Constraints
Housing costs can be substantially impacted by the availability of infrastructure. Infrastructure
constraints such as lack of adequate water, sanitary sewer lines (or inappropriate soils for septic
tanks), electricity, and other essential public utilities and services can preclude development
and greatly increase cost. The City of Grover Beach currently gets its water supply from a
combination of groundwater and local surface water and is currently working to obtain access
to additional supplies from new sources. While new sources are needed in the future, Grover
Beach has never suffered from a shortage in water supply. The City has a centralized sewer
system, and wastewater service is provided through the South San Luis Obispo County Sanitation
District. The infrastructure is adequate and funding sources for additional sewer connections
sustainable. No infrastructure consideration is a constraint for housing in the City.
Water and Sewer Priority
Effective January 2006, SB 1087 requires water and sewer providers to grant priority for service
allocations to proposed developments that include units affordable to lower-income
households. Pursuant to this statute, upon adoption of its Housing Element, the City will
immediately deliver the element to local water and sewer providers, along with a summary of its
Regional Housing Needs Allocation.
Environmental Constraints
Environmental and infrastructure issues affect the amount, location, and timing of new
residential development. Slope, natural and man-made hazards, creeks, and other natural
features reduce the developable area of a site and often require special site grading, building,
or landscape design to mitigate the impacts of development. Given its setting near a unique
ocean ecosystem, nearby hills, and numerous perennial creeks, Grover Beach must balance
environmental preservation with well-designed development. New housing opportunities create
challenges regarding public infrastructure extensions and expansions, and encroachment into
sensitive habitat and into agricultural land. Thus, environmental factors can reduce the number
of dwellings that can be developed on a given site.
                                                                                                77

Chapter 5 Housing Constraints
Faults
Grover Beach is relatively close to the San Andreas Fault Zone. Consequently, the City is prone to
ground shaking. Such ground shaking has the potential to cause severe vulnerability in the built
environment and to human life. Seismic hazards are not generally considered a major constraint
to housing development, as all building developments must comply with similar earthquake-
ready building standards, and earthquake insurance is not mandatory in California.
Flooding
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood map for Grover Beach indicates
that only three residential streets (Nacimiento, Mono and Owens) in the City are in a high flood
hazard zone. Flood vulnerability relating to sea level rise is also likely to increase in severity as a
result of climate change in the future.
78
                                                                                   Chapter 6 
         Review of Previous Housing Element 
6.1 Evaluation of 2009 Housing Element 
The 2009 Housing Element included goals, policies, and programs intended to produce
adequate affordable housing for the community. It also included a housing allocation to
provide housing affordable to various income categories for the previous planning period.
Overall, the City did not achieve the planned goals to provide affordable housing at the various
income levels, particularly for the allocated very low- and low-income units.
Table 6-1 summarizes the City’s RHNA for the period from January 2007 through December 2013
and the number of housing units built during that period. Between January 2007 and December
2013, there were building permits issued for 73 units. Only five of these units were very low- and
low-income housing units. 68 of the units were in the moderate- and above moderate-income
categories.
                 Table 6‐1 Progress During Previous Planning Period, 2007‐2014
                                                     Housing Units Built        Remainder of
  Income Level                    2007-2014 RHNA
                                                         2007-2014              Housing Goals
  Very Low                               44                   4                       40
  Low                                    31                   1                       30
  Moderate                               37                  15                       22
  Above Moderate                         81                  53                       28
  Total                                 193                  73                      120
Source: City of Grover Beach, 2014
Table 6-2 provides a review of implementation of the City’s Housing Element programs during
the 2007–2014 planning period.
                                                                                                79

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                            Table 6‐2 Review of Previous Housing Element Matrix 
                                                                                                                       Appropriateness for
                                     Program                                           Status/Effectiveness            2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                             Element
 1.1.1 In order to meet State law requirements (Government Code Sections      The City Council adopted an           Delete.
 65583(c)(1) (A) and 65583(c)(1) (B)) to address the 2007–2014 RHNA, the      updated Development Code and
 City shall amend the General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance to provide        Zoning Map on October 15, 2012.
 adequate sites for 50 very low and low-income units at a minimum of 20       The City rezoned part of the parcel
 dwelling units per acre “by right” (without a conditional use permit or any  in question (APN 060-031-005) to R-
 other discretionary action). A minimum of 16 units will be accommodated      3. The zoning on this parcel requires
 per site. At least half (50 percent) of these sites shall be zoned for       a minimum density of 20 units per
 residential uses only. The applications can be subject to design review as   acre and allows residential uses
 long as the project does not trigger the CEQA review process. The City has   only per Land Use Element (LUE)
 identified a site that could be rezoned to meet the State requirements       Policy LU-3.4.
 and has the potential to accommodate the remaining 50 very low- and
 low-income units allocated for this planning period. The site (9.89 acre lot
 on 1600 block of Atlantic City Ave, APN 060- 031-005) is discussed in detail
 in Chapter 4.
 Responsibility: Community Development Department
 Funding: General Fund
 Housing Objective: 50 Units
 Timeframe: To be completed by June 2011
 1.1.2 The City will prepare an inventory of State, federal, City and         The City reviewed and updated         Modify and continue.
 Improvement Agency owned land and will analyze that land for possible        the inventory in June 2013. This      The City will remove
 housing sites. If appropriate sites are identified, the City will approach   program will be continued. A site at  reference to the
 developers and funding agencies to facilitate development of the sites       10th Street and Farroll Road          Improvement Agency.
 for affordable housing and provide priority permit processing.               (previously a drainage basin) was
 Responsibility: Community Development Department                             identified and has been entitled for
 Funding: General Fund                                                        five low-income units.
 Housing Objective: N/A
 Timeframe: The database will be updated annually
80

                                                                                               Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                     Appropriateness for
                                   Program                                          Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                           Element
1.1.3 In June 2008, an amendment to the City Zoning Ordinance went into   The City has not implemented an         Modify and continue.
effect which applied a Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zoning District   annual marketing program. Owners        Reference to the
to the blocks along West Grand Avenue. This overlay district is generally and developers have been                Improvement Agency
bounded to the north by Ramona Avenue and to the south by Rockaway        informed about the PD Overlay, if       and the annual
Avenue and encompasses commercial properties along West Grand             applicable, when they approach          marketing will be
Avenue from east of Highway 1 to Oak Park Boulevard. The purpose of this  the City with interest to develop. No   removed.
overlay zone is to promote flexible and relaxed development standards,    City financial assistance is currently
beyond what is permitted in the underlying zoning district. In addition,  available. In addition, more flexible
Innovative site planning and other aspects of project design are          standards have been put in place
encouraged which will facilitate the development of small parcels in the  as part of the comprehensive
area. The PD Overlay encourages mixed-use projects, which include         Development Code update, which
residential uses, and redevelopment of underutilized land. The City shall may reduce the need for the PD
encourage implementation through the following actions: Providing         Overlay. The City does not
assistance for lot consolidations through the Improvement Agency or       anticipate a lot of interest in this
development incentives, such as priority permit processing or flexible    program, but it will be continued in
development standards. The City shall actively contact property owners    the interest of providing as many
and developers to promote lot consolidations; The City shall conduct an   options and tools as possible to
annual marketing program to promote development opportunities             facilitate higher-density
provided by the PD Overlay District.                                      development on small parcels.
Responsibility: Community Development Department
Funding: General Fund, Improvement Agency
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)
                                                                                                                                         81

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                       Appropriateness for
                                      Program                                           Status/Effectiveness           2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                             Element
 1.1.4 The City’s Improvement Agency shall make Improvement Agency             With the dissolution of the           Delete.
 funds available for the development of affordable housing through             Improvement Agency (the City’s
 agency loans and grants. In order to encourage extremely low-income           former Redevelopment Agency),
 housing, the City will prioritize funding for projects that include extremely Improvement Agency funds are no
 low-income units. A public outreach program will disseminate information      longer available.
 on the City’s website, on the Cable TV channel, City Seabreeze                Five low-income units were entitled
 Newsletter, and hand outs that can be distributed to affordable housing       at 10th Street and Farroll Road prior
 developers and made available at the City Community Development               to dissolution of the Improvement
 Department.                                                                   Agency. The agency was going to
 Responsibility: Community Development Department                              pay approximately $120,000 in fees
 Funding: Improvement Agency                                                   for development of the five units,
 Housing Objective: 12 Extremely, Low, Very Low, or Low Income dwelling        but those funds are no longer
 units                                                                         available as a result of the
                                                                               dissolution of the Improvement
 Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                               Agency.
 1.1.5 The City will investigate the possibility of becoming the primary       The City Council voted to become      Delete.
 recipient of Community Development Block Grant funds rather than              a non-entitlement city on May 16,
 applying to San Luis Obispo County for CDBG funding.                          2011. The City received a $1.8
 Responsibility: Community Development Department                              million CDBG grant from the
 Funding: General Fund                                                         California Department of Housing
                                                                               and Community Development in
 Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                               2013. This program has been
 Timeframe: Investigate and decide whether to pursue within one year of        completed.
 Housing Element adoption (by November 2, 2010)
82

                                                                                                   Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                         Appropriateness for
                                     Program                                            Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                               Element
1.1.6 The City will consider an Inclusionary Housing Ordinance that requires    The City Council has not yet          Delete.
new housing development projects or subdivisions of five or more units or       considered an Inclusionary Housing
lots to provide at least 10 percent of the units available to very-low          Ordinance. The City does not
income households, 15 percent of the units available to low-income              expect to consider an Inclusionary
households, or 20 percent of the units available to moderate income             Housing Ordinance during the
households. The affordable housing requirements may include providing           planning period.
on-site affordable housing units, paying a fee in lieu of providing such
housing, or providing the required housing unit(s) off-site in the City. For
projects with five units, but less than 10 units, an in lieu fee, as adopted by
the City Council will be considered. For projects of ten or more units, on-
site or off-site housing units are required, unless the City Council makes
findings authorizing the payment of in lieu fees. The Ordinance shall
require that all affordable units be maintained as affordable housing for
at least 30 years for projects outside the Improvement Agency area
boundaries, and at least 45 years for projects inside the Improvement
Agency area boundaries (as required by California Community
Redevelopment Law). If such an ordinance is adopted, the City shall
investigate incentives such as increased density, reduced parking
requirements, reduced or deferred permitting fees, and/or expedited
permit processing.
Responsibility: Community Development Department
Funding: General Fund Housing
Objective: 25 units
Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)
                                                                                                                                             83

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                            Appropriateness for
                                      Program                                              Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                                   Element
 1.1.7 The City will establish an Affordable Housing Fund to accept               The City Council approved the          Due to the dissolution of
 inclusionary in-lieu fees, Improvement Agency set-aside funds, and other         Home Repair Loan Program on            the Improvement
 housing-related fees or funds. This fund will be used to acquire property,       September       8,    2009.   Through  Agency, this program
 construct affordable housing, write-down land or financing costs, or to          December 2013, 13 applicants           will not be continued.
 rehabilitate existing substandard or at-risk units. The City will also adopt     have     had      their   applications Ongoing City
 guidelines and criteria for the utilization of these funds, including priorities approved            and        homes   rehabilitation efforts will
 and procedures.                                                                  rehabilitated. Loans were granted      be addressed by a
 Responsibility: Community Development Department, Administrative                 to income-qualified homeowners         modified version of
 Services, and Administration                                                     and rental property owners who         Program 5.1.1.
 Funding: General Fund                                                            rent to income-qualified residents
                                                                                  of single-family homes or mobile
 Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                                  homes      for     households     with
 Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)                 moderate incomes or lower. The
                                                                                  funding for this program came from
                                                                                  the Improvement Agency Low- and
                                                                                  Moderate-Income Housing Fund
                                                                                  that has since been dissolved per
                                                                                  AB 26X. The City received HOME
                                                                                  funds in January 2014, some of
                                                                                  which will be used for rehabilitation
                                                                                  purposes.
84

                                                                                               Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                     Appropriateness for
                                    Program                                         Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                           Element
1.1.8 The City shall continue to implement the affordable housing density-  The City completed this program       Delete.
bonus and incentive/concession program adopted in August, 2007 by           and implements it through routine
City Ordinance No. 07-06. This program meets the requirements of            compliance with the Municipal
Government Code Section 65915 provides incentives for affordable            Code.
housing projects not meeting the State threshold of five units. All
affordable units are to be maintained as affordable housing for at least 30
years for projects outside the Improvement Agency area boundaries and
at least 45 years for projects inside the Improvement Agency area
boundaries (as required by California Community Redevelopment Law).
Responsibility: Community Development
Funding: General Fund
Housing Objective: 10 units
Timeframe: Ongoing
1.1.9 The City will continue to partner with other agencies and non-profits The Home Repair Loan Program          Continue.
for assistance with affordable housing programs such as the Section 8       with the Community Action
Rental Voucher Program and other programs and opportunities that meet       Partnership of San Luis Obispo
the needs of extremely low income households. The City intends to utilize   County was approved on
these relationships for program implementation, administration, income      September 8, 2009. Thirteen homes
verifications, and monitoring of the City’s density bonus and inclusionary  have been rehabilitated.
housing programs. Additionally, the City will work with these partners on
applications for financial assistance. Potential local partnership
opportunities include, but are not limited to, the San Luis Obispo City
Housing Authority, the San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund, and
People’s Self Help Housing.
Responsibility: Community Development Department
Funding: Improvement Agency Fund
Housing Objective: Conserve 180 existing Section 8 vouchers
Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                                                                         85

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                         Appropriateness for
                                      Program                                            Status/Effectiveness            2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                              Element
 1.2.1 The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to modify the mixed-use        The City Council adopted a            Delete.
 residential standards in non-residential zoning districts to allow the         comprehensive Development
 residential component of the project to be located above, to the side, or      Code update on October 15, 2012.
 to the rear of the non-residential portion and to allow the residential use of The update modified the mixed-use
 a mixed-use project to be detached from the nonresidential use as long         residential standards in
 as the non-residential use is located entirely along the front of the project  nonresidential zoning districts as
 site.                                                                          described in Program 1.2.1. This
 Responsibility: Community Development                                          program has been completed.
 Funding: General Fund
 Housing Objective: Five mixed-use residential dwelling units per year
 Timeframe: Within one year of HE adoption (by November 2, 2010)
 1.2.2 The City shall revise Part 40 of the Municipal Code to potentially       The City Council has not yet          Modify to clarify
 decrease lot size and make other changes in development standards to           considered revisions to this section. language to read
 encourage development of small, underutilized parcels in the R-3 zoning        This program will be continued.       “consider revising” and
 districts. The City, through recent amendments to the Code, has also                                                 continue.
 expanded the allowable lot coverage in the R-3 zone to 60 percent to
 provide a further incentive for development of small parcels.
 Responsibility: Community Development
 Funding: General Fund
 Housing Objective: N/A
 Timeframe: Within one year of HE adoption (by November 2, 2010)
86

                                                                                                Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                      Appropriateness for
                                  Program                                            Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                            Element
1.2.3 Although no current need for farmworker housing exists, the City will In October 2012, the Council           Modify to specifically
amend the Zoning ordinance to insure compliance with Health and             adopted the Urban Reserve (UR)         address removing the
Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6.                                   zone for the 30 acre property          use permit requirement
Responsibility: Community Development                                       currently used for agriculture. The    in the UR zone and
Funding: General Fund                                                       zone allows for farmworker housing     continue.
                                                                            in compliance with Health and
Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                            Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and
Timeframe: Within three years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2012)          17021.6 subject to approval of a
                                                                            use permit.
                                                                            This program will be continued to
                                                                            allow Farmworker housing in the UR
                                                                            zone without a use permit.
2.1.1 Affordable housing developments that are proposed to be two           The City does not have a view          Delete.
stories or more shall be designed to respect existing coastal views, where  protection ordinance, and this
possible.                                                                   program is more like a policy. This
Responsibility: Community Development                                       program is sufficiently addressed by
Funding: General Fund                                                       Policy 2.1 and will be removed.
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Ongoing
2.2.1 The architectural design of affordable housing developments shall     No policies or regulations have        Delete.
incorporate safe and attractive pedestrian linkages to common open          been put in place to implement this
space areas, public transit and other uses in the public realm.             program and the City doesn’t
Responsibility: Community Development                                       consider it a feasible requirement
Funding: General Fund                                                       for affordable housing
                                                                            developments at this time. This
Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                            program will not be continued.
Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                                                                          87

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                     Appropriateness for
                                     Program                                         Status/Effectiveness            2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                            Element
 3.1.1 The City will prepare an Affordable Housing Development              The City completed the guidebook      Modify and continue.
 Guidebook identifying funds available and the process for applying to use  in January 2011 and updated it in     The City will reword the
 City or Improvement Agency funds available for affordable residential      December 2013. It has not yet         program to focus on
 projects. This Guidebook will be available at City Hall and on the City    been posted on the website. This      updating and
 website.                                                                   program will be modified and          distributing the
 Responsibility: Community Development, Administration                      continued.                            guidebook and to
 Funding: General Fund and Improvement Agency Housing                                                             remove reference to
                                                                                                                  Improvement Agency
 Objective: N/A
                                                                                                                  funds.
 Timeframe: Within three years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2012)
 3.1.2 The Improvement Agency shall provide funding for the construction    This program is ongoing. Habitat for  Modify to remove
 of new affordable housing to be developed in partnership with affordable   Humanity developed four units at      reference to the
 housing developers. The City will prioritize funding for developments that 506 Longbranch (finalized on          Improvement Agency
 incorporate extremely low-income units. Developers who receive financial   November 25, 2009) using this         and change to City
 assistance from the City or Improvement Agency for their project will be   program. Those units are owner        providing support and
 required to record a covenant on the project deed(s) that requires the     occupied and deed restricted for      assistance for
 units to be rented or for resale at below market, affordable rates as      very low-income households.           applications when
 established in the County of San Luis Obispo Affordable Housing            Additionally, five low-income for     feasible.
 Standards.                                                                 sale units at 920 S. 10th Street were
 Responsibility: Community Development                                      entitled in November 2012 as part
 Funding: Project Applicant                                                 of a partnership with a developer.
                                                                            This program will be modified to
 Housing Objective: Eight Low or Very Low Income dwelling units
                                                                            address the dissolution of the
 Timeframe: Ongoing                                                         Improvement Agency and reflect
                                                                            current City resources and
                                                                            continued.
88

                                                                                               Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                     Appropriateness for
                                   Program                                          Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                           Element
4.1.1 In accordance with the California Building Code, multistory dwelling The City implements this program       Delete.
units in apartment buildings with three or more dwelling units or          through routine compliance with
condominiums with four or more dwelling units shall continue to install    the Municipal Code and the
design features in at least 10 percent of the units for handicapped        California Building Code. No
accessibility.                                                             additional action is required.
Responsibility: Community Development
Funding: Project Applicant
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Ongoing
4.1.2 The City shall encourage residential developers of five or more      This program has been made             Continue.
dwelling units to offer an optional accessible design to home buyers       available throughout the planning
whose households have one or more disabled persons.                        period. The 48-unit (5 low income)
Responsibility: Community Development                                      development at 16th Street and
Funding: Project Applicant                                                 Farroll Road could make the units
                                                                           accessible with minor adjustments.
Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                           This program will be continued.
Timeframe: Ongoing
4.1.3 In order to encourage housing for extremely low and low income       The City Council adopted an            Delete.
households, the City shall allow single-room occupancy units (SROs) in the updated Development Code on
R-2, C-R-2, R-3, and C-R-3 zoning districts with a conditional use permit. October 15, 2012. The update
Standards and procedures shall be developed to encourage and               allows SROs in the R-2, C-R-2, R-3,
facilitate development of SROs. Parking needs will be analyzed during      and C-R-3 zones subject to
development of the standards and procedures.                               approval of a use permit and
Responsibility: Community Development                                      provides SRO development,
Funding: General Fund                                                      operation, parking, density, and
                                                                           design standards. This program has
Housing Objective: Five extremely low-income units
                                                                           been completed.
Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)
                                                                                                                                         89

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                        Appropriateness for
                                    Program                                             Status/Effectiveness            2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                              Element
 4.2.1 To encourage senior housing, the City will consider a senior housing   The City Council adopted an            Delete.
 overlay that provides incentives for developers of senior housing in certain updated Development Code on
 areas. The City shall also reduce the parking standards required for senior  October 15, 2012. The update
 housing developments located near commercial services and transit            allows senior housing in the R-2,
 routes by amending the parking regulations of the Zoning Ordinance.          C-R-2, R-3, C-R-3, C-B and C-B-O
 Responsibility: Community Development                                        zones subject to approval of a use
 Funding: General Plan and Improvement Agency                                 permit with amended parking and
                                                                              open space standards. This
 Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                              program has been completed.
 Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)
 4.5.1 Underutilized motels or other commercial structures located in         The City completed an inventory of     Modify and continue.
 appropriate areas that are in need of rehabilitation shall be identified,    underutilized motels or other          The City will reword to
 contacted, and offered financial assistance and other incentives to          commercial structures located in       focus on contacting,
 convert and/or upgrade their buildings for permanent special needs           appropriate areas in need of           incentivizing, and
 housing that could serve disabled, elderly, extremely low income, and        rehabilitation in September 2010.      upgrading inventoried
 very low income persons.                                                     Half of one hotel is in the Coastal    buildings.
 Responsibility: Community Development                                        Visitor-Serving Zone and would not
 Funding: General Fund or Code Enforcement Fees                               be able to be converted. The other
                                                                              half is located in the Central
 Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                              Business Open Zone and could be
 Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)             converted, with a use permit. The
                                                                              two halves are separated by a
                                                                              public street. The other hotel site is
                                                                              in the Central Business Open Zone,
                                                                              but no contact has been made
                                                                              since the Development Code was
                                                                              adopted in order to further explore
                                                                              the option of conversion. This
                                                                              program will be continued.
90

                                                                                                 Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                       Appropriateness for
                                    Program                                           Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                             Element
4.6.1 The City shall implement measures to mitigate constraints for         The City Council adopted an             Delete.
disabled or special needs persons who may seek a reasonable                 updated Development Code on
accommodation. The City shall complete the following actions:               October 15, 2012. The update
Establishment of a dedicated application procedure allowing a disabled      includes reasonable
person to apply for a reasonable accommodation from the strict              accommodation provisions and
interpretation of the zoning regulations. This application will be attached procedures. This program has been
to the City’s Building Permit and Planning Review applications and will     completed.
outline a specific permit process for an applicant to obtain a reasonable
accommodation. This procedure will also incorporate group homes or
residential care facilities that specifically serve disabled persons. The
approval authority for a reasonable accommodation will be given to the
Community Development Director; Reduced parking requirements may
be granted to projects that serve disabled or special needs person if the
project can demonstrate a reduced need for parking. The approval
authority for this parking reduction will be given to the Community
Development Director.
Responsibility: Community Development
Funding: General Fund
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Within one year of HE adoption (by November 2, 2010)
4.6.2 The City will publish information handouts for those seeking a        This information has been published     Continue.
reasonable accommodation from the strict interpretation of the zoning       and is available at City Hall.
regulations. These information handouts will be made available at City      Currently, there isn’t anywhere to
Hall and the Grover Beach Post Office.                                      post information at the Grover
Responsibility: Community Development                                       Beach Post Office. If that changes,
Funding: General Fund                                                       handouts will be made available at
                                                                            the Post Office.
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Within one year of HE adoption (by November 2, 2010)
                                                                                                                                           91

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                          Appropriateness for
                                    Program                                               Status/Effectiveness             2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                                Element
 4.6.3 The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to comply with SB 2 and         The City Council adopted an           Modify and continue to
 permit emergency shelters without a conditional use permit (CUP) or other       updated Development Code on           require amendments to
 discretionary permits and define transitional and supportive housing as         October 15, 2012. The update          the Development Code
 residential uses subject to the same restrictions that apply to other housing   includes an Emergency Shelter         to allow transitional and
 (including design/architectural review). The City will consider the R-3, L-M,   Overlay zone consistent with SB 2     supportive housing in all
 and C-1 zoning districts to allow emergency shelters by right. This will be     (Development        Code      Section zones             allowing
 implemented either by allowing the use by right in the entire zone or           2.90.030). The update also defined    residential           uses.
 through use of an overlay on a particular site or sites. The zone(s) or site(s) transitional and supportive housing   Transitional           and
 must have adequate capacity for at least one homeless shelter.                  as residential uses subject to the    supportive housing will
 Responsibility: Community Development                                           same restrictions that apply to other be allowed in the same
                                                                                 housing in residential zones. This    way other residential
 Funding: General Fund
                                                                                 program has been completed for        uses are allowed in
 Housing Objective: N/A                                                                                                each zone. In addition,
                                                                                 the requirement of SB 2 to allow
 Timeframe: Within one year of HE adoption (by November 2, 2010)                 emergency shelters. The program       the      program         will
                                                                                 will be modified and continued to     propose amendments
                                                                                 fully address the requirements of SB  to the development
                                                                                 2 related to transitional and         standards      for      the
                                                                                 supportive housing and to clarify     Emergency           Shelter
                                                                                 the Emergency Shelter Overlay         Overlay zone to comply
                                                                                 development standard related to       with Government Code
                                                                                 the distance between emergency        Section
                                                                                 shelters to ensure compliance with    65883(a)(4)(A)(v), which
                                                                                 SB 2.                                 allows       development
                                                                                                                       standards to dictate
                                                                                                                       “the proximity to other
                                                                                                                       emergency          shelters
                                                                                                                       provided               that
                                                                                                                       emergency shelters are
                                                                                                                       not required to be more
                                                                                                                       than 300 feet apart.”
92

                                                                                                  Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                        Appropriateness for
                                   Program                                             Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                              Element
5.1.1 The City will continue seeking funds for loans and grants through the  This program has not been               Modify to remove EOC-
Community Development Block Grant program to assist in financing and         implemented since the City              specific references and
rehabilitating affordable residential projects (extremely low, very low, and became a CDBG non-entitlement           to broaden the
low-income). Approximately $15,000 is currently spent on rehabilitations     jurisdiction in 2011, as the funding    potential funding
per year under CDBG through grants administered by the EOC, a non-           was from the City’s CDBG                sources and remove the
profit organization based in San Luis Obispo. The City shall continue to     entitlement funds. The City no          specifics on definite
distribute information on the rehabilitation program to citizens in the City longer has a regular funding source     annual funding
Seabreeze newsletter and on the City’s public access cable channel.          for this program.                       amounts, as they are
Responsibility: Community Development                                        Prior to the City becoming a non-       less certain without
Funding: CDBG Program                                                        entitlement jurisdiction, the small     CDBG entitlement funds
                                                                             housing rehabilitation grant            and continue.
Housing Objective: 20 Rehabilitated units
                                                                             administered by CAPSLO resulted in
Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                             changed out water heaters, new
                                                                             roofs, and other relatively minor
                                                                             rehabilitation efforts for city
                                                                             residents.
                                                                             The City received HOME funds in
                                                                             January 2014, some of which will be
                                                                             used for rehabilitation purposes. This
                                                                             program will be modified and
                                                                             continued as funding is available.
                                                                                                                                            93

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                       Appropriateness for
                                      Program                                          Status/Effectiveness            2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                            Element
 5.1.2 The City shall identify existing owner-occupied housing that received While the City was under the CDBG     Modify to specify that
 a financial subsidy (ies) through programs such the CDBG for gap            entitlement program, CDBG funds       this program will be
 financing, track the term remaining on the financing, and develop a         were used to implement this           implemented as funding
 program to reallocate the funds into new affordable housing units.          program. The City no longer has a     is available and
 Responsibility: Community Development                                       regular funding source for this       continue.
 Funding: CDBG Program, other funding as appropriate                         program. There may be limited
                                                                             program income due to sale or
 Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                             refinancing, but it is expected to be
 Timeframe: Ongoing                                                          very limited and not sufficient to
                                                                             contribute to implementation of this
                                                                             program.
                                                                             The City received HOME funds in
                                                                             January 2014, some of which will be
                                                                             used for gap financing purposes.
                                                                             This program will be continued as
                                                                             funding is available.
                                                                             Grover Beach residents are also
                                                                             eligible to participate in the County
                                                                             of San Luis Obispo’s First-Time
                                                                             Homebuyer Program.
94

                                                                                                   Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                         Appropriateness for
                                     Program                                            Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                               Element
5.2.1 Housing that provides living accommodations for low- and                 The City Council adopted an            Continue.
moderate-income households shall not be demolished unless any of the           updated Development Code on
following criteria apply: It is necessary to demolish the structure for health October 15, 2012. The update
and safety reasons, as evidenced by the determination of the Building          includes the provisions identified in
Official that it is substandard (in accordance with the criteria set forth in  Program 5.2.1. These requirements
Chapter 10 of the Uniform Housing Code as amended from time to time)           will continue to be implemented.
and that the cost of remediating the code violations would: 1) result in
housing that is not affordable to low- and moderate-income households;
or 2) exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure in its
present condition; It is necessary to carry out a public project that would
improve coastal access or other direct public benefit; The unit to be
demolished is owner-occupied housing; The unit to be demolished is a
non-conforming use according to the requirements of the General Plan or
Zoning Ordinance; The unit to be demolished will be replaced with a
rental unit available to low- or moderate-income households.
Responsibility: Community Development
Funding: General Fund
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Ongoing
5.3.1 Those who are very-low and low income householders that are              The City implements this program       Delete.
displaced due to abatement of unsafe structures may be provided                through normal compliance with
relocation assistance as provided by State law.                                State law. No further action
Responsibility: Community Development                                          required.
Funding: General Fund, Housing Trust Fund, and Improvement Agency
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                                                                             95

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                     Appropriateness for
                                    Program                                             Status/Effectiveness         2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                           Element
 6.1.1 Rights-of-way within the City vary from 60 feet to 100 feet. The City  No requests to vacate the right-of-  Delete.
 shall continue to evaluate locations and the appropriateness of narrowing    way have been submitted since
 certain residential streets to a maximum of 60 feet in width. The City shall November 2009. Because most of
 also continue to evaluate potential financial mechanisms to vacate           the right-of-way in Grover Beach is
 public street right-of-way to adjacent residential properties in order to    70 feet, vacating would only
 provide property owners with more land to build additional housing units.    provide 10 additional feet on most
 Responsibility: Community Development                                        parcels and doesn’t increase lot
 Funding: General Fund and/or Improvement Agency                              sizes enough to build additional
                                                                              housing units. This program will not
 Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                              be continued.
 Timeframe: Ongoing
 6.2.1 The City shall prepare an update of the General Plan Land Use          The City Council adopted the Land    Delete.
 Element and shall consider appropriate locations for workforce residential   Use Element (LUE) on February 16,
 and non-residential development south of Farroll Road between South 4th      2010. The LUE contains Policy LU-
 and South 13th Streets. The environmental review will evaluate public        11.5 regarding live/work units. This
 facility resources needed to meet housing demand.                            policy called for the establishment
 Responsibility: Community Development                                        of live/work settings in industrial
 Funding: General Fund                                                        zones through amendments to
                                                                              allowed uses and inclusion of
 Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                              performance standards in the
 Timeframe: The Land Use Element update is underway and completion is         Development Code and
 projected for Winter 2010                                                    maintaining consistency with the
                                                                              policy as project applications are
                                                                              reviewed. A policy addressing
                                                                              workforce units was not adopted.
                                                                              The updated LUE represents the
                                                                              result of implementing this program,
                                                                              and this program will not be
                                                                              continued.
96

                                                                                               Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                     Appropriateness for
                                   Program                                          Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                           Element
7.1.1 The City shall review and potentially amend the Non-Conforming       The City Council adopted an            Delete.
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance to lower the review authority required  updated Development Code on
from the Planning Commission to staff level, to allow additions to non-    October 15, 2012. Additions to
conforming residential structures.                                         nonconforming structures are now
Responsibility: Community Development                                      allowed with staff-level review. This
Funding: General Fund                                                      program has been completed.
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)
7.1.2 The City shall update housing, planning, and building public hand    The handouts were updated to be        Modify to require
out materials to improve their effectiveness and to reflect regulation and more complete and easier to            updates when needed
policy amendments. These handouts will be made available at City Hall      understand and are available at        to respond to regulation
and the City website.                                                      City Hall and on the City website.     and policy amendments
Responsibility: Community Development                                      Future updates will be made as         and continue.
Funding: General Fund Housing                                              regulation and policy amendments
                                                                           occur and will continue to be
Objective: N/A
                                                                           made available as called for in the
Timeframe: Within three years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2012), and    program.
as zoning regulations are amended
                                                                                                                                         97

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                          Appropriateness for
                                     Program                                              Status/Effectiveness            2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                                Element
 7.1.3 The City shall implement revised parking regulations to remove           The City utilizes state parking        Modify to include
 potential constraints and provide incentives for the development of            requirements for eligible affordable   updated suggestions for
 affordable housing. The City shall utilize the following measures: The City    housing developments and               revisions to consider and
 shall utilize the state parking requirements for eligible affordable housing                                          continue.
                                                                                applicants may request parking
 developments as provided for in Government Code Section 65915 (p); A
 housing project applicant may request parking reductions as set forth by       reductions. Development Code
 Section 9138.8. 3. The City shall explore the option of a parking district for Section 3.50.020 provides parking
 commercial and mixed-use projects along West Grand Avenue and                  requirements for different housing
 major arterial roads to facilitate residential development.                    types. Providing a garage for every
 Responsibility: Community Development                                          type of apartment unit is not
 Funding: General Fund                                                          required. Multifamily projects of 3
 Housing Objective: N/A                                                         units or less are required to provide
 Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)               a 1 car garage and 1 uncovered
                                                                                parking space per unit, plus 1
                                                                                uncovered guest space for every 2
                                                                                units. Multifamily projects of 4 units
                                                                                or more are required to provide 2
                                                                                uncovered parking spaces per unit,
                                                                                plus 1 uncovered guest space for
                                                                                every 2 units. This program will be
                                                                                modified and continued.
98

                                                                                              Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                    Appropriateness for
                                   Program                                         Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                          Element
7.1.4 The City shall monitor programs, standards, procedures, and fees as The City has continued to monitor      Modify to apply to all
part of the annual General Plan review to ensure that they do not         potential constraints to affordable    housing development
constrain affordable housing development.                                 housing development during the         and continue.
Responsibility: Community Development                                     annual General Plan review.
Funding: General Fund                                                     Constraints to development of
                                                                          some housing types suitable for
Housing Objective: N/A
                                                                          those with lower incomes and
Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)          special needs were addressed
                                                                          through the comprehensive
                                                                          Development Code update in
                                                                          2012. This program is ongoing.
7.2.1 The City shall continue to evaluate the City’s development fee      The City Council has not yet           Remove references to
structure and consider the reduction of fees for affordable housing units considered revisions to                Improvement Agency
where possible. For affordable housing units within the boundaries of the development impact fees. This          and continue.
Improvement Agency, the Agency may assist with the payment of             program will be continued.
development fees.
Responsibility: Community Development
Funding: Improvement Agency
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Within two years of HE adoption (by November 2, 2011)
                                                                                                                                        99

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                     Appropriateness for
                                     Program                                            Status/Effectiveness          2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                           Element
 7.3.1 The City encourages the development of second units as affordable       Three second units have been        Modify to focus on
 housing and shall promote second units, create development incentives,        constructed in the City since 2009. second unit monitoring
 and monitor their construction and affordability. Actions that the City shall Second units are monitored and      and reporting as part of
 take include the following:                                                   reported as part of the annual      annual report to HCD
• The development of a public relations program to publicize the benefits      report to HCD. The City has not     and continue.
    of the City’s second unit ordinance and the process of applying for the    established incentives or a public
    relevant permits.                                                          relations program. As part of
• Staff will create a brochure for circulation by a one-time citywide          annual monitoring the City will
    distribution, publish quarterly promotional articles in appropriate        consider the need for incentives.
    newsletters and newspapers, and maintain the brochure at City Hall         For example, reducing
    and the City website;                                                      development impact fees for
                                                                               second units.
• Applications for second units will be eligible for priority permit
    processing to encourage the construction of second units. This priority
    processing status will apply to both new second units on lots with an
    existing primary unit and to the construction of new primary units that
    provide a second unit as part of the project;
• The development of a system to track and monitor the construction of
    second units and the availability and affordability of second units as
    rental units.
• On an annual basis, the City will compare the results of the tracking
    system with its Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) The building
    permit database will be utilized to facilitate this tracking system.
 Responsibility: Community Development
 Funding: General Fund
 Housing Objective: 30 second units
 Timeframe: Within the Planning Period
100

                                                                                                   Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                         Appropriateness for
                                    Program                                             Status/Effectiveness              2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                               Element
8.2.1 The City will implement Title 24 compliance of the California Code on   The City implements this program        Delete.
all new development or remodeling through its building plan check             through routine compliance with
process.                                                                      Title 24. No further action is
Responsibility: Community Development                                         required.
Funding: Building Permits
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Ongoing
8.2.2 The City will continue to provide information about conservation         Ongoing.                               Continue.
programs, rebates, retrofits, and low-income assistance programs
available through local utility providers. This information will be available
to the public at the Community Development Department.
Responsibility: Community Development
Funding: N/A
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Ongoing
8.2.3 The City shall continue to require that all new subdivisions are        The City Council adopted an             Delete.
designed and housing tracts constructed to make maximum use of solar          updated Development Code on
access to structures and that landscaping plans utilize plants that           October 15, 2012. Subdivision solar
enhance solar access during the winter months.                                orientation is addressed in the
Responsibility: Community Development                                         update. This program has been
Funding: Building and Planning Permits/ Applications                          completed.
Housing Objective: N/A
Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                                                                             101

Chapter 6 Review of Previous Housing Element
                                                                                                                       Appropriateness for
                                     Program                                            Status/Effectiveness           2014–2019 Housing
                                                                                                                              Element
 9.1.1 The City will disseminate information in Spanish and English on         The City currently provides links on Combine Program 9.1.2
 Housing Program assistance available from the Housing Authority and           its website to the Housing Authority into this program,
 Department of Equal Housing and Employment regarding fair housing             and the Department of Fair           modify to update
 laws. The City will post fair housing information at the following locations: Employment and Housing. This         appropriate locations to
 City of Grover Beach Website; Grover Beach City Hall - Community              program will be continued. No        make fair housing
 Development Department; Seabreeze Newsletter - Published by Grover            housing discrimination cases have    information available,
 Beach City Hall; Ramona Park Community Center; Trouville Community            been reported during the planning    and continue.
 Center; Grover Beach Post Office; State Superior Court - Grover Beach         period.
 Branch; County Public & Environmental Health - Grover Beach Branch. The
 City has acted and will continue to act as an information station for
 people who experience housing discrimination, referring them to the
 Housing Authority and Department of Equal Housing and Employment for
 assistance.
 Responsibility: Community Development
 Funding: General Fund
 Housing Objective: N/A
 Timeframe: Within one year of HE adoption (by November 2, 2010)
 9.1.2 The City will continue to refer persons who report that they are        Ongoing. No housing discrimination   Combine into Program
 experiencing housing discrimination to the California Rural Legal             cases have been reported during      9.1.1 and delete.
 Assistance center.                                                            the planning period. This program
 Responsibility: Community Development                                         relates to the previous program
 Funding: N/A                                                                  and will be combined into it and
                                                                               deleted.
 Housing Objective: N/A
 Timeframe: Ongoing
102

Appendix A – Land Inventory

  Appendix A Land Inventory
                                            General            Max            Realistic
                                                                     Max Unit           Map
   APN        Address        Street  Zone     Plan   Acreage Allowed            Unit
                                                                     Capacity            ID
                                            Land Use         Density          Capacity
060-012-021 1032         Margarita    R-1     LDR      0.32      5      1         1       1
060-014-058 839          Sandcastle   R-1     LDR      0.21      5      1         1       2
060-020-020 850          N 12th       R-1     LDR      0.25      5      1         1       3
060-031-028              Laguna       R-1     LDR      0.52      5      1         1       4
060-153-014 300 Block    N 8th        R-1     LDR      0.17      5      1         1       5
060-163-021 347          N 11th       R-1     LDR      0.22      5      1         1       6
060-337-007 800 Block    Nice         R-1     LDR      0.14      5      1         1       7
060-369-011 1600 Block   Baden        R-1     LDR      0.31      5      1         1       8
060-503-022 862          Charles      R-1     LDR      0.12      5      1         1       9
                         Ocean
060-522-005 300 Block                 R-1     LDR      0.17      5      1         1      10
                         View
                         Ocean
060-532-003 645                       R-1     LDR      0.14      5      1         1      11
                         View
060-543-007              Huber        R-1     LDR      0.54      5      1         1      12
060-561-073 1358         Farroll      R-1     LDR      0.19      5      1         1      13
060-574-002              Farroll      R-1     LDR      1.13      5      5         5      14
060-574-007 NA           S 16th       R-1     LDR      4.67      5     29        29      15
060-574-008 975          S 16th       R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      16
060-574-013 933          S 16th       R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      17
060-574-014              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      18
060-574-015              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      19
060-574-016              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      20
060-574-017              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      21
060-574-018              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      22
060-574-019              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      23
060-574-020              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      24
060-574-021              Sausalito    R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      25
060-574-022              Sausalito    R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      26
060-574-023              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      27
060-574-024              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      28
060-574-025              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      29
060-574-026              Napa         R-1     LDR      0.11      5      1         1      30
060-338-010 600 Block    S 8th        R-1     LDR      0.10      5      1         1      31
060-031-031 1682         Laguna Ct.   R-1     LDR      0.53      2      1         1      32
060-490-001 900          N 5th      C-P-R-1   LDR      0.19      5      1         1      33
060-490-002 906          N 5th      C-P-R-1   LDR      0.14      5      1         1      34
060-490-031 858          N 5th      C-P-R-1   LDR      0.16      5      1         1      35
060-490-037 835          Pacifica   C-P-R-1   LDR      0.19      5      1         1      36
060-502-015 933          N 6th       C-R-1    LDR      0.19      5      1         1      37
060-501-026 885          N 6th       C-R-1    LDR      0.08      5      1         1      38
060-501-027              N 6th       C-R-1    LDR      0.17      5      1         1      39
                                                                                        1
                                                                       Appendix A Land Inventory
                                              General            Max                Realistic
                                                                         Max Unit             Map
     APN        Address       Street    Zone    Plan   Acreage Allowed                Unit
                                                                        Capacity                ID
                                              Land Use         Density             Capacity
060-482-034 811.000       1st St.       C-R-1   LDR      0.15      5         1          1       40
060-483-002               1st St.       C-R-1   LDR      0.16      5         1          1       41
  Low Density Subtotals                                 12.82               73         73
060-082-013 200 Block     Saratoga      C-R-2   MDR      0.15      9         2          2       42
060-083-006 253           Newport       C-R-2   MDR      0.17      9         2          2       43
060-142-028 200 Block     N 4th         C-R-2   MDR      0.17      9         2          2       44
060-215-011 400 Block     Rockaway      C-R-2   MDR      0.11      9         1          1       45
060-327-002 500 Block     Mentone       C-R-2   MDR      0.17      9         2          2       46
060-031-005 1700 Block    Atlantic City  R-2    HDR      6.50      9        58         58       47
060-088-013 425           Saratoga       R-2    MDR      0.10      9         1          1       48
060-089-002 408           Saratoga       R-2    MDR      0.14      9         2          2       49
060-123-034 1600 Block    Saratoga       R-2    MDR      0.16      9         1          1       50
060-123-035 1600 Block    Saratoga       R-2    MDR      0.16      9         1          1       51
060-145-005 200 Block     N 5th          R-2    MDR      0.17      9         2          2       52
060-145-039 200 Block     N 5th          R-2    MDR      0.17      9         2          2       53
060-145-040 200 Block     N 5th          R-2    MDR      0.17      9         2          2       54
060-184-007 1600 Block    Newport        R-2    MDR      0.32      9         3          3       55
060-279-019 700 Block     Trouville      R-2    MDR      0.09      9         2          2       56
060-565-002 1207          S 13th         R-2    MDR      1.01      9         9          9       57
060-565-003 1207          S 13th         R-2    MDR      0.85      9         7          7       58
060-631-021 1277          S 16th         R-2    MDR      0.14      9         1          1       59
Medium Density Subtotals                                10.76              100        100
060-031-005 1700 Block    Atlantic City  R-3    HDR      3.40     20        68         68       60
060-033-011 1513          Cabrillo       R-3    HDR      0.16     20         1          1       61
060-033-012 1535          Cabrillo       R-3    HDR      0.09     20         1          1       62
060-277-014 773           Manhattan      R-3    HDR      0.17     20         3          3       63
060-176-060 1500 Block    Brighton       R-3    HDR      0.21     20         4          4       64
060-176-077 1500 Block    Ramona         R-3    HDR      0.06     20         1          1       65
060-309-005 300 Block     S Oak Park     R-3    HDR      0.35     20         3          3       66
060-348-014 1300 Block    Baden          R-3    HDR      0.16     20         3          3       67
060-352-018 920           S 10th         R-3    HDR      0.18     20         5          5       68
060-192-034 594           Rockaway       R-3    HDR      0.18     20         4          4       69
060-271-009    500 Block  Manhattan      R-3    HDR      0.17     20         3          3       70
060-271-030    500 Block  Longbranch     R-3    HDR      0.17     20         3          3       71
060-346-013    1300 Block Trouville      R-3    HDR      0.17     20         3          3       72
060-221-024    600 Block  Grand         CBO     HDR      0.34     20        12         12       73
060-242-008    100 Block  S 11th        CBO     HDR      0.15     20         3          3       74
060-237-007    152        N 11th        CBO     HDR      0.17     20         4          3       75
060-213-013    200        S 4th          CI     HDR      0.15     20         2          2       76
  High Density Subtotals                                 6.28              123        122
       Grand Totals                                     29.87              296        295
   2
Appendix B – Public Outreach List
                                  1


Mailing labels for March 19, 2014 Workshop
State Parks Dept. Oceano Dune District       270 James Way                     Arroyo Grande, CA 93420
DeBlauw Builders                             411 El Camino Real                Arroyo Grande, CA 93420
Lucia Mar Unified School District            602 Orchard Ave.                  Arroyo Grande, CA 93420
South County Library Regional Ctr.           800 W. Branch St.                 Arroyo Grande, CA 93420
Times Press Recorder                         PO Box 460                        Arroyo Grande, CA 93421
Arroyo Grande Planning Department            PO Box 550                        Arroyo Grande, CA 93421
Union Pacific Railroad                       2015 S. Willow Ave.               Bloomington, CA 92516
California Dept. of Fish & Game              1234 E. Shaw Ave.                 Fresno, CA 93710
San Luis Obispo County Chumas Council        1030 Ritchie Rd.                  Grover Beach, CA 93433
S & S Homes                                  1350 E. Grand Ave.                Grover Beach, CA 93433
Grover Beach Community Library               867 Ramona Ave.                   Grover Beach, CA 93433
Coastal San Luis Resouce Conservation Dist.  545 Main St., #B‐1                Morro Bay, CA 93442
CA Dept. of Fish and Game                    PO Box 1388                       Morro Bay, CA 93443‐1388
US Dept. of Energy Oakland Operations Office 1301 Clay St, Mail Stop 700N      Oakland, CA 94612‐5208
South SLO County Sanitation Dist.            1500 Aloha Pl.                    Oceano, CA 93445
Oceano Community Services District           1655 Front St.                    Oceano, CA 93445
Oceano/Halcyon Advisory Committee            PO Box 517                        Oceano, CA 93445‐0517
Oceano Improvement Assoc.                    PO Box 597                        Oceano, CA 93445‐0597 
Pismo Beach Planning Dept.                   760 Mattie Rd.                    Pismo Beach, CA 93449
CA Dept. of Fish & Game Central Coast Region 897 Oak Park Blvd. #259           Pismo Beach, CA 93449
SWRCB Regional Water Rights                  PO Box 2000                       Sacramento, CA 95812‐2000
CA Air Resources Board                       PO Box 2815                       Sacramento, CA 95812‐2815
Office of Planning and Research              PO Box 3044                       Sacramento, CA 95812‐3044
Secretary for Resources CA Resources Agency  1416 9th St, Room 1311            Sacramento, CA 95814
California State Parks                       1416 9th St.                      Sacramento, CA 95814
CA Dept. of Water Resources                  1416 9th St., Room 252‐19         Sacramento, CA 95814
CA Energy Commission                         1516 9th St.                      Sacramento, CA 95814
CA Dept. of Conservation                     801 K St. Mail Stop 09‐06         Sacramento, CA 95814
California Dept. of Conservation             801 K St., MS 24‐01               Sacramento, CA 95814
Native American Heritage Commission          915 Capital Mall, Rm. 364         Sacramento, CA 95814
Endangered Species Office                    2800 Cottage Way, #W‐2605         Sacramento, CA 95825‐1888
Environmental Center (ECOSLO)                11204 Nipomo St.                  San Luis Obipo, CA 93401
SLO Council of Governments                   1150 Osos St., Suite 202          San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Northern Ynez Band of Mission Indians        1177 Marsh St, Suite 110          San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Home Builders Association                    246 Higuera St.                   San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Air Pollution Control Board                  3433 Roberto Ct.                  San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
San Luis Obispo County Builder's Exchange    3563‐G Sueldo St.                 San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Telegram Tribune                             3825 S. Higuera St.               San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
KCBX                                         4100 Vachell Lane                 San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
New Times                                    505 Higuera St.                   San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
KVEC                                         51 Zaca Lane, Ste 110             San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Home Builders Association                    811 El Capitan Way, Suite 120     San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
SLO County Integrated Waste Management       870 Osos St.                      San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Regional Water Quality Control Board         895 Aerovista Pl.                 San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
SLO County Airport Land Use Commission       903 Airport Dr., Suite 5          San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Dept. of General Services Airport Manager    905‐5 Airport Dr.                 San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
County of San Luis Obispo                    976 Osos St.                      San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
CA Dept. of Transportation                   50 Higuera St.                    San Luis Obispo, CA 93401‐5415
San Luis Obispo City/County Librabry         PO Box 8107                       San Luis Obispo, CA 93403‐8107
Habitat for Humanity                         PO Box 613                        San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
The Tribune                                  PO Box 112                        San Luis Obispo, CA 93406‐0112
Agriculture Task Force                       PO Box 14060                      San Luis Obispo, CA 93406‐4060
Sierra Club Conservation Committee           PO Box 15755                      San Luis Obispo, CA 93406‐5755
City & Regional Planning Resource Ctr.       Cal Poly State University         San Luis Obispo, CA 93407
Robert E. Kennedy Library                    Cal Poly State University         San Luis Obispo, CA 93407
CA Native Plant Society Physics Dept.        Cal Poly State University         San Luis Obispo, CA 93407
Planning Commission                          976 Osos St, Rm 300               San Luis Obispo, CA 93408
County of SLO Planning & Building            County Governement Center         San Luis Obispo, CA 93408
Public Works Dept. (Solid Waste)             County Governement Center, RM 207 San Luis Obispo, CA 93408

Airport Land Use Commission                         County Government Center        San Luis Obispo, CA 93408
County Clerk                                        1055 Monterey St, Rm D120       San Luis Obispo, CA 93408‐3237
Housing Authority of SLO                            487 Leff St.                    San Luis Obispo, CA 93421
Regional Water Quality Control Board                8985 Aerovista Place, Suite 101 San Luis Obsipo, CA 93401
KSBY TV ‐ NBC Channel 6                             1772 Calle Joaquin              San Luis Obsipo, CA 93405
Environmental Defense Center                        906 Garden St.                  Santa Barbara, CA 93101
California Coastal Commission                       725 Front St., Suite 300        Santa Cruz, CA 95060
KCOY Television                                     1211 W. McCoy Lane              Santa Maria, CA 93455
Dept. of Conservation Div. of Oil, Gas & Geothermal 5075 S. Bradley Rd, Ste 221     Santa Maria, CA 93455‐5077
Santa Ynez Trial Elders Council                     PO Box 365                      Santa Ynez, CA 93460
Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians                  PO Box 517                      Santa Ynez, CA 93460
SLO County Chumash Council                          PO Box 3063                     Shell Beach, CA 93448
Natural Resources Conservation Services             65 Main St, Ste 8               Templeton, CA 93465
US Soil Conservation Dist. Templeton Service Center 65 S. Main St., #106            Templeton, CA 93465‐8703
US ACOE                                             2151 Alessandro Dr., Suite 225  Ventura, CA 93001
Ecological Services                                 2493 Portland Rd, Ste B         Ventura, CA 93003‐7726
CA Dept. of Fish and Game Region III Office         PO Box 47                       Yountville, CA 94599‐0047

Mailing labels for April 8, 2014 Planning Commission Public Hearing
                                  SLO County Department of
Airport Land Use Commission                                  SLO County Farm Bureau
                                  Agriculture
County Government Center                                     651 Tank Farm Road
                                  2156 Sierra Way, Suite A
San Luis Obispo, CA 93408                                    San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
                                  San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
SLO County Planning & Building                               Home Builders Association of the
                                  Habitat for Humanity
County Government Center, Rm                                 Central Coast
                                  PO Box 613
310                                                          PO Box 748
                                  San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
San Luis Obispo, CA 93408                                    San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
Housing Authority of SLO          City of Arroyo Grande      City of Pismo Beach
487 Leff Street                   300 East Branch Street     760 Mattie Rd.
San Luis Obispo, CA 93421         Arroyo Grande, CA 93420    Pismo Beach, CA 93449
                                  Oceano Community Services
Lucia Mar Unified School District                            SLO Council of Governments
                                  District
602 Orchard Avenue                                           1150 Osos Street, Suite 202
                                  1655 Front Street
Arroyo Grande, CA 93420                                      San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
                                  Oceano, CA 93445
Native American Heritage
                                  SLO County Chumash Council Economic Vitality Corporation
Commission
                                  1030 Ritchie Rd.           735 Tank Farm Road, Suite 264
915 Capital Mall, Rm. 364
                                  Grover Beach, CA 93433     San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Sacramento, CA 95814
Kathleen Bellefontaine
SLO County Commission on Aging
PO Box 8119
San Luis Obispo, CA 93403

Mailing labels for April 21, 2014 City Council Public Hearing
                                  SLO County Department of
Airport Land Use Commission                                  SLO County Farm Bureau
                                  Agriculture
County Government Center                                     651 Tank Farm Road
                                  2156 Sierra Way, Suite A
San Luis Obispo, CA 93408                                    San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
                                  San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
SLO County Planning & Building                               Home Builders Association of the
                                  Habitat for Humanity
County Government Center, Rm                                 Central Coast
                                  PO Box 613
310                                                          PO Box 748
                                  San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
San Luis Obispo, CA 93408                                    San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
Housing Authority of SLO          City of Arroyo Grande      City of Pismo Beach
487 Leff Street                   300 East Branch Street     760 Mattie Rd.
San Luis Obispo, CA 93421         Arroyo Grande, CA 93420    Pismo Beach, CA 93449
                                  Oceano Community Services
Lucia Mar Unified School District                            SLO Council of Governments
                                  District
602 Orchard Avenue                                           1150 Osos Street, Suite 202
                                  1655 Front Street
Arroyo Grande, CA 93420                                      San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
                                  Oceano, CA 93445
Native American Heritage
                                  SLO County Chumash Council Economic Vitality Corporation
Commission
                                  1030 Ritchie Rd.           735 Tank Farm Road, Suite 264
915 Capital Mall, Rm. 364
                                  Grover Beach, CA 93433     San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Sacramento, CA 95814
Kathleen Bellefontaine
SLO County Commission on Aging
PO Box 8119
San Luis Obispo, CA 93403
This page sent 4/11/14
Native American Contacts
Received 4/14/14 from Native       Sent 4/14/14
American Heritage Commission
                                                                      Barbareno/Ventureno Band of
                                   Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians
Beverly Salazar Folkes                                                Mission Indians
                                   Vincent Armenta, Chairperson
1931 Shadybrook Drive                                                 Julie Lynn Tumamait-Stennslie
                                   PO Box 517
Thousand Oaks, CA 91362                                               365 North Poli Avenue
                                   Santa Ynez, CA 93460
                                                                      Ojai, CA 93023
                                   San Luis Obispo County Chumash
Lei Lynn Odom                      Council                            Patty Dunton, Tribal Administrator
1339 24th Street                   Chief Mark Steven Vigil            7070 Morro Road, Suite A
Oceano, CA 93445                   1030 Ritchie Road                  Atascadero, CA 93422
                                   Grover Beach, CA 93433
                                   Santa Ynez Tribal Elders Council
Peggy Odom                                                            Randy Guzman-Folkes
                                   Adelina Alva-Padilla, Chair Woman
1339 24th Street                                                      4676 Walnut Avenue
                                   PO Box 365
Oceano, CA 93445                                                      Simi Valley, CA 93063
                                   Santa Ynez, CA 93460
Coastal Band of the Chumash        yak tityo tityu – Northern Chumash
Nation                             Tribe                              Matthew Darian Goldman
Michael Cordero, Chairperson       Mona Olivas Tucker, Chairwoman     495 Mentone Avenue
PO Box 4464                        660 Camino Del Rey                 Grover Beach, CA 93433
Santa Barbara, CA 93140            Arroyo Grande, CA 93420
Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians Salinan-Chumash Nation             Northern Chumash Tribal Council
Tribal Admin/Counsel Sam Cohen     Xielolixii                         Fred Collins, Spokesperson
PO Box 517                         3901 Q Street, Suite 31B           67 South Street
Santa Ynez, CA 93460               Bakersfield, CA 93301              San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
                                   Santa Ynez Tribal Elders Council   Barbareno/Ventureno Band of
Frank Arredondo                    Freddie Romero, Cultural           Mission Indians
PO Box 161                         Preservation Consultant            Kathleen Pappo
Santa Barbara, CA 93102            PO Box 365                         2762 Vista Mesa Drive
                                   Santa Ynez, CA 93460               Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90275
Barbareno/Ventureno Band of        Coastal Band of the Chumash        Coastal Band of the Chumash
Mission Indians                    Nation                             Nation
Raudel Joe Banuelos, Jr.           Janet Darlene Garcia               Crystal Baker
331 Mira Flores Court              PO Box 4464                        PO Box 723
Camarillo, CA 93012                Santa Barbara, CA 93140            Atascadero, CA 93423
PeuYoKo Perez
11465 Nardo Street
Ventura, CA 93004

Mailing labels for June 9, 2014 Planning Commission and June 16, 2014 City
Council Public Hearings
Airport Land Use Commission        SLO County Department of Agriculture SLO County Farm Bureau
County Government Center           2156 Sierra Way, Suite A             651 Tank Farm Road
San Luis Obispo, CA 93408          San Luis Obispo, CA 93401            San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
                                                                        Home Builders Association of the
SLO County Planning & Building     Habitat for Humanity
                                                                          Central Coast
County Government Center, Rm 310   PO Box 613
                                                                        PO Box 748
San Luis Obispo, CA 93408          San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
                                                                        San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
Housing Authority of SLO           City of Arroyo Grande                City of Pismo Beach
487 Leff Street                    300 East Branch Street               760 Mattie Rd.
San Luis Obispo, CA 93421          Arroyo Grande, CA 93420              Pismo Beach, CA 93449
Lucia Mar Unified School District  Oceano Community Services District   SLO Council of Governments
602 Orchard Avenue                 1655 Front Street                    1150 Osos Street, Suite 202
Arroyo Grande, CA 93420            Oceano, CA 93445                     San Luis Obispo, CA 93406
Native American Heritage           Kathleen Bellefontaine
                                                                        Economic Vitality Corporation
  Commission                       SLO County Commission on Aging
                                                                        735 Tank Farm Road, Suite 264
915 Capital Mall, Rm. 364          PO Box 8119
                                                                        San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Sacramento, CA 95814               San Luis Obispo, CA 93403
                                                                        Barbareno/Ventureno Band of Mission
                                   Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians
Beverly Salazar Folkes                                                    Indians
                                   Vincent Armenta, Chairperson
1931 Shadybrook Drive                                                   Julie Lynn Tumamait-Stennslie
                                   PO Box 517
Thousand Oaks, CA 91362                                                 365 North Poli Avenue
                                   Santa Ynez, CA 93460
                                                                        Ojai, CA 93023
                                   San Luis Obispo County Chumash
Lei Lynn Odom                        Council                            Patty Dunton, Tribal Administrator
         th
1339 24 Street                     Chief Mark Steven Vigil              7070 Morro Road, Suite A
Oceano, CA 93445                   1030 Ritchie Road                    Atascadero, CA 93422
                                   Grover Beach, CA 93433
                                   Santa Ynez Tribal Elders Council
Peggy Odom                                                              Randy Guzman-Folkes
                                   Adelina Alva-Padilla, Chair Woman
1339 24th Street                                                        4676 Walnut Avenue
                                   PO Box 365
Oceano, CA 93445                                                        Simi Valley, CA 93063
                                   Santa Ynez, CA 93460
                                   yak tityo tityu – Northern Chumash
Coastal Band of the Chumash Nation
                                     Tribe                              Matthew Darian Goldman
Michael Cordero, Chairperson
                                   Mona Olivas Tucker, Chairwoman       495 Mentone Avenue
PO Box 4464
                                   660 Camino Del Rey                   Grover Beach, CA 93433
Santa Barbara, CA 93140
                                   Arroyo Grande, CA 93420
Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians Salinan-Chumash Nation               Northern Chumash Tribal Council
Tribal Admin/Counsel Sam Cohen     Xielolixii                           Fred Collins, Spokesperson
PO Box 517                         3901 Q Street, Suite 31B             67 South Street
Santa Ynez, CA 93460               Bakersfield, CA 93301                San Luis Obispo, CA 93401

                            Santa Ynez Tribal Elders Council      Barbareno/Ventureno Band of Mission
Frank Arredondo             Freddie Romero, Cultural Preservation   Indians
PO Box 161                    Consultant                          Kathleen Pappo
Santa Barbara, CA 93102     PO Box 365                            2762 Vista Mesa Drive
                            Santa Ynez, CA 93460                  Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90275
Barbareno/Ventureno Band of
                            Coastal Band of the Chumash Nation    Coastal Band of the Chumash Nation
  Mission Indians
                            Janet Darlene Garcia                  Crystal Baker
Raudel Joe Banuelos, Jr.
                            PO Box 4464                           PO Box 723
331 Mira Flores Court
                            Santa Barbara, CA 93140               Atascadero, CA 93423
Camarillo, CA 93012
PeuYoKo Perez               People’s Self-Help Housing            Housing Trust Fund
11465 Nardo Street          3533 Empleo Street                    71 Zaca Lane, Suite 130
Ventura, CA 93004           San Luis Obispo, CA 93401             San Luis Obispo, CA 93401


Prepared by
               ®
860 Walnut Street, Suite B
San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Phone: (805) 250-7970
Fax: (805) 250-7971


                CITY OF GROVER BEACH
                          GENERAL PLAN
                         NOISE ELEMENT
                     volume 1 - policy Document
          volume 2 - Technical Reference Document
              Volume 3 - Acoustical Design Manual
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL                                  PLANNING COMMISSION
   Lowell Forister, Mayor                                  John Ziomek, Chair
Fred Munroe, Mayor Pro Tem                                Guyla Hall, Vice Chair
     Ronald Arnoldsen                                          William Coe
     H.E. 'Gene' Gates                                         John Geiss
     Peter Donald Keith                                        Robert Reed
                                                             Richard Roberts
                                        STAFF
                  Penelope J. Culbreth, DPA, City Administrator
               Thomas Sullivan, Community Development Director
                     Sandra M. Bierdzinski, Associate Planner
                       Pamela Gartin, Planning Technician
                     Kelly Wetmore, Administrative Secretary
                                   CONSULTANT
                           Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
                             319 West School Avenue
                              Visalia, California 93291
                             THE GENERAL PLAN
Grover Beach's General Plan is composed of sections called "elements". Each element
focuses upon a topic as required or allowed by State law. Each element carries equal
weight and must be consistent with the other elements. The following elements
comprised the General Plan on March 1, 1993:
      Element Title                                              Adoption or Last
                                                                 Major Revision Date
      Land Use                                                          12/7/92
      Housing                                                           11/3/86
      Circulation                                                       1/18/88
      Open Space and Conservation                                       8/6/73
      Parks and Recreation                                              7/15/91
      Noise                                                             1/3/77
      Scenic Routes                                                     11/2/81
      Safety                                                            1/3/77
      Seismic Safety                                                    9/2/75
The City Planning Department is currently updating the Housing and Noise elements.
Some elements may be combined in the future.
      CITY OF GROVER BEACH - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
                          City Hall - 154 South Eighth Street
                   P.O. BOx 365 - Grover Beach, California - 93483
                    Telephone 805 473-4520     11' Fax 805 489-9657

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION                        .................................... 1
               1.1 Purpose and Scope .............................................. 1
               1.2 Authority and Compliance ......................................... 2
               1.3 Relationships of General Plan Elements ............................... 2
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS ......................................... 3
CHAPTER 3 EXISTING AND FUTURE NOISE ENVIRONMENT ................. 5
               3.1  Overview of Noise Sources .........................................                                                   5
               3.2  Methods Used to Develop Noise Exposure Information ....................                                               5
               3.3  Determining Noise Information for Specific Locations ....................                                             5
               3.4  Community Noise Survey Background ..................... '...........                                                  8
CHAPTER 4 GOALS AND POLICIES .................................. 9
               4.1 Goals ......................................................... 9
               4.2 Land Use Compatibility - Transportation .............................. 9
               4.3 Policies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
CHAPTER 5 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES ............................ 14
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1       Chart for Locating Noise Exposure Information ............................ 6
Figure 2       Flow Chart for Determining Noise Exposure and Mitigation for New Development .. 7
Figure 3       Land Use Compatibility Guidelines/Transportation Noise Sources ............. 10
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1        Adjustments to Traffic Noise Exposure for Topography ....................... 6
Table 2        Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure/Transportation Noise Sources ............ 12
Table 3        Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure/Stationary Noise Sources ............... 13
Table 4        Requirements for an Acoustical Analysis ................................ 17
APPENDICES
Appendix A     Noise Contour Map (1990)
Appendix B     Noise Contour Map (Buildout)
em OF GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                                                                      ADOPTED JUNE          21, 1993
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Purpose and Scope
This Noise Element of Grover Beach's General Plan consists of three documents: the Policy Document
(Volume 1), a Technical Reference Document (Volume 2), and an Acoustical Design Manual (Volume 3).
The Policy Document describes the policies through which noise impacts are to be addressed in the City
of Grover Beach. The Technical Reference Document identifies and discusses existing and future noise
within the City. It is intended that the Technical Reference Document serve as a reference for City staff
during the development review process on issues relating to the measuring and effects of noise. The
Acoustical Design Manual provides guidance, including an offering of standard noise mitigation packages,
on how to mitigate noise and prevent future land use conflicts as a result.
This Noise Element is designed to minimize future noise conflicts. A noise ordinance is necessary to
address current noise levels. Some noise sources, such as traffic on public roadways, railroad operations
and aircraft in flight, are protected by State and/or Federal regulations from municipal regulation. Any
noise level standards contained within an ordinance should be consistent with the standards and policies
contained within this Noise Element.
The Government Code requires this Element to include noise exposure information for the following major
noise sources:
         1.      Highways and freeways
         2.       Primary arterial and major local streets
         3.       Aircraft and airport operations
         4.       Railroad operations
         5.       Local industrial facilities
         6.       Other stationary sources
These major noise sources are the creators and senders of noise.
The noise-sensitive receivers are identified in this Element as:
         1.       Residential development
         2.       Schools
         3.       Nursing homes and hospital-type facilities
         4.       Churches
         5.       Meeting halls, auditoriums, theaters and libraries
         6.       Motels, hotels and transient lodging
         7.       Parks and playgrounds
         8.       Office buildings
Naturally, noise receivers can also send noise. One of the major purposes of this Element is to prevent
major noise impacts upon proposed noise-sensitive receivers by requiring the potential receiver to include
noise mitigation measures during the development review process. A second major purpose of the
Element is to prevent the development or creation of additional major noise senders, whenever possible.
CIlY OF GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT   VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT               1                           ADOPTED JUNE 21 , 1993
Research and expertise for this Noise Element was provided by Brown-Bnntin Associates, Inc. of Visalia,
California through a coutract with the County of San Luis Obispo and most, if not all, of the cities of San
Luis Obispo County, including the City of Grover Beach. The draft Noise Element provided to Grover
Beach contained information and references to other contracting jurisdictions which the staff of the City
of Grover Beach believed to be distracting if included within this City's Noise Element. The consultant's
draft documents were, therefore, modified to uniquely reflect Grover Beach's needs.
 1.2 Authority and Compliance
The contents of the Noise Element and the methods used in its preparation were determined by Section
65302 (f) of the California Government Code and by the Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of
Noise Elements of the General Plan adopted and published by the California Office of Noise Control
(ONC) in 1976. This Noise Element complies with Government Code Section 65302 (D.
'1'he ONC Guidelines require that major noise sources and areas containing noise-sensitive land uses be
identified and quant.ified by preparing generalized noise exposure contours for current and prqject.ed
conditions. Contonrs may be prepared in terms of either the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
or the Day-Night Average Level (Ldn ), which are descriptors of total noise exposure at a given location or
an annual average day. CNEL and Ldn are generally considered to be equivalent descriptors of the
communi1y noise environment within plus or minus 1.0 Db. (See Chapter 2 for definitions of terminology
used in this document.)
 1.3 Relationships of General Plan Elements
The Noise Element is related to the Land Use, Housing, Conservation, and Open Space Elements of the
City's General Plan. Recognition of the interrelationship of noise and the other mandated elements is
necessary to prepare an internally consistent general plan. A summary of some important relationships
follow:
 1.      Land Use: The Noise Element provides noise exposure information for use in the Land Use
         Element. Together these two elements show acceptable land uses in relation to existing and
         projected noise levels.
2.       Housing: Noise exposure iuformation must be considered when plauning the locations of new
         housing. The State Noise Insulatiou Standards may influence the construction and location of
         multi-family housing.
3.       Circulation: Noise exposure information will be a decisive factor in the locatiou and design of new
         circulation facilities, and in the mitigation of noise produced by existing circulation facilities. Of
         special concern are roads which carry a significant number of tl11cks and railroad operations.
 4.      Open Space: Noise exposure should be considered when planning for open space and recreational
         pursuits. Open space can also serve as a buffer between noise sources and noise·sensitive areas.
 CITY OF GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT VOL.  1, POLICY DOCUMENT                 2                             ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS
The following terms are used in the Noise Element Policy Document, Acoustical Design Manual, and
Technical Reference Docnment. Unless otherwise stated, all sound levels used in this Noise Element are
A-weighted decibels (dB).
A-Weighted Sound Level: The sound level obtained by using the A-weighting filter of a sound level meter,
expressed in decibels (dB). A-weighting de-emphasizes the very low and very high frequencies of sound
in a manner similar to the human ear. Most community noise standards use A-weighting, as it provides
a high degree of correlation with human annoyance and health effects.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL): The equivalent energy (or energy average) sound level
during a 24-hour day, obtained after addition of approximately five decibels to sound levels in the evening
from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and ten decibels to sound levels in the night before 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00
p.m. The CNEL is generally computed for annual average conditions.
DayfNight Average Sound Level ~n): The equivalent energy (or energy average) sound level during a
twenty-four (24) hour day, obtained after the addition of 10 dB to sound levels in the night after 10 p.m.
and before 7 a.m. The Ldn is generally computed for annual average conditions.
Decibel (dB): A unit describing the amplitude of sound equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the
base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measnred to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20)
micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
EquiValent Sound Level (Leq): The sound level containing the same total energy as a time varying signal     (
over a given sample period. Thus, the Leq is a single-valued level that expresses the time-averaged total
energy of a fluctuating sound level. For example, if 64 dB is measured for 10 minutes, 68 dB is measured
for 20 minutes and 73 dB is measured for 30 minutes, the I-hour Lcq is about 71 dB. Loq is typically
computed over 1, 8 and 24 hour sample periods.
Impulsive Noise: Noise of short duration, usually less than one second, with an ahrupt onset and rapid
decay.
New Development: Projects requiring land use or buildings permits, but excluding remodelling or
additions to existing structures. Includes modifications to existing stationary noise sources that increase
 noise levels.
Noise Exposure Contours: Lines drawn about a noise source indicating constant noise exposure levels.
CNEL and Ldn contours are frequently used to describe community noise exposure.
Noise Level Reduction <NLR): 'I'he arithmetic difference between the outside and inside sound levels
 measured in decibels. For example, if the sound level outside a house is 70 dB and the sound level inside
the house is 45 dB, the NLR is 25 dB. (70-45=25).
 CITY OF GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT VOl.  1, POLICY DOCUMENT              3                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
Noise-Sensitive Land Use: The following uses are considered sensitive to noise:
         1.       Residential development
         2.       Schools
         3.       Nursing homes and hospital-type facilities
         4.       Churches
         5.       Meeting halls, auditoriums, theaters, and libraries
         6.       Motels, hotels, and transient lodging
         7.       Parks and playgrounds
         8.       Office buildings.
Ontdoor Activity Areas: Patios, decks, balconies, outdoor eating areas, swimming pool areas, yards of
dwelling units and other areas that have been designated for outdoor activities and recreation.
Resilient Channel (CLIP): A metal device that allows the indirect attachment of an interior wall to a stud
or a ceiling to a joist. Resilient channels reduce noise transmissions of walls and roof/ceiling assemblies.
Sound Transmission Class (STC): A single-numbered rated system used to determine the amount of noise
reduction a window, door or other building component provides. The higher the STC rating the higher
the NLR. Windows and doors having a minimum STC rating are sometimes required to ensure that a
building facade will achieve a minimum NLR. STC ratings may uot be subtracted from exterior noise
exposure values to determine interior noise exposure values.
Stationary Noise Source: Any fuwd or mobile source not preempted from local control by existing federal
or state regulations. Examples of such sources include industrial and commercial facilities and vehicle
movements on private property (e.g., parking lots, truck terminals, auto race tracks, etc.)
Transportation Noise Source: Traffic     011 public roadways, railroad line operations and aircraft in flight.
CIlY Of GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                 4                             ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
CHAPTER 3 EXISTING AND FUTURE NOISE
                           ENVIRONMENT
3.1 Overview of Noise Sources
There are a number of significant noise sources within Grover Beach. These include traffic on State
Highway One, Grand Avenue, and other major roadways; railroad operations; and industrial and
commercial activities. The Technical Reference Document discusses noise levels produced by these sources
and their effects upon people.
3.2 Methods Used to Develop Noise Exposure Information
Analytical noise modeling techniques were used in conjunction with actual field noise level measurements
to develop generalized Ldn or CNEL contours for major noise sources within the City for existing and
future conditions.
The analytical methods used in the preparation of this Element closely follows ONC recommendations.
Methods include the FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model for roadway sources, the Wyle
Laboratories method for determining railroad noise exposure and the FAA Integrated Noise Model for
aircraft/airport noise source assessment.
Information developed does not include all conceivable noise sources of industry, commerce and
agriculture. Information gathered is a representative sampling of typical noise sources. The noise         (
exposnre informatiou developed for this Element shonld only be used as an indicator of potential noise
ilnpacts when other, similar sources are concerned.
3.3 Determining Noise Exposure Information for Specific Locations
Fignre 1 shows where noise exposure information for a particular location may be found. Once the noise
level is determined for a partiCUlar location, it may be determined if a particular proposed use for the
location is allowable or if noise mitigation measures can make the location suitable for the proposed use.
Note that Table 1 should be consulted to adjust traffic noise exposure in areas with varying topography.
Fignre 2 is a flow chart that illustrates the process to be followed when determining noise exposure and
appropriate mitigation for specific locations.
CITY OF GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT VOL. 1. POLICY DOCUMENT                5                            ADOPTED JUNE 21. 1993
                                                    TABLE 1
                            Adjustments to Traffic Noise Exposure for Topogrnphy
                                                              Distauce from Center of ll.oadway
     Topogrnphical Situation                            <200'             200-400'               >400'
     Hillside overlooks roadway                           -0-              +1 dB                +3 dB
     Roadway is elevated (> 15')                        -5 dB              -2 dB                  -0-
     Roadway in cut/below embankment                    -5 dB              -5 dB                -5 dB
                                                   FIGURE 1
                               Chart for Locating Noise Exposure Information
                               1. Reduced noise contour maps              1. Reduced noise contour maps
                                  in Appendix of Policy                      in Appendix of Policy
Topographic adjustments           Document, or                               Document, or
roay be made from 'I'able 1
of Policy Document or
Table 3-2 of Technical         2. Rolled full-scale noise                 2. Rolled full-scale noise
Reference Document                contour tnaps, or                          contour maps, or
                               3. Table 3-4 in Technical                  3. Table 3-6 in Technical
                                  Reference Document                         Reference Document
                                    1. Chapters 3-6 & 3-7 of Technical
                                       Reference Docnment
   CITY OF GROVER BEACH
   NOISE ELEMENT VOL 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                 6                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                                  FIGURE 2
                          J<'Jow Chart for Determining Noise Exposure and Mitigation for New Development
Determine future noise exposure                            Does noise exposure exceed thresholds for
from Technical Reference and                               mitigation In Figure 3 of Polley Documenl or               No           No miligation
Policy Documents of Noise Element                          standards In Tables 2 and 3 of Polley                                   required
                                                           Documenl?
                                                                               Yes
                                                                         Mitigation required
          Noise mitigation In
        ouldoor activity areas                                                                                       Inlerlor noise mitigation
Have all of the following condilions been complied                             Have all of the following conditions been complied wllh?
with?
                                                                               • Required NLR , 30 dB
• <5 single-family dwellings or offices, churches,                             • <5 single-family dwellings or offlces, churches. meeting
  meeting halls with < 10.000 sq. fl. floor area                                 halls with < 10.000 sq. ft. floor area
• Noise source Is a single street. highway or railroad                         • Noise sources Is a single street. highway, railroad, or airport
  (no comblnallons of sources)                                                   (no combinations of noise sources)
• Existing or future noise exposure does not exceed
  65 dB Ld,/CNEL                                                                                   Yes                                       No
• Project site Is flat and site and noise source are af
  about the same eleva lion
                                                                               May use slandard mill got Ion                       Cannol use (
                                                                               packages In Design Manual                           Design Manual.
                                                                                                                                   Expert should
                                                                                                   or                               be consulted,
                                                                                          Expert may be consulled      I
Cannot use
Design Manual.           No        Yes          May use Design Manual              or
Experl should be
consulted.
                                                                                                                         Allernallve site design or
                                                                                                                         building orientation may
                                                  I
                       Mitigation through slle design Is
                                                                                                                         reduce need for
                                                                                                                         acoustical treatment of
                                                                                                                         building
                       preferred allernatlve (See
                       Appendix A. Acoustical Design        or        Expert may be consulled
                       Manual)
                                                   I
                       Standard mitigation package may
                       be used If mitigation through site
                       design Is not possible               or
           GIlY Of GROVER BEACH
            NOISE ELEMENT      VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                  7                                       ADOPTED JLlNE 21 , 1993

3.4 Community Noise Survey Background
A community noise survey was conducted in the city during August, 1990 to document background noise
levels within noise-sensitive land use areas. The snrvey revealed that Grover Beach was relatively quiet.
Noise level data collected during the community noise survey are summarized in Table 2 below.
Maximum noise levels are generally caused by local automobile traffic or heavy trucks. Background noise
levels in the absence of traffic noise were generally caused by wind, birds, the surf or insects. Noise level
standards and policies contained within this Element were adopted to help preserve quiet conditions. A
more detailed discussion of the community noise survey may be found in tbe Technical Reference
Document.
                                                  TABLE 2
                                 Summary of Community Noise Survey Data
                                            City of Grover Beach
                                                                    Level, dB
          Location               L"          LN         Lmax (source)      L min (source)      Estimated
                                                                                                  L dn•
   Grover Heights Park           50          42        63 (traffic)       40 (distant          49-53 db
                                                                          AjC)
   240 No. Eighth                47          39        72                 26                    50-54 db
   Street··
   Mentone Park                  54          39        73 (traffic)       35 (wind)             51-55 db
   LD = Average Leg of two 15-minute samples obtained between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. except for
   sites where 24-hour monitoring was conducted.
   LN = Leg for one 15-minute sample obtained between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for sites
   where 24-honr monitoring was conducted.
   • Ldn estimated from LD and LN
   •• Ldn 24-hour monitoring site
 CITY OF GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT  VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                8                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

CHAPTER 4 GOALS AND POLICIES
4.1 Goals
The goals of this Noise Element and the City are listed below with policies designed to accomplish the
goals.
Goal 1: Protect Grover Beach citizens and visitors from harmful and annoying effects of excessive noise
          exposnre
Goal 2: Protect the Grover Beach's economic base by preventing incompatible land uses from imcroaching
          upon existing or planned noise-producing uses
Goal 3: Preserve residential area tranquility by preventing noise producing uses from encroaching upon
          existing or planned noise sensitive uses
Goal 4: Educate citizens of the effects of excessive noise exposure and methods available for minimizing
          exposure
Goal 5: Emphasize the reduction of noise impacts through careful site planning and project design, giving
          second preference to the use of sound barriers and/or structural modifications to buildings
          containing noise-sensitive uses
4.2 Land Use Compatibilily - Transportation
Figure 3 shows the ranges of noise exposure from transportation noise sources that are considered to be
acceptable, conditionally acceptable, or unacceptable for the development of different land uses. Figure 3
is used to determine whether mitigation is needed for development ofland uses near major transportation
sources.
If the noise level on the development site falls within the chart's acceptable range, the project may be
approved without mitigation measures. If the noise level on the proposed development site falls within
the conditionally acceptable range on the chart, the project may be permitted after study and inclusion of
mitigation measures in the development process. Sound levels in the unacceptable range on the chart
normally prohibit development, however, the developer may submit mitigation measures to planning
authorities for consideration.
CITY Of GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT   VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT              9                             ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                     FIGURE 3
                             Land Use Compatibility Guidelines for New Development
                                      Near Transportation Noise Sources'
                                                                                       INTERPRETATION
                                             COHHUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
                LAND USE                          LON OR CHEL, dB                j~~~ m~~w ACCEPTABLE
                                                                                 sp'~~i-fied land use la
                                        ,
                                       S5    60
                                               ,    6~       ,
                                                            70  75
                                                                  ,   80
                                                                                 satiafactory. No noise
      RESIDENTIAL, THEATERS,
     AUDITORIUMS, MUSIC HALLS                i ll     J
                                                        ..             I
                                                                                 mitigation measures are
                                                                                 required.
                                        I             J
                                                                                 ~         CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
     'l'RANSIENT LODGING-
      MOTELS, HOTELS
                                                      J      J    J
                                                                 II    I         Uae ahould be permitted only
     SCHOOLS, LIBRARIES, MUSEUMS,
                                       T       I      J      J
                                                                                  after careful study Bnd
                                                                                  incluaion of protective
                                                                                 measures as needed to satisfy
                                                      J      J    J
                                                                       I
                                        I i'll
                                                              ..
      HOSPITALS, NURSING HOMES                                                   the policies of the Noiae
      HEETING BALLS, CnURCHES                                                    Element.
                                                      J      J
     PLAYGROUNDS, PARKS                                                I         II1II     UNACCEPTABLE
                                       T I                                        Development is usually not
                                                                                  feasible in accordance with the
                                                                       I
                                        I i'll
     OFFICES                                                                      goals of the Noise Element.
                                                      J      J
.... This figure indicates whether mitigation ia required. See Ta.ble 2 for noiae standards.
CllY OF GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT VOL 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                      10                                ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
4.3 Policies
General:
Policy 4.3.1 The noise standards in this chapter represent maximum acceptable noise levels. New
development should minimize noise exposure and noise generation.
TransportaHon Noise Sources:
Policy 4.3.2 Noise-sensitive land uses shall not be permitted in areas exposed to existing or projected
future levels of noise from transportation sources which exceed 60 dB Ldn or CNEL (70 dB Ldn/CNEL
for playgrounds and parks) unless the project design includes effective mitigation measures to reduce noise
in outdoor activity areas and interior spaces to levels specified for the given land use in Table 2.
Policy 4.3.3 Noise created by new transportation noise sources, including roadway improvement projects,
shaH be mitigated so they wiH not exceed the levels specified in Table 2 within the outdoor activity areas
and interior spaces of existing noise-sensitive land uses.
Stationary Noise Sources:
Policy 4.3.4 The development of new noise-sensitive uses is prohibited where the noise level from existing
stationary noise sources exceeds the standards of Table 3. If uoise mitigation measures designed into the
project reduce noise levels to the standards of Table 3, the project may be perInitted.
Policy 4.3.5 Modifications of existing stationary noise sources that increase noise levels on lands         (
designated for noise-sensitive uses in excess of the standards of Table 3 are prohibited. This policy does
not apply to noise levels associated with agricultural uses.
Policy 4.3.6 No new stationary noise sources shall be allowed if they increase the noise on lands
designated for noise-sensitive uses to a level that exceeds the standards of Table 3. This policy does not
apply to noise levels associated with agricultural uses.
Existing and CumulaHve Noise Impacts:
Policy 4.3.7 The City should consider implementing or requiring noise mitigation measures where existing
noise levels produce significant noise impacts within noise-sensitive land uses or where new development
may result in cumulative increases of noise upon noise· sensitive land uses.
Policy 4.3.8 The City should consider requiring that new City equipment and vehicle purchases include
the best·available noise reduction technology at a reasonable cost.
CllY OF GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                11                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

                                                  1'ABLE 2
                       Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure for New Development
                                       l'mnsportation Noise Sonrces
                            Outdoor Activity Areal                  Interior Spaces
 Land Use                         LdnlCNEL, dB             Ld,/CNEL, dB             L"q,db 2
 Resideutial                               60 3                     45              --
 Transient Lodging                         60 3                     45              --
 Hospitals, Nursing Homes                  60 3                     45              --
 Theaters, Auditoriums                     --                       --              35
 Churches, Meeting Halls                   603                      --              45
 Office Buildings                          60 3                     --              45
 Schools, Libraries, Museums               --                       --              45
 Playgrounds, Neighborhood
         Parks                             70
 1
         The exterior noise level standard shall apply to the property line of the receiving land use
         when the outdoor activity area is unknown.
 2
         As determined for a typical worst-case hour during use periods.
 3
         An exterior noise level of up to 65 dB Ldn/CNEL may be allowed if:
                 a.       exterior noise level reduction measures were implemented; and
                 b.       the best-available exterior noise level reduction measures do not result in 60
                          dB, Ldn/CNEL; and
                 c.       interior noise levels comply with this table.
CllY OF GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT VOl.  1, POLICY DOCUMENT               12                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                TABLE 3
                      Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure for New Development
                                        Stationary Noise Sources l
                                               Daytime                             Nighttime 2
                                          (7 a.m. to 10 n.m.)                   (10 n.m. to 7 a.m.)
 Hourly Leq, dB                                    50                                    45
 Maximum Level, dB                                 70                                    65
 Maximum Level,
 dB-Impulsive Noise                                65                                    60
 J       As determined at the property line of the receiving use. When determining the effectiveness
         of noise mitigation measures, the standards may be applied on the receptor side of noise
         barriers or other property line noise mitigation measures. Add ten decibels to the noise level
         standards in this table for parks and playgronnds.
 2       Applies only where the receiving land use operates or is occupied during nighttime hours.
                                                                                                        (
Gin OF GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                13                          ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
CHAPTER 5 IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Implementation measures prevent new noise-related land use conflicts by requiring proposed projects to
be reviewed to determine if they comply with the policies of Chapter 4. Noise exposure maps, which are
a part of this Element, are used to determine if a proposed project will be exposed to excessive noise levels
that require mitigation. The maps also provide guidance in the long range planning process. The noise
exposure maps provide a worst-case assessment of noise exposure for the major noise sources identified
in this study. In many cases, the proposed project design review process will review additional noise
sources, particularly stationary noise sources, not identified in this study or on the maps.
The project review process will use the information concerning the effects of noise npon people contained
in the Technical Reference Document. Also, techniques availahle for noise control will be reviewed during
this process. The Acoustical Design Manual descrihes standard noise mitigation packages which may he
used to reduce inside and outside noise.
Controlling noise at its source and thoughtful location and orientation of receiving uses should take
priority over controlling noise during its transmission with noise barriers and acoustical treatments of
bUildings.
In order to implement the goals and policies of this Element, the following measures can he implemented:
Measure 5.1 The City could review new public and private development proposals to determine
conformance with Noise Elements policies.
Measure 5.2 The City could require an acoustical analysis early in the design process whenever there is        (
an indication that a proposed project will exceed the Noise Element's noise standards. Acoustical analyses
shall be paid for by the developer-applicant and include mitigation measures (see Table 4 for acoustical
analysis requirements). City approved mitigation measures resulting from the analysis shall be included
in the project's plans prior to issuance of any building permit.
Measure 5.3 The Community Development Department could waive the requirements for an acoustical
analysis if all of the following conditions are met:
Outdoor Activity Areas:
a.        The proposed development is less than five single-family dwellings or is a office building, church
           or meeting hall that has a total project gross floor area ofless than 10,000 square feet. No waiver
          is permitted for apartments, condos or similar residential developments where multiple dwelling
          units are contained in a single structure or mobile homes when contained in a park or setting
           containing more than olle unit.
b.         The noise source in question consists of a single transportation noise source (rail or
           highway/street) for which current noise exposure information is available. No waiver is
           permitted for a stationary noise source or when there are multiple transportation noise sources.
 c.        The existing 01' projected noise exposures at the exterior of the proposed noise-sensitive building
           or within the proposed outdoor activity areas of the project site do not exceed 65 dB Ldn (or
           CNEL) prior to mitigation. The existing or project noise exposure for playgrounds and parks may
           not exceed 75 dB Ldn (or CNEL) prior to mitigation.
CITY Of GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT VOL. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                  14                              ADOPTED JUNE 21 , 1993
d.        The project area is flat and the noise source and receiving land use are at the same grade.
Interior Spaces:
a.       Required Noise Level Reduction (NLR) is equal or less than 30 dB.
b.        The development is for less than five single-family dwellings or for offices, churches, meeting
          halls with less than 10,000 square feet of floor area.
c.        The noise source in question consists of a single transportation noise source (rail or
          highway/street) for which current noise exposure information is available. No waiver is
         permitted for a stationary noise source or when there are multiple transportation noise sources.
General:
Effective noise mitigation measures, as determined by the planning agency, is incorporated into the project
design to reduce noise levels to those specified in 'fable 2. Mitigation measures may include use of building
setbacks, orientations, noise barriers and the standard noise mitigation packages. If closed windows are
required to meet interior standards, a mechanical ventilation system or air conditioning will be required
by the planning authority.
Measure 5.4 Where mitigation of noise levels in accordance with the policies and standards of this Noise
Element is not feasible, the City Council could reduce or waive the applicable policies and standards to
the degree needed to allow reasonable use of the property, provided that noise levels are mitigated to the
maximum extent feasible.
Measure 5.5 The City's Community Development Department could develop and implement procedures
that ensure that noise mitigation measures required by planning authorities are implemented in the
development review and building permit processes.
Measure 5.6 The Community Development Department could monitor compliance of completed project
with Noise Element policies.
Measure 5.7 The Community Development Department could enforce the State Noise Insulation
Standards (California Code of Regulations, Title 24) and Uniform Building Code, Chapter 35.
Measure 5.8 The City Police Department could request the California Highway Patrol and the San Luis
Obispo Sheriff's Office to actively enforce the California Vehicle Code sections relating to adequate vehicle
muffler and modified exhaust systems.
Measure 5.9 The City Police Department could actively enforce California Vehicle Code muffler and
exhaust system regulations and City noise ordinances and regulations.
Measure 5.10 The City planning staff could review and report to the Planning Commission and City
Council the need to update or amend the Noise Element in order to ensure the City is using current noise
exposure information and that it is amending its specific policies to adjnst to changing conditions. Such
reports shall be presented every other year after the adoption of this Element and shall also advise of the
need to amend or adopt City ordinances.
Measure 5.11 The Acoustical Design Manual could be made available to the public for nominal price and
for the purpose of allowing cit.izens to incorporate noise reduct.ion measures into private projects.
CITY OF GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT VOL 1. POLICY DOCUMENT                    15                            ADOPTED JUNE 21. 1993
Measure 5.12 Where existing noise levels significantly impact existing noise·sensitive land uses, the City
could consider one or more of the following mitigation measures:
a.        Reroute traffic to low traffic volume streets or to streets that do not adjoin noise· sensitive uses
b.        Reroute trucks to streets that do not adjoin noise-sensitive land uses
c.        Construct noise barriers
d.        Lower speed limits
e.        Acoustically treat buildings
f.        Finance low cost loans for noise-impacted property mitigation measures
Measure 5.13 When the result of adding proposed noise from a project to the existing noise is a
cumulative effect that exceeds the stsndards of this Element, the City could consider one or more of the
following measures:
a.        Reroute traffic to low volume street or to streets not adjoining noise-sensitive land uses
b.        Reroute trucks to street not adjoining noise-sensitive uses
c.        Construct noise barriers
d.        Lower speed limits
e.        Acoustically treat buildings
f.        Finance low cost loans for noise-impacted property mitigation measures
g.        Impose noise mitigation impact developer fees
Measure 5.14 Alternatives to the use of existing noisy equipment by City personnel, such as leaf blowers,
could be studied.
CIlY OF GROVER BEACH
 NOISE ELEMENT VOl. 1, POUCY DOCUMENT                 16                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

                                                 TABLE 4
                         REQuntEMENTS }o'OR AN ACOUSTICAL ANALYSIS
 An acoustical analysis prepared pursuant to the Noise Element shall:
   A.    Be the financial responsibility of the applicant.
   B.    Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise
         assessment and architectural acoustics.
   C.    Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and
         locations to adequately describe local conditions. Where actual field measurements
         cannot be conducted, all sources of information used for calculation purposes shall be
         fully described. When the use being studied is a commercial or industrial use, all
         noise sources related to the operation, service and maintenance of the facility shall be
         considered, including but not limited to the following: parking lot and landscape
         maintenance, refuse collection and truck loading/unloading activities, amplified
         sound, and outdoor sales and activities.
   D.    Estimate existing and projected (20 years) noise levels in terms of the descriptors
         used in Tables 2 and 3, and compare those levels to the adopted policies of the Noise
         Element. Projected future noise levels shall take into account noise from planned
         streets, highways and road connections.
   E.    Recommend appropriate mitigation to meet or exceed the policies and standards of
         the Noise Element., giving preference to proper site planning and design over
         mitigation measures which require the construction of noise barriers or structural
         modifications to buildings which contaiu noise-sensitive land uses.
   F.    Estimate noise exposure after the prescribed mitigat.ion measures have been
         implemented.
   G.    Describe a post-project assessment program which could be used to evaluate the
         effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures.
CllY OF GROVER BEACH
NOISE ELEMENT VOl. 1, POLICY DOCUMENT                17                            ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
       APPENDIX A
NOISE CONTOUR MAP (1990)
    !, .. -r!?t'~
                                                       o :r '/ C};- P j.§ J,j cJ J3.& .rJ c'}}
  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                               DISTRICT
                                                                                                                                                                                            R-A           RESIDtNTIAL AG?,ICUl TURAL
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-R-A         COASTAL RESIDEllTlAL AGRICULTURAL
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-P-R         COASTAL   PLAN1;ED RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                      FIfT'II' ,I
                                                                                                                                                                                            R-j
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-R~
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SlNGLE  FAMILY    RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          COASTAL SINGlE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                            R-2           DUPLEX RESID£t.'TIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-R-2         COASTAL RES10CNTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                            R-o           MULTIPLE   RESlDWTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-R-3         COASTAL   MUlTlP'_E     RESlOCN11AL
                                                                                                                                                                                            Cop           COMMERCIAL ffi(.Ft:"-SSlOOt..:..
               -,;:;                                                                                                                                                                        CoN           NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAl
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-B-D         CENTRAL eUSINESS DISTRICT
                   ';/                                                                                                                                                                      H-C           HIGHWAY COMll.E?.C:AL
                                                                                                                                                                                           .C-H-C         COASTAL HIGHWl.Y COMMERCIAL
                      [',
                                                                                                                                                                                            C~P-C         COASTAL PLAN1iED Cm.'JlERCIAL
                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                            H-S           HIGHWAY   SERVICE
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-M           COMMERCIAL     W.t.WFACTlRING
 (                        -.'                                                                                                                                                               M             INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-I           COASTAL INDUSTRIl.L
                                                                                                                                                                                           P-C            PLANNED COMMl.liITY
                              ,'
                             .~
                                        \
                                        \ ...
                                                 c-O                                                        (:..EM[N1!RY
                                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-O
                                                                                                                                                                                                          OPEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          COASTAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SPACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OPEN SPACE
                                           "
                                          .! \
                                                                                                               ScttOOl.
                                                                                                                                                                                            P-F           PRIMARY    FLOOD PLAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                            S-F           SECONDARY    FLG:.D     PLlJ~;
                                                                                                                                                                                            C-S-F         COASTAL SECOl~              FLOOD   PLAIN
                                 o
                                                                                                                                                                                            S-C           SCENIC CDRRID0-?:
                                 . [\                                                                                                                                                       C-V-B         COASTAL VEHIC::JR Ss;.::H
                                                                                                                                                                                            C~P~B         COASTAL PEOC$":"RIt..'.J EEt.CH
                                    ,:.                                                                                                                                                     C-G-C
                                                                                                                                                                                            M-H
                                                                                                                                                                                                          COASTAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MOBILE HOME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOLF     :OURS,
                                               \.,                                                                                                                                                        COASTAL ZONE E.OLINDA?'Y
                                                   \ \
                                                                                                                                                              .       "
                                                                                                                                                                                   ,.             "
                                                                                                                                                                          .           ,.           ,.
                                                                                                                                  ~~~lb)}~j;;~~~~ii.l~r~;':'f,,,,:,,:,~\\\~:~~,,\,~t ~,.~
                                                                                                                                                                ,~
                                                                                                                                                                C-N-D                       _
                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  =,S        Existing Noise Contours
(
                                                                                               ~.
                                                                                               , . =-1 '., ....-.' "".'",;~- -
                                                                                               \tt"-   .
                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                            7AJ!iC-.
                                                                                                            ;£ .r~
                                                                                                                               .,
                                                                                                                      r-:;5~JO!,
                                                                                                                                                                       " .- , ,~
                                                                                                                                                                      ._.,""
                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                           1'<-1 \
                                                                                                                                                                                    I, I
                                                                                                                                                                                         "._'~.,;;,.
                                                                                                                                                                                         ',.:     "C'-'U~Ir
                                                                                                                                                                                         ~!,"0''j~::;,;.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Scale:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OF GROVER CITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAN L:.:~ ::.:s::, COUNT'!'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             :!_:FG:"I';'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           . ,, ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '*
                                                                                                          -                ~
                                                                                                                                      • ,.                                                                             1·:1000'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -'
                                                                                                                             / 1\
                                                                                                                           i

         APPENDIX B
NOISE CONTOUR MAP (BUILDOUT)
                                                                       "
(
                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                        SyMBOL                     DISTRICT
                                                                                           R-A               RESIDENTIAL "GRICULTURAL
                                                                                           C·R·A             COASTAL RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL
                                                                                           C-P-/l            COASTAL    PLANNED       RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                           R-I               SINGLE   FAMILY   RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                           C-R-l             COASTAL    'SINGLE    FAMILY RESlDENTIAL
                                                                                           R-2               DUPLEX RESIDnmAL
                                                                                           C~R·2             COASTAL     RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                           R-3               MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                           C-R-3             COASTAL     MULTIPLE      RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                           C-P               COMMERCIAL PP.:O!-""tSSlCNAL
                                                                                           C-N               NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
                                                                 .-
                                                                 ~               - "       C-.B-D
                                                                                           H-C
                                                                                                             CENTRAL BUSINESS
                                                                                                             HIGHWAY
                                                                                                                                       D!STRICT
                                                                                                                         COMMER.CIt..:...
  \\
                                                                                           C-H-C             COASTAL     H1GHWt..Y COMMERCIAL
                                                                   = 65lan                 C-P-C             COASTAL PLAt.'UED COMMERCIAL
                                                              p.
                                                       ---!::                              H-S
                                                                                           C-M
                                                                                                             HIGHWAY   5ERVlCE
                                                                                                              COMMERCIAL     MAt-.'UFACTLfl.ING
(  ~   \,
                                                                                           M
                                                                                           C-I
                                                                                                             INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                             COASTAL      lNYJSTRUL
    '7                                                                                     P-C               PLANNED COMML.MTy
                                                                                           o                 OPEN    SPACE
     C,L\'\c-o                                                                             C-O
                                                                                           P-F
                                                                                                             COASTAL
                                                                                                             PRIMARY
                                                                                                                          OpEN S?t..SE.
                                                                                                                          FLOOD    PLAIN
          ,                                                                                S-F               SECONDARY      FLOOD Pt.Alt.'
            ,,.                                                                            C-5-F             COASTAL SECONDARY             FLOOD  PLAIN
             \     ~''''''
                                                                                           S-C
                                                                                           c-v-a
                                                                                                             SCENIC    CORRIDOR
                                                                                                             COASTAL VEHlCULl...q BEACH
              •
                                                                                           C-P-B              COASTAL PEC-=-STR:t.~l BEACH
               \                                                                           C-G-C             COASTAL GOlf COU?.5.I
                                                                                                              MOBILE HOllE
                 \                      .---'-'",' !9
                                                                                           M-H
                                                                                                             COASTAL ZOOE       EOtr.~:J,l..~Y
                                                                                                             ,.,"
                                                                                           I
                                                                                                      I
                                          Y[NUt        _
                                         : :.1,0 I \"!"f
                                           !:       I,.
                     \
                                                                             "    "               "
                      \                                                                    \I           \
                           \
                             '.                                            \     ==  R 'A9
                                                                                                       II1\
                                                                                                        .,
                                                                                                   ,.   "~,
                                                                               "    "
                                                                                                          ~
                                                                                                                   Future Noise Contours
                                                                                           -              ;;
                                                                                                                                                        CITY
(
                                    ! i
                                  i
                                /


TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION               ...................................... 1
CHAPTER 2 NOISE AND ITS EFFECTS ON PEOPLE ........................ 2
        2.1 Fundamentals of Noise Assessment ........................................ 2
        2.2 Criteria for Acceptable Noise Exposure ..................................... 4
CHAPTER 3 EXISTING AND FUTURE NOISE ENVIRONMENT ................. 7
        3.1 Overview of Sources ................................................... 7
        3.2 Metbods and Noise Exposure Maps ........................................ 7
        3.3 State Highways and M!\ior County and City Roadways .......................... 9
               3.3.1 Trafftc Calibration Study ......................................... 9
               3.3.2 Traffic Counts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
               3.3.3 Traffic Noise Exposure Calculations ................................ 12
        3,4 Railroad Noise ....................................................... 19
        3.5 Airport Noise ....................................................... 22
        3.6 M!\ior Stationary Noise Sources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 24
CHAPTER 4 COMMUNITY NOISE SURVEY ...........................                                                                      25
CHAPTER 5 REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ,                                  35
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 2-1      Examples of Noise Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..     3
Figure 3·1     M!\ior Noise Sources ...............................................                                                 8
Figure 3-2     Percent Change in AADT Compared to Trafftc Noise Level ...................                                          18
Figure 3·3      Oceano Airport - Future CNEL Contours ................................                                             23
Figure 4-1      Community Noise Monitoring Locations .................................                                             26
Figure 4-2     Ambient Noise Levels· City of Pismo Beach ......•.......................                                            32
Figure 4·3     Ambient Noise Levels - City of Arroyo Grande ............................                                           33
Figure 4-4     Ambient Noise Levels· City of Grover Beach .............................                                            34
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL 2. TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                                                                  ADOPTED JUNE 21. 1993

TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)
LIST OF TABLES
Table 2-1       Subjective Reaction to Changes in Noise Levels of Similar Sources . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6
Table 3-1       Summary of Traffic Noise Calibration Studies ........................... 10
Table 3-2       Adjustments to Traffic Noise Levels Due to Topography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 11
Table 3-3       Summary of Traffic Counts/San Luis Obispo County Cities ................. 14
Table 3-4       Noise Contour Date/Diptance From Center of Roadway to Ldn Contours ..... 15-17
Table 3-5       Summary of Railroad Noise Level Measurement Data ..................... 20
Table 3-6       Distance From Center of Track to Ldn Contours. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 21
Table 4-1       Summary of Community Noise Survey Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 28-31
APPENDIX A         FHWA Model TraffiC Noise Input Data
                                                                                                                   (
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT               II                                ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
This Technical Reference Document is adopted as part of the Noise Element of the General Plan. It
provides backgronnd information on the data and methods used to prepare noise exposure information
for major noise sources within San Luis Obispo Connty and its incorporated cities in compliance with the
Government Code. Information concerning the measurement and effects of noise on the commnnity is
also included in this document. The Technical Reference Document should be used as a resource when
evaluating the noise-related implications of specific development proposals or long-range planning efforts.
This document was edited by Grover Beach planning staff to remove extraneous tables and figures relating
to areas outside of southern San Luis Obispo County.
 GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
 VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                  1                            AOOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
CHAPTER 2 NOISE AND ITS EFFECTS ON PEOPLE
2.1 Fundamentals of Noise Assessment
Noise is often defined simply as unwanted sound, and thus is a subjective reaction to characteristics of a
physical phenomenon. The descriptors of community noise in current use are the results of many years
of effort to translate objective measurements of sound into measures of subjective reaction to noise. Before
elaborating on these descriptors, it is useful to discuss some fundamental concepts of sound.
Sound is defined as any pressnre variation in air that the human ear can detect. If the pressure variations
occur frequently enough (at least 20 times per second), they can be heard and hence are called sound. The
number of pressure variations per second is called the frequency of sound, and is expressed as cycles per
second, now called Hertz (Hz) by international agreement.
The speed of sound in air is approximately 770 miles per hour, or 1,130 feet/second. Knowing the speed
and frequency of a sound, one may calculate its wavelength, the physical distance in air from one
compression of the atmosphere to the next. An understanding of wavelength is useful in evaluating the
effectiveness of physical noise control devices such as mufflers or barriers, which depend upon either
absorbing or blocking sound waves to reduce sound levels.
To measure sound directly in terms of pressure would require a very large and awkward range of
numbers. To avoid this, the decibel (dB) scale was devised.
The decibel scale uses the hearing threshold as a point of reference, defined as 0 dB. Other sound
pressures are then compared to the reference pressure, and the logarithm is taken to keep the numbers
in a practical range. Use of the decibel scale allows a million-fold increase in pressure to be expressed as
120 dB. Another nseful aspect of the decibel scale is that changes in levels (dB) correspond closely to
human perception of relative loudness.
The perceived loudness of sounds is dependent upon many factors, inclnding sonnd pressure level and
frequency content. In the range of usnal environmental noise levels, perception of loudness is relatively
predictable, and can be approximated by weighting the frequency response of a sound level measurement
device (called a sound level meter) by means of the standardized A-weighting network. There is a strong
correlation between A-weighted sound levels and community response to noise. For this reason, the A-
weighted sound level has become the standard tool of environmental noise assessment. Figure 2-1
illustrates typical A-weighted sound levels due to recognizable sources.
It is common to describe community noise in terms of the "ambient" noise level, which is defined as the
all-encompassing noise level associated with a given noise environment. A common statistical tool to
measure the ambient noise level is the average, or equivalent, sonnd level (Leq ), which is the sound level
corresponding to a steady-state A-weighted sound level containing the sallle total energy as a time-varying
signal over a given time period (usually one hour). The Leg is the foundation of the composite noise
descriptors such as Ldn and CNEL, and shows very good correlation with community response to noise.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2. TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                  2                               ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
              Examples of NoIse Levels
                                                              (
                                                  Subjective
Level. dBA                        Activity        Evaluations
    140
           Sonic booms
    130    Threshold of pain
                                                  Deafening
    120    Threshold of discomfort
           Amplified music
    110    Commercial Jet takeoff at 200 feet
    100    Auto horn at 10 feet
                                                  Very loud
    90     Noisy factory Interior
           Heavy truck at 50 feet
    80
           New automobile at 50 feet
                                                  Loud
    70     Stenographic room                                  (
    60     Normal conversation at 6 feet
    50     Office Interior                        Moderate
    40     Soft radio music
    30     Residence Interior                     Faint
    20     Whisper at 6 feet                  ./
    10
           Human breathing                    \)  Very faint
    0      Threshold of audibility
                                                 BBA
                                   3
Two composite noise descriptors are in common use today: Ldn and CNEL. The Ldn (day-night average
level) is based upon the average hourly Leq over a 24-hour day, with a +10 decibel weighting applied to
nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) Le'l values. The nighttime penalty is based upon the assumption that
people react to nighttime noise exposures as though they were subjectively twice as loud as daytime
exposures. The CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level), like Ldn> is also based upon the weighted
average hourly Leq over a 24-hour day, except that an additional 4.77 decibel penalty is applied to evening
(7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.) hourly Leg values.
The CNEL was developed for the California Airport Noise Regnlations, and is applied specifically to
airport/aircraft noise assessment. The Ldn scale is a simplification of the CNEL concept, but the two will
usually agree, for a given situation, within 1 dB. Like the Leq, these descriptors are also averages and
tend to disgnise variations in the noise environment. Because Ldn and CNEL presume increased evening
or nighttime sensitivity, they are best applied as criteria for land uses where nighttime noise exposures
are critical to the acceptability of the noise environment, such as residential developments.
Noise in the community has often been cited as being a health problem, not in terms of actual
physiological damage, such as hearing impairment, but in terms of inhibiting general well-being and
contributing to undue stress and annoyance. The health effects of noise in the community arise from the
interference with human activities such as sleep, speech, recreation, and tasks demanding concentration
or coordination. When community noise interferes with human activities or contributes to stress, public
annoyance with the noise source increases, and the acceptability of the environment for people decreases.
This decrease in acceptability and the threat to public well-being is the basis for land use planning policies
directed towards the prevention of exposnre to excessive community noise levels. There are also economic
effects of community noise: reduction in property values, inefficiency in the workplace and lost hours due
to stress.
To control noise from existing fixed sources, many jnrisdictions have adopted community noise control
ordinances. Such ordinances are intended to abate noise nuisances and to control noise from existing
sources. They may also be used as planning tools if applied to the potential creation of a nuisance, or to
potential encroachment of sensitive uses npon noise-producing facilities. Community noise control
 ordinances are generally designed to resolve noise problems on a short-term basis (usually by means of
 hourly noise level criteria), rather than on the basis of 24-hour or annual cumulative noise exposures.
 2.2 Criteria for Acceptable Noise Exposure
 'I'he Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of the Noise Element of the General Plan (Reference 1),
includes recommendations for exterior and interior noise level standards to be used by local jurisdictions
to identify and prevent the creation of incompatible land uses due to noise. The State Guidelines contain
 a land nse compatibility table which describes the compatibility of different land uses with a range of
 environmental noise levels in terms of Ldn or CNEL. An ext.erior noise environment of 50 to 60 dB Ldn
 or CNEL is considered to be "normally acceptable" for residential nses according to those gnidelines. The
 recommendations in the State Guidelines also note that, under certain conditions, more restrictive
standards may be appropriate. As an example, the standards for quiet suburban and rural communities
 may be reduced by 5 to 10 dB to reflect lower existing ontdoor noise levels.
 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) also prepared gnidelines for community noise exposure
 in the publication Information on the Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Prot.ect Public Health
 and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety (Reference 2). These gnidelines are based upon
 assumptions regarding acceptable noise levels which consider occupational noise exposure as well as noise
 exposure in the home. The gnidelines recognize an exterior noise level of 55 dB Ldn as a goal to protect
 the public from hearing loss, activity int.erference, sleep disturbance and annoyance. The EPA notes,
 GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
 VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                 4                                ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
however, that this level is not a regulatOly goal, but is a level defined by a negotiated scientific consensus
without concern for economic and technological feasibility or the needs and desires of any particular          !
communit;y. The EPA and other governmental agencies have adopted suggested land use compatibility
guidelines which indicate that residential noise exposures of 55 to 65 dB Ldn are within acceptable limits.
For control of noise nuisances, a community noise control ordinance is the most appropriate tool. The
State Office of Noise Control has prepared a Model Community Noise Control Ordinance (Reference 3)
which contains recommended noise standards in terms of "time-weighted" sound levels. The time-
weighting concept allows discrimination of both short- and long-term noise exposures, and sets allowable
levels for each. The Model recommends more stringent standards for residential land nses than for
commercial and industrial, with the most stringent standards recommended for "rural suburban"
situations. The primary exterior noise standard for rural residential uses is 50 dB in the daytime hours
(7 a.m. to 10 p.m.), and 40 dB at night. The standard is expressed in terms of the level exceeded for 30
minutes of an hour, equivalent to the median level, or L50. This ordinance format is successfully applied
in many California cities and counties.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has also prepared a Model Community Noise Control
Ordinance (Reference 4), using the "Equivalent A-weighted Sound Level" (Leq) as the means of defining
allowable noise level limits. The EPA model contains no specific recommendations for local noise level
standards, but reports a range of Leq values as adopted by various local jurisdictions. The mean daytime
noise standard reported by the EPA is 56.75 dB (Leq); the mean nighttime noise standard is 51.76 dB
(Leq ). This ordinance format has been successfolly applied by the City and County of San Diego and by
many other jurisdictions looking for a simplified approach to the enforcement of a local noise control
ordinance.
In addition to the A-weighted noise level, other factors should be considered in estsblishing criteria for
noise-sensitive land uses. For example, sounds with noticeable tonal content such as whistles, horns, or
droning or high-pitched sounds may be more annoying than the A-weighted sound level alone will suggest.
Many noise standards apply a penalt;y, or correction, of 5 dB to such sounds. The effects of unusual tonal
content will generally be more of a concern at nighttime, when residents may notice the sound in contrast
to previously-experienced background noise.
Because many rural residential areas experience very low noise levels, residents may express concern
abont the loss of "peace and quiet" due to the introdnction of a sound which was not audihle previously.
In very quiet environments, the introduction of virtually any change in local activities will canse an
increase in noise levels. A change in noise level and the relative loss of "peace and quiet" is the inevitable
 result ofland use or activity changes in such areas. Audibilit;y of a new noise source and/or increases in
 noise levels within recognized acceptable limits are not usually considered to be significant noise impacts,
but these concerns should be addressed and considered in the planning and environmental review
processes.
Table 2-1 is commonly used to show expected public reaction to changes in environmental noise levels.
This table was developed on the basis of test subjects' reactions to changes in the levels of steady-state
 pure tones or broad-band noise, or to changes in levels of a given noise source. It is probablY most
applicable to noise levels in the range of 50 to 70 dB, the usual range of voice and interior noise levels. It
is probably not directly applicable to public perception of identifiable intrusive noise sources in very quiet
 environments because of the difference in frequency content between background noise sources and
intrusive sounds, as well as the fact that the absolute amount of energy required to make a given change
in sound pressure level is much smaller at low noise levels than at higher levels. Table 2-1 should
therefore only be applied in a general manner to show the relationship between changes in sound energy,
sound pressure levels and subjective reaction.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                   5                               ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
The comparisons of subject.ive reactiou outlined in Table 2-1 are not applicable to noise exposures which
are very quiet or very loud. For example, a whisper which is increased by 10 decibels, e.g., from 20 dB to
30 dB, remains a whisper, and would still be described as quiet. In contrast, an increase in the noise level
of a diesel locomotive from 90 dB to 100 dB would be a change from a lond noise to a very loud noise.
Thus the subjective reaction to a 10 dB change in either case may be different, even though the change
in level is the same.
                                                '{'ABLE 2-1
                   Subjective Reaction to Changes in Noise Levels of Similar Sources
      Increase in Sound            Relative Increase in
     Pressure Level, dB             Acoustical Energy                    Suhjective Reactiou
               1                       1.26 times            Minimum Detectable Change (Lab)
               3                        2.0 times            Usually Noticeable Change
               5                        3.2 times            Definitely Noticeable Change
               10                      10.0 times            Twice as Loud as Before
  Sources: Various, reported by Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                  6                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
CHAPTER 3 EXISTING AND FUTURE NOISE
                          ENVIRONMENT
3.1 Overview of Sources
Based on discussions with San Luis Obispo County staff, information provided by the seven (7)
incorporated cities of the connty and field studies conducted by BBA, it was determined that there are a
number of potentially significaut sources of communi!,)' noise witllin the county and its incorporated cities.
These sources include traffic on state highways, major county roadways and city streets, railroad
operations, airport operations, military activities and industrial facilities. Specific noise sources selected
for study are discussed in the following sections. Figure 3-1 shows the generaiized locations of major noise
sources selected for study, and for which generalized noise exposure contours have been prepared.
3.2 Methods and Noise Exposure Maps
Analytical noise modeling techniques in conjunction with actual sound noise level measurements were
used to develop generalized noise exposure contours for major sources of noise within San Luis Obispo
County and ita incorporated cities for existing (1990) and future conditions.
Anaiyticalnoise modeling techniques generally make use of source-specific data including average levels
of activity, hours of operation, seasonal fluctuations, and average levels of noise from source operations.
Analytical methods have been developed for many environmental noise sources including roadways,
railroad line operations, railroad yard operations, industrial plants and aircraft/airport operations. Such
methods will produce reliable results as long as data inputs and assumptions are valid for the sources
being studied. The analytical methods used in this report closely follow recommendations made by the
State Office of Noise Control, and were supplemented where appropriate by source-specific sound level
data to account for local conditions.
Noise exposure contours for major sources of noise are contained within the Policy Documents for each
jurisdiction. The maps depict noise exposure within each of the incorporated or major unincorporated
communities of the county. Noise exposnre in outlying areas of the connty may be derived from the
tables and discussions of the following text which describe the distance from the center of the source to
noise exposure contours. Additionally, noise exposure maps for aircraft operations at public use airports
and the major stationary sources selected for study are contained within this document.
It should be noted that the noise exposure contours shown or described in this or the Policy Document
are generally based upon annual average conditions (unless otherwise noted), and are not intended to be
site-specific where local topography, vegetation or intervening structures may significantly affect noise
exposure at a given receiver location. The contours should be used as a screening device when
determining whether a project may result in a noise-related land use conflict. Generally, a site specific
study will be required to determine noise exposure in situations involving complex topography or shielding
by buildings or vegetation. Where the reviewing agency wishes to estimate site-specific traffic noise
exposure, adjustment factors for topography and shielding may be used as discussed in Section 3.3.1 of
this document.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                  7                                AOOPTED JUNE  21, 1993
                                                                                                   1'1"
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 3-1
                                                                                           -" 0?1
~(
                                                                                                                                                                                             Major Nol •• Source.
                                                                                      c..a......... 1!                 '~
                                                                                                                    '"  . I
                                                                                                                        '\~
    .'"'"    ~_/
                                                                                                                               "
'"'                                                                                                                        '-'
                                                                                                                              ~I
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                        ,I.
             <:~""I:l"'''' '""'\
                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                     , I
                                                                                                                                       \L,
                                                                                                                                          "L,
                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,21'"'"',
                                                                                                                                       /)
                                                "P                                                                                    I         "1
                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                                                                      9M'
                                                                                                                               ,'" I\
                                                                                                                                                           I                           , .... =-
                                                                                                                                                                                            4   a   a .. ,e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~
                                 MGRRO
                                              ,"""'''<0''''''''''''
                                                ~.-./" ---
                                                                        --, ___
                                                                                   :w                 ....--'t..". - - - -
                                                                                                                           ,/  :~"L                               I
                                                                                                                                                                  '-
                                                                                                                                                                                       MILES                          '~ . .
                                                     \\~:<:'~:::J-, i                                                                            t                 .'1
                                                                                                                                                   "
                                          5AN lUIS OBISPO--                       ,
                                                                                                                                                     " ,,'  i"   !.o".
                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                             '~
                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                         '"
                                                                                "                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                               "      i-.o.
                                             Block.                ~Fi
                                                                                                                                                               ':'-~-r~'
                                                                             __
                                                           -.,.~
                                                                  i'~< t;'::::~G'                                                                                     \
                                                                                                                                                                          '-"-,.,
                                                                                                                                                                                  ~,
                                                                 Cold Storage FaeIllU ••
                                                                                                                                                                                     '----....                    c,
                                                                                      ;L
                                                                       r.jIPCMO          "
                                                                                           '."--;.                                                       -.0.                                                        i
                                                                                             \~         I(
                                                                                            r:~
                                                                                            ,~                                                                              =-                              '-"""':"'i
                                                                                                '\                                                                                     ~'-
                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                         '.                                                                                           ;:;;-,-J
                                                                                                                                                                                        ----~--               I      '
       •    Stationary Hoi•• Source •
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,\J
       III  Airports                                       "
       .... Camp Robert.
                                       '.                                       \
             Railroad                                                         -~.                                                                                                              8~.
  ---,., r- Hlghwaya

3.3 State Highways and Major County and Ci1y Roadways
The Federal Highway Administration (l"HWA) Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (Reference 5) was
used to develop Ldn contours for major traffic noise sources within the county and cities. The FHWA
Model is the analytical method presently favored for traffic noise prediction by most state and local
agencies, including Caltrans. The model is based upon reference energy emission levels for automobiles,
medium trncks (2 axles) and heavy trncks (3 axles or greater), with consideration given to vehicle volume,
speed, roadway configuration, distance to the receiver and the acoustical characteristics of the site. As
recommended by Cal trans, the Calveno noise emission curves have been used in this document to more
accurately portray noise exposme along roadways in California. (The full FHWA Model is available from
the Federal Highway Administration; see Reference 5).
Traffic data for existing and projected fntme conditions used in the calculation process were obtained from
San Lnis Obispo County and eacb of the cities of the county. For some roadways, where traffic data were
unavailable, traffic counts were conducted during peak traffic periods so that estimates of daily vehicle
movements could be prepared.
The l"HWA Model was developed to predict hourly Leg values for free· flowing traffic conditions, and is
generally considered to be accurate within plus or minus 1.5 dB. To predict Ldn values it is necessary to
determine the hourly distribution of traffic for a typical 24·hour day and to adjust the traffic volume input
data to yield an equivalent hourly traffic volume. BBA experience with the use of the l"HWA Model has
indicated that for most situations where the roadway and receiving land use are at the 'same grade, the
Model will generally provide a conservative (worst·case) estimate of traffic noise exposure.
3.3.1 Traffic Calibration Study
Since many areas within the study area contain complex topographical features, a traffic calibration study
was conducted to determine the types of adjustmenta which should be applied to calculated traffic noise
levels along certain roadway segmenta. The findings of the traffic calihration study may also be applied
to other noise sources where the height and precise location of the source with respect to the location of
the receiving use are known.
The calibration study consisted of conducting sound level measurements and concurrent traffic counts in
areas where the following topographic relationships between the roadway and surrounding area exist.
Suitable measurement locations were found along SRI between San Luis Obispo and Morro Bay and along
SRI0l between Arroyo Grande and Nipomo.
        •    Terrain gradually rises above roadway. This is typical of many areas where a potential receptor
             would look down on the roadway.
        •    Roadway is elevated ahove surrounding terrain.
        •    Roadway is located in a cut or is below a steep embankment.
Traffic noise levels were measured in terms of the Leg descriptor for 15 minute intervals while traffic
counts were being conducted. Traffic counts were projected for a one· hour period and measured Leq
values were compared to the levels calculated by the FHWA Model using the projected hourly number of
vehicles, posted speed and distance to the microphone. Calculations were based upon an acoustically "soft"
site (that is, a site where absorption of sound by the ground is significant) since experience has shown that
this generally provides the closest correlation with measured results. These comparisons afe summarized
in Table 3·1.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                   9                               ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

                                             TABLE 3-1
                              Summary of TraOic Noise Calibration Studies
                               Hourly Veb. Volumes                          L eq, dB
                                                                                        Mens.
   Distance (Roadway)"                                  Posted                         Minus
                               A       MT       lIT     Speed       Pred.··   Mens.     Pred.
  Rising TOllograI!hy
  100' (SRI)                  1636      16      108        55         69.1     69.5      -0.4
  150' (Sm01)                 2656      72       96        55         67.9     64.8     +3.1
  150' (SR101)                2868      68      140        55         68.6     65.5     +3.1
  200' (SRI)                  1636      16      108        55         64.6     63.1     +1.5
  300' (SR101)                2656      72       96        55         63.3     62.8     +0.5
  300' (SR101)                2868      68      140        55         64.0     63.3     +0.7
  400' (SRI)                  1636      16      108        55         60.1     62.3      -2.2
  450' (SR101)                2656      72       96        55         60.7     60.0     +0.7
 405' (SR101)                 2868      68     140         55         61.4     63.5      -2.1
  500' (SRI)                  1636      16      108        55         58.6     62.4      -3.8
  Elevated Roadway
  100' (SRI)                  2096      52       20        55         68.4     60.8     +7.6
  120' (SRI)                  1172      32       24        55         65.2     55.9     +9.3      (
  240' (SRI)                  1172      32       24        55         60.7     57.0     +3.7
  240' (SRI)                  1416      12       -0-       55         60.2     56.8     +3.4
  480' (SRI)                  1416      12       -0-       55         55.7     54.9     +0.8
  Roadway in Cut
   75' (SRI)                  1592      28        4        55         68.6     64.7     +3.9
  150' (SRI)                  1612    . 44       16        55         64.7     59.1     +5.6
  150' (SR101)                2656      72       96        55         67.9     63.1     +4.8
  150' (Sm01)                 2868      68      140        55         68.6     63.4     +5.2
  • Distance from the center of the roadway
  •• Calculated using the FHWA Model and Calveno noise emission curves for an
    acoustically "soft" site.
  A =        Automobiles
  MT =       Medium Trucks (2 axles)
  HT =       Heavy Trucks (3 or more axles)
  Source: Bmwn-Buntin Associates, Inc.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REfERENCE DOCUMENT              10                        ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

From Table 3-1 it may be seen that the ~'HWA Model generally overpredicted noise exposure in all
situations. This is consistent with BBA experience with the use of the model, and is probahly due mostly
to the fact that the model does not account for excess ground attenuation or atmospheric absorption over
distance. The greatest amount of overprediction occurred in areas which were shielded from view of all
or part of the roadway by either a cut, steep embankment or elevated roadway situation. In these
instances, predicted noise levels were found to be approximately 4-10 dB higher than measured levels at
distances of 150 feet or less from the center of the roadway. The shielding effect WaS found to diminish
as the distance from the roadway was increased.
For topography that rises above the roadway, such as on a hillside overlooking the roadway it was found
that the FHWA Model generally overpredicted noise exposure at distances of approximately 100-200 feet
from the center of the roadway and somewhat underpredicted noise exposure at distances greater than
400 feet. The greatest amount of underprediction was found to occur in instances where the observer was
elevated significantly above the roadway and there was a clear view of the entire roadway surface.
Tahle 3-2 has been prepared to serve as a guide when applying the traffic noise exposure contour
information presented later in this section to areas with varying topography. It should be noted that the
adjnstment factors presented in Tahle 3-2 are intended to provide conservative (worst· case) results, and
that complex situations should be evalnated by a trained professional when the potential for significant
noise impact exists.
                                                TABLE 3-2
                         Adjnstments to Traffic Noise Levels Due to Topography
                                                            Distance from Center of Roadway
   Topographical Sibmtion                             <200'             200-400'               >400'
   Hillside overlooks roadway                           -0-              +1 dB                +3dB
  Roadway is elevated (> 15')                         -5 dB              -2 dB                   -0-
  Hoadway in cutfbelow embankment                     -5 dB              -5 dB                 -5 dB
Noise exposure may also be reduced when the receiver is located behind a row of houses or other
buildings. The amount of shielding provided depends upon whether or not the row of buildings is
continuons and effectively interrupts line·of-sight hetween the noise source and receiver. Shielding by
huildings can rednce noise exposure by up to 15 dB.
It is commonly assumed that trees and other vegetation can provide significant noise attenuation.
However, approximately 100 feet of dense foliage (so that no visual path extends through the foliage) is
required to achieve a 5 dB attenuation of traffic noise. For this reason, the use of vegetation as a noise
barrier should not he considered a practical method of noise control unless large tracts of dense foliage are
a part of the existing landscape.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                 11                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

3.3.2 Traffic Counts
                                                                                                              (
In some instances, traffic connts were not available from the cities for individual roadways which were
thought to have the potential for generating significant noise levels. For these roadways, short-term traffic
counts were performed durillg the peak hours of either 7:00 a.m. - 8:30 a.m. or 4:00 p.m. - 5:30 p.m. to
provide a basis for estimating annual average daily traffic (AADT). Counts were generally conducted for
a period of 15 minutes and then projected for an hour. For the purposes of this study, AADT values were
then calculated based on the assnmption that peak hour traffic flows represent approximately 10 percent
of the AADT. A summary of the traffic counts and estimated AADTs are shown in Table 3-3.
3.3.3 Traffic Noise Exposure Calculations
Traffic data representing annual average daily traffic volumes (MDT), truck mix and the day/night
distribution of traffic for existing (1990) and future conditions were obtained from Caltrans, San Luis
Obispo County, and the Cities of San Luis Obispo, Pismo Beach, Paso Robles, Arroyo Grande, Grover
Beach, Atascadero and Morro Bay. For the county and the Cities of Morro Bay and Paso Robles, the
future situation was assumed to be the year 2010; for the Cities of San Luis Obispo, Grover Beach,
Atascadero, Arroyo Grande and Pismo Beach, it was assumed to be the time at which build out would
occur under the general plan. For the state highways in the county or the cities, the future situation was
assumed to be 2010, except for Highway 101 which was assumed to be 2005. Future traffic volumes for
a few county and cit.y roadway segments were estimated by BBA based upon growth rates for comparable
roadways since these data were not available from the jurisdiction. Traffic data used in the traffic noise
exposure modelling process are summarized in Appendix A. The odd numbered segments in Appendix
A refer to existing traffic volumes and the even numbered segments refer to future traffic volumes.
Using the FHWA Model and the traffic data summarized in Appendix A, the distances from the center
of the roadway to the 60, 65 and 70 dB Ldn contours for existing and projected future traffic conditions      (
were calculated. Contour distances are snmmarized in Table 3-4. Table 3-4 is subdivided into city streets,
state highways and rnral county roadways. Roadway segments listed in Table 3-4 refer to the traffic data
print-out snmmarized in Appendix A. Noise contour calculations generally were performed only for
roadways which had an existing or projected future ADT of 5000 or greater, since at lower traffic volumes
the 60 dB Ldn contour would be confined to an area closer to the roadway than normal residential
setbacks. Where medium and heavy truck volumes were greater than about 5% or where speeds were
greater than 50 mph, noise contours were calculated for roadways with less than 5000 AADT. The
approximate locations of the 60 dB Ldn contours for existing and projected future conditions are shown
on maps contained within the Policy Document for each major unincorporated community or incorporated
city within the county.
It should be noted that since noise contour calculations did not take into consideration shielding caused
by local buildings or topographical features, the distances reported in Table 3-4 and depicted in the noise
exposure maps should be considered worst-case estimates of noise exposure. Noise exposure behind the
first row of houses or other types of buildings may be reduced by up to 15 dB. The effects of elevated or
depressed roadways or other topographic features, which are common along many roadway segments
throughout the county, are described in Section 3.3.1 of this document.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                 12                              ADOPTED  JUNE  21, 1993
Simple adjustments to traffic noise levels shown in Table 3-4 can be made using Figure 3-2 if a new or
differentAADT is assumed. For example, if it is known that a highway with an AADTof 10,000 produces
a noise level of 60 dB Ldn at 200 feet, the noise level at that same distance can be calculated if the AADT
increases to 20,000 (assuming no changes in other traffic conditions, such as percentage of truck traffic
and speed). From Figure 3-2 it can be seen that a + 100% change in traffic volnme (10,000 to 20,000)
increases the relative noise level by +3 dB. Therefore, the new traffic noise level is 63 dB Ldn (60 dB +3
dB) at 200 feet.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
Val. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                  13                             ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                                           TABLE~
                                                                  Summary of Traffic Counts
                                                          WIthin Cities of San LIDs Obispo County
                                                                                            Observed            Obsv. Obsv. Posted
                                                                                           Peak Hour Estimated*  MT    HT   Speed
                                                                      Date        Time      Volume      ADT      (%)   (%)  (MPH)
  West Branch Street (Camino Mercado)                               3/29/90     3:12 am       303       3,080    1.3     0    30
  Huasna Road (near Route 227)                                      3/29/90     7:20 am       532       5,320      0   0.3    35
  Oak Park Boulevard (at James Way)                                 8/28/90    8:34 am        532       5,320    0.8   1.5    40
  South Elm Street (north of Farroll Avenue)                        8/29/90    8:18 am        352       3,520      0     0    30
  South Halcyon Road (north of Fair Oaks)                           8/29/90     7:50 am       756       7,560    2.1     0    35
  North Halcyon Road (north of Grand Avenue)                        8/29/90     7:30 am       572       5,720    1.4   2.1    35
  James Way (at Oak Park Boulevard)                                 8/29/90     7:53 am       113       1,130    0.9   1.8    35
  Camino Mercado (at West Branch Street)                            8/29/90    3:12 am         124      1,240      0   3.2    30
  The Pike (west of Elm Street)                                     3/29/90     8:08 am       280       2,800    5.7   2.9    35
  Farroll Avenue (west of South Elm)                                            8:35 am       120       1,200            0    35
  Rancho              (at West Branch Street)
                                                                    8/29/90
                                                                    8/29/90     8:31 am         92        920      °
                                                                                                                 4.3   4.3    30
  Grand Avenue (at 3rd Street)                                      3/28/90    4:24pm         924       9,240    0.4   0.9    30
  Oak Park Boulevard (at Newport Avenue)                            8/28/90    5:16 pm        948       9,480      0   0.8    25
  North 12th Street (at Atlantic City Avenue)                       8/28/90    5:06 pm        120       1,200      0     0    30
  Farroll Road (at 12th Street)                                     8/28/90    5:38 pm        384       3,840      0     0    30
  The Pike (21st Street)                                            8/30/90    7:20 am        192       1,920      0     0    35
  13th Street (at Grand Avenue)                                     8/28/90    4:45 pm        308      3,080       0   1.3    35
  North 4th Street (Ramona Avenue)                                  8/28/90    4:07 pm        844       8,440    0.9   0.5    30
  Shell Beach RoadjPrice Street (Cliff Avenue)                      8/28/90    7:18  am       176       1,760    2.3   2.3    35
  Price Canyon Road (at Dell Court)                                 8/28/90    7,48  am       444      4,440     1.8   5.4    35
  Mattie Road                                                       8/29/90    8:20  am        84         840    4.8          35
  Oak Park Boulevard (near James Way)                               8/28/90    8:34  am       532       5,320    0.8     °
                                                                                                                       1.5    30
 James Way (at 4th Street)                                          8/30/90    7:50  am       528      5,280     0.8   0.8    35
  4th Street (near Highway 101)                                     8/28/90    8:11  am       808       8,080    1.5   3.0    30
• Assumes tha! the peak hour traffic volume is equal to 10% of the ADT
MT = Medium Trucks (2 axles)
HT = Heavy Trucks (3 or more axles)
Source: Brown·Bunfin Associates, Inc.
                                                                             14
                                                                             ~

                                                        TABLE 3-4
                                                    Noise Contour Data
                                          Distance (Feet) from Center of Roadway
                                                      to Lw, contollIS
   Segment                                                                      Existing              Future
     Nos.                             Description                        60 dE    65 dE  70 dB 60 dB   65 dE 70 dB
STATE HIGHWAYS
 /~~~hW~yii
      1-2      Santa Barbara County to Valley Road                          95      44     21    136    63    29
      3-4      Valley Road to Halcyon Road                                 152      71     33    223   104    48
      5-6      Halcyon Road to Grand Avenue                                179      83     39    257   119    55
      7-8      Grand Avenue to Jct. Route 101                              123      57     27    168    78    36
     9-10      Jet. Route 101 to Highland Drive (Santa Rosa Street)        296     137     64    384   178    83
    11-12      Highland Drive to South Morro Bay Interchange               478     222    103    644   299   139
    13-14      South Morro Bay Interchange to North Morro Bay              456     212     98    614   285   132
               Interchange
    15-16      North Morro Bay Interchange to Jct. Route 41                470     218    101    594   276   128
    17-18      Jet. Route 41 to Old Creek Road Interchange                 370     172     80    463   215   100
    19-20      Old Creek Road Interchange to Ardath Drive                  190      88     41    209    97    45
    21-22      Ardath Drive to Pico Creek                                  171      80     37    207    96    44
    23-24      Pico Creek to Hearst Castle State Park                      172      80     37    197    91    42
    25-26      Hearst Castle State Park to Monterey County                  79      37     17    103    48    22
    57-58      Santa Barbara County to Oak Park Road Interchange            855    397    184   1,204  559   259
    59-60      Oak Park Road Interchange to South Pismo Beach               989    459    213  1,851   859   399
               Interchange
    61-62      South Pismo Beach Interchange to Avila Road                  919    426    198  1,519   705   327
    63-64      Avila Road to Los Osos Valley Road Interchange               986    457    212  1,391   645   300
    65-66      Los Osos Valley Road Interchange to Higuera Street           891    414    192  1,268   589   273
    67-68      Higuera Street to Jet. Route 1                             1,077    500    232  1,588   737   342
    69-70      Jet. Route 1 to Grand Avenue                                 970    450    209  1,698   788   366
    71-72      Grand Avenue to South Paso Robles Interchange                861   400     185  1,420   659   306
    73-74      South Paso Robles Interchange to Jet. Route 46 East          674   313     145  1,156   537   249
                                                             15
                                                         TABLE 3-4 (Continued)
                                                           Noise Contour Data
                                                 Distance (Feet) from Center of Roadway
                                                             to Lru, Contours
      Segment                                                                         Kristine:             Future
        Nos.                                 Description                        60 dB   65 dB   70 dB 60 dB  65 dB 70 dB
 COlJNTY AREA ROADS
;·;;;$I~i~~~;~~~);;;;
      143-144         San Luis Bay Drive (west of Hwy 101)                       114      53     25    193    90   42
      145-146         Avila Road (west of San Luis Bay Street)                   222     103     48    325   151    70
      147-143         Corbett Canyon Road (Hv,,"y 227 to Arroyo Grande)           92      43     20    149    69    32
      149-150         Noyes Road                                                  54      25     12    107    50    23
      151-152         Lopez Drive (Arroyo Grande Fringe)                         108      50     23    148    69    32
      153-154         San Luis Street (Avila Beach urban area)                    38      18      8     61    28    13
      155-156         Pier Avenue                                                 62      29     13     65    30    14
      157-158         Halcyon Road (north of Hwy 1)                               92      43     20    101    47    22
      167-168         Tefft Street (west of Highway 101 - Nipomo)                114      53     25    317   147    68
      169-170         Orchard Avenue (Nipomo urban area)                          77      36     17    173    80    37
      171-172         Pomeroy Road (south of Sandydale Road)                     105      49     23    133    62    29
      173-174         Thompson Avenue (Nipomo urban area)                         57      27     12    128    59    28
      175-176         North Frontage (Nipomo urban area)                          86      40     19    114    53    24
      177-178         South Frontage (Nipomo urban area)                          62      29     13     99    46    21
      179-180         Division Street (Nipomo urban area)                         45      21     10     82    38    18
                                                                     16
                                                                   ~.                                                 ~.

                                                             '-"" ~
                                                      TABLE 3-4 (Continued)
                                                       Noise Contour Data
                                             Distance (Feet) from Center of Roadway
                                                        to Lw, Contours
                                                                                  Existing             Future
  Segment Nos.                          Description                         60 dB   65 dB  70 dB 60 dB  65 dB 70 dB
     277-278      North Oak Park Boulevard                                   100     46     21    126    58   27
     279-280      North 4th Street (north City limits)                        86     40     19    113    52   24
     281-282      Grand Avenue                                               144     67     31    189    88   41
     315-316      West Branch Street                                          49      23    11     62    29    13
     317-318      HuasnaRoad                                                  58      27    13     74    34    16
     319-320      Grand Avenue                                               143      66    31    180    84    39
     321-322      Brisco Road                                                 91      42    20    115    53   25
     323-324      South Elm Street (south of Grand Avenue)                    76      35    16     97    45   21
     325-326      South Halcyon Road                                          87      40    19    111    51   24
     327-328      North Halcyon Road                                          68      32    15     86    40    19
     329-330      Fair Oaks Avenue                                            76     35     16      96   45   21
     331-332      El Camino Real                                              70     32     15      88   41   19
     333-334      Valley Road                                                 63     29     13      79   37    17
     335-336      Oak Park Boulevard                                         144     67     31     224  104   48
     337-338      Oak Park Boulevard                                         144     67     31     224  104   48
     339-340      4th Street                                                 121     56     26     152   70    33
     341-342      Shell Beach RoadjPrice Street                               64     29     14      81   37   17
     343-844      Mattie Road                                                 95     44     20     126   59   27
     345-346      Price Canyon Road                                           79     36     17     103   48   22
Source: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
                                                                    17
                                                          Figure 3-2
                         Percent Change In Annual Average
                                            Daily Traffic (AADT)
                          Compared To Traffic Noise Level
        Relative Traffic Noise Level, Ldn
    +81r-----------------------------------------------------------~
    +7  ~------------.----.--        . .-.----.-..----.. -----.---... ---..---..------..- ...---.-.-.---...----
    +6     _._. __. _._----_.__. _------_._. _--_ . .__._. _._--_._--_._-_._--_._ . ._--_.__._----_._==---_. _---------
    +5                      .._--_..__._-----_._._---_._-:::::;=--= . _----------_.._-
    +4
    +3 f---- - - - -           .._----             ~ .. -.--.--.-..----..------..---.---.-.-.-.---.
    +2                                      ----.-..--..-..---------.----.----..--.---.----.--.-.--.. - - - 1
     +1 ---.----.---.- .---------.-------.-----.--.--.---..-..-.----..-.-..-.. -.-··-·-·------·---·---1
      o                  //
                         ---_._---_.__.._.._---_.._-_......_--------------_._-------_.-
    =~  r-.-/- --.-.---.-------.-.. - . -.-.-.----.----..-------.--.. -
   '-3
    -41          /.--.                    - - _. _._.... _-_.._--_....__._._.__.__.__._-----_._-_._---.. _ - - - - - j
    -5                                   --_._._-_...__.._._... __ ..---_.               ------_._--_.
    -6
    -7                  - - _..._.•.•..__._--_._.._-_.....      __ __ _-------_.. _-_._..
                                                                       ...  ..                     _.---_ .... _---_._--_.._._----_._-
    -aLI____~____~____L __ _~_ _ _ __ L_ _ _ _- L_ _ _ _~_ _ _ _~_ _ _ _L __ _~
      -100       -50     o        +50           +100              +150          +200           +250 '+300                  +350    +400
                                            Percent Change in AADT
Note: All other traffic conditions are
unchanged
                                                                                                                                BBA
                                                                 .~
                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                           18

3.4 Railroad Noise
The mainline of the Southern Pacific Transportation Company Hailroad (S.P.RR) passes through the
county generally in a north-south direction. According to railroad officials there are presently two freight
and two passenger train movements per day within the San Luis Obispo County area. One of the freight
trains generally passes through the county at night between the hours of 10;00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Estimates of future railroad operations were not available from the railroad, although it is likely that the
number of train movements could increase.
There are a variety of railroad operating conditions which occur in San Luis Obispo County due to the
presence of grade crossings, cnrves, grades and congested areas within cities or unincorporated
communities. For this reason, speeds and the use of the warning horn vary considerably from location
to location.
In order to document railroad noise exposure within different areas of the county where residential or
other noise-sensitive development has occurred, measurements of noise levels generated by individual train
passbys were conducted. Measurement sites were selected to quantify the effects of grade crossings, grades
and variations in speeds.
The results of railroad noise level measurements are summarized in Table 3-5. From Table 3-5 it is
apparent that measured sound levels from railroad passbys as defined by the Sound Exposure Level (SEL)
at approximately 100 feet from the tracks ranged from approximately 98-101 dB for freights and 93-104
dB for passenger trains. At approximately 50 feet from the tracks, SEL values were approximately 110
dB for a freight train and 87-106 dB for passenger trains. The most significant variable in measured levels
was whether or not the horn was in use during the measurements.
Railroad noise exposure may be quantified in terms of Ldn using the following formula:
       Ldn = SEL+ 10 Log Neq - 49.4
   where,
       SEL is the average SEL for a train passby,
       Neq    is the equivalent numher ofpassbys in a typical 24-hour period determined by adding 10 times
            the number of nighttime events (10:00 p.m-7:00 a.m.) to the actual number of daytime events
             (7:00 n.m.-1O:00 p.m.), and 49.4 is a time constant equal to 10 log the number of seconds in the
            day.
Operational data used for the calculation of railroad noise exposure for existing conditions were obtained
from the railroad. For future conditions, an estimate was developed by BBA in conjunction with county
staff which includes ten freight and four passenger trains per day. Fifty (50) percent of the freight trains
and one of the passenger trains would pass through the county during the nighttime hours. This should
be considered a worst-case estimate of future railroad operations.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                   19                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                            TABLE 3-5
                                         Summary of Railroad Noise Level Measurement Data
                                             Southern Pacific Transportation Company
                                                                             Distance  #Locos/ Speed       SEL
                 Location              Date      Time       Type     Dir      (Feet)    #Cars  (mph) Lmax   (dB)  Horn
 Highway 41 and SPRR                 8/21/90   2:18 pm        P      S         100              60    86.7  97.0   N
                                     8/21/90   2:45 pm        F      N         100              50    85.0  98.7   N
 West of Wilhelma Avenue Crossing    8/28/90   2:00 pm        P      S         100        3/15  35   105.0 104.2   Y
                                     8/28/90   4:07 pm        P      N         100        2/15  35    96.0 100.8   Y
                                     8/28/90   4:52 pm        F      N         100        4/65  25    90.0   98.4  Y
 East of Wilhelma Avenue Crossing    8/28/90   2:00pm         P       S        100        3/15  35    87.9   94.1  Y
                                     8/28/90   4:07 pm        P      N         100        2/15  40    83.1   92.7  Y
                                     8/28/90   4:52 pm        F      N         100        4/65  25    83.8   97.6  Y
 Railroad Street near Highway 1      8/22/90   3:05 pm        P      S         110        2/13        82.0  92.5   N
                                     8/23/90   2:45 pm       F       N         110                    88.0  98.4   N
                                     8/24/90   3:14pm         p      S         llO                   92.0   98.0   N
 South of Oceano near Callender      8/29/90   9:00 am        F      S         120        4/55  55    92.0 101.3   N
 Near Industrial Way                 8/21/90   3:04pm         P      N          48        2/16  40    84.5  92.9   N
                                     8/21/90   3:30 pm        P      S          54        2/15  40   101.0 104.6   Y
 Near Marsh Street                   8/24/90   2:19 pm        P      S          50              40    78.0  87.0   N
                                     8/24/90   3:00 pm        P      N          50              40   103.0 105.5   Y
                                     8/24/90   3:50 pm        F      N          50              40   104.0 109.5   Y
Source: Bwwn-Buntin Associates, Inc.
                                                                20
Using the above-described railroad noise level and operational data, the distances from tracks to the Ldn
60, 65 and 70 dB contours were calculated for existing and future conditions. Calculated distances are
summarized in Table 3-6. The mean SEL values at 100 feet used for the calculations for areas away from
grade crossings and horn usage were 94.5 dB for passenger trains and 99.7 dB for freight trains. For areas
within 1000 feet of grade crossings where horns are likely to he used, mean SEL values used for
calculations were 100.4 dB for passenger trains and 101.7 dB for freight trains. As shown by the data
presented in Table 3-5, noise levels from individual trains passhys can vary considerably from event to
event.
                                               TABLE 3-6
                                Distance (Feet) from Center of Track to
                       Ldn Contours - Southern Pacific 'fmnsportation Company
                                         San Luis Obispo County
                                            Existing                              Future·
     Ldn Contour Values          wlo Horn            wfHorn            wlo Horn             w/Horn
            70 dB                    25'                35'                76'                113'
            65 dB                    53'                76'                163'               244'
            60 dB                   115'               163'               352'                525'
  • Based on a hypothetical operational scenario consisting of 10 freight and
    4 passenger trains per day.
  Source: Brown-Bnntin Associates, Inc.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
Val. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT               21                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

3.5 Airport Noise
The State of California requires that aircraft noise be quantified in terms of the CNEL descriptor in
California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 21. CNEL is considered to be equivalent to the L dn descriptor
used for other noise sources addressed in this document within approximately ± 1 dB.
Noise exposure information for the Oceano Airport was obtained from the Airport Master Plan Update
Study prepared by PRC Engineering, Inc. in 1987 (Reference 8). Version3.S of the INM was used in this
st.udy to prepare CNEL contour maps for the airport based upon the following assumptions concerning
the total number of annual aircraft operations.
        • 1985· 4,000 (17% Multi·Engine; 83% Single Engine)
        • 2005· 13,000 (11% Multi-Engine; 89% Single Engine)
Figure 3-3 shows the projected·future (2005) CNEL contours for the airport. Shown are noise exposure
val ues of 45 and 50 CNEL. Such values represent lower noise exposure than the land use compatibility
criteria established by the State of California or the policies of this Noise Element. For this reason, they
may be used to represent a worst-case picture of noise exposure in areas around the airport which are
normally subject to aircraft overflights.
It should be noted that. the airport noise exposnre map shown in Figure 3-3 depicts noise levels of aircraft
in flight. Noise levels from aircraft engine runups on the ground and other stationary.noise sources at
the airports were not studied during the preparation of this document. It is unknown if these sources are
significant.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL RmRENCE DOCUMENT                    22                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

                            1jIDJ;                            0
                                                                              0
                            , .'
                                              ~'.:k.1'
                                                              0
                                                              0               X
                                       .... /   .'            '" ...w
                                                                       W
                                                                            "~•
                                                                             ~    '"
                                                                                    M
                                                                                      I
                                                                       Ie   «
                                                                      =
                                                                             0
                                                              0
                                                                       W
                                                                       -'
                                                                       "'
                                                                       0
                                                              0
                                                                       '"
                                                              0
                                                              0
                                                                                  iii
                                                                                  0
                                                             ,LJ                  0
                                                                                  '"0.
                                                                                  «
                                       '.                                         :::
                                                            ~:V
                                                                                  UI
                                               ,  ,                               a:
                                                                                  ::>
                                                                                  (J)
                                                 , ~!
                                                    .                             0
                                  ~                       .~
                                                                                  0.
                                                                                  X
                                   .t "                .'
                                                      l .'
                                                      .'
                                                           .                      UI
                                     :.'0.                                        UI
                                                                                  (J)
                              <l'  ,
                                  CJ'
                                                           ",\ ~" ...
                                                                ,'.'
                                                                                  0
                                                                                  z
                                                                                  UI
                                                                   I;"~
                      '\. .                                  .;/                  a:
                                                                                  ::>
                                                                                  I-
                                      :.                                          ::>
                                                                                  u.
               ,. ,
             ~       ;
          .
     . -i~il"                                                                     I-          """"
                                                                                  a:
                                                                              zO
                                                                              ",0.
                                                                              ..Ja:
                                                                              0.-
                                                                              0::
                                                                                  «
                                                                              w>-
                                                                       i'     0-1-
                                                                              (/)z
                                                                              "'::>
                                                                              ;:1;0
                                                                              0-0
                                                                              0::
                                                                                     I
                                                                              0
                                                                              0.0
                                                                              !:z
                                                                              "'« w
                                                                                  0
                                                                                        ~
                                                                                  0     I/)
                                                                                        0
                                                                                        0
                                                                                        N
                                                                                    ,;
                                                                                    =   .....
                                                                                        ~
                                                                                    ,;
                                                                                    =Ie
                                                                                     w
                                                                                     w
                                                                                          ..
                                                                                          0
                                                                                          C.
                                                                                        <I:
                                                                                    =CJ   0
                                                                               0 "
                                                                                     w    C
                                                                                          III
                                                                               (.U        CD
                                                                               Q.g'       CJ
                                                                                        0
..
                  LL      ..
                          z
                          w
                                                                            c
                                                                            !
                                                                           ii        ·
                                                                                     !
                                                                                     0
                                                                                        ~
                                                                                        C?
                                                                                          I
                                                                                         ..
   ~
                  0
                          0                                                              CD
                  «                                                       ••c ••
                         0
                  n.                                                                ••   ::0
                                                                          ·
                                                                          ~
                                                                          0
                                                                           • <•     0
                                                                                         III
                                                                                        u::

3.6 Major Stationary Noise Sources
                                                                                                              (
The production of noise is an inherent part of many industlial, commercial and aglicultural processes,
even when the hest availahle noise control technology is applied. Noise production within an industrial
or commercial facility or in close proximity to many types of agricultural equipment is controlled indirectly
by Federal and State employee health and safety regulations (OSHA and Cal-OSHA), but exterior noise
emissions from such operations have the potential to exceed locally acceptable standards at nearby noise-
sensitive land uses.
Noise control issues focus upon two objectives: to prevent the introduction of new noise-producing uses
in a noise sensitive area, and to prevent encroachment of noise-sensitive land uses upon existing noise-
generating facilities. The first objective can be achieved by applying performance standards to proposed
new indnstrial or other noise generating uses. The second objective can be met by requiring that new
noise-sensitive uses in proximity to existing noise sources include receiver-based mitigation measures to
ensure compliance with the same performance standards.
There were no major stationary noise sources within Grover Beach that were selected as part of this study.
In addition, specific noise sources related to agriCUlture were not studied as a part of this Noise Element,
although such operations are common in the South Grover Beach Neighborhood Area and the mral areas
of the county south of the City. Agricultural operations have the potential to produce significant noise
impacts. The following is a list of typical operations or equipment for which noise level measurements
have been obtained in Tulare County. This noise exposure information should be used as a general guide
to identify potential noise conflicts.
                                                                     Noise Level, lIB      Distance (Ft.)
  EqnipmentjOperation                                                                                          (
  Wind Machine (National                                                   91-92                 50
  Frost 391 G.P., 391 cu. in. Ford V-8 engine)                             61-71                350
  Cotton Gin                                                               74-77                120
  Diesel Engine                                                            74-85                 50
  Aerial Application Aircraft (Crop Dusters)
   Piper Brave (400 H.P.f3-bladed prop.)                                   85-88                600
    Grumman Ag Cat (600 H.P./2-bJaded prop.)                                103               100-150
    Turbine Thrush (800 H.P./3-bladed prop.)                               90-95                100
  Cotton Pickers                                                            58                  500
  Large Tractor                                                            72-75                150
  Small Tractor                                                            69-79                 50
 GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REfERENCE DOCUMENT                  24                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
CHAPTER 4 COMMUNITY NOISE SURVEY
As recommended by the Government Code and ONC Guidelines, a community noise survey was conducted
to document noise exposure in representative areas of the county and cities containing noise-sensitive land
uses. The following noise-sensitive land uses have been identified for the purpose of this survey:
1. All residential uses
2.  Schools
3.  Long-term care medical facilities, snch as hospitals, Imrsing homes, etc.
4.  Office bnildings
5.  Parks
Noise monitoring sites were selected to be representative of typical conditions where such uses are located.
A total of 41 monitoring sites throughout the County were selected as shown in Figure 4-1. A combination
of short-term and continuons noise monitoring was used to document existing noise levels at these
locations during August, 1990.
At 33 ofthe community noise survey sites, noise levels were sampled for approximately 15 minutes during
each of three periods of the day and night so that reliable estimates of Ldn could be prepared. The data
collected during the short-term sampling program included the Leg, maximum noise level, minimum noise
level and a description of noise sources which were audible at the monitoring sites.
Continuous noise monitoring was conducted at eight of the community noise survey sites to document
fluctuations in noise levels over a typical 24-hour period within the different types of noise environments
(City, County Rural Area, County Urban/Village Area). Noise level data collected during continuous
monitoring included the Leg' maximum noise level and the statistical distribution of noise levels for each
hour of the sample period.
Noise level data collected during the community noise survey are summarized in Table 4-1. Typical hourly
fluctuations of noise levels at the sites where continuous noise monitoring was conducted are shown in
graphic form in Figures 4-2 through 4-4. Hourly Leq values shown in these figures are representative of
energy average sound levels, and are very sensitive to single events such as vehicle or railroad passbys or
aircraft overflights. Lmax and Lmin values represent the maximum and minimum values measured each
hour.
The community noise survey results indicate that to'pical noise levels in noise-sensitive areas range from
approximately 39-62 dB Ldn- As would be expected, the quietest areas are those which are removed from
major transportation-related noise sources and local industrial or other stationary noise sources. Good
examples of these quiet areas are the County Rural Areas defined by the El Pomar-Estella, San Luis
Obispo and South County Planning Areas and some of the Count;y Urban/Village Areas such as at
Heritage Hanch. The noisier locations monitored during the survey were in areas located near Highway
101 and major local streets.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                 25                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Flgur. 4-1
                                                          ~-           --
                                                         ': .....~Ii.;;~~;;-l                                                                                                                                -(       ; , f lI                                                 Community Nol •• Monitoring Locatlont
\
                                                                                                                                                                                               ":2 '" ~
                                                                                                                                    .-                                                                              /-.-
                                                                             , ...
                                                                                 ~    ";:
                                                                                                                 --...-;:-
                                                                                                                             1 .. ""
                                                                                                                                '. ,-"', --,_ 1112                                                   /
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ..£...--" "<5 \ '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ".
                                                                                          II
  '\~-                                                               ,i<"
                                                                           "
                                                                                           4
                                                                                                           -'-.···.'_\~l~;n.
                                                                                                                   '-......, \              i~~.'.::.:,.~-=:'-,                            r'~~'NDCN\~
                                                                                                                                                                                              ~,
                                                                             ~-
                                                                                                                ,~ -~, ~-1I13                                                             )
   3.:.·~ S:~"'€'-::N
                          "~..,
                              \~         /
                                              .
                                                                               .1 '
                                                                                   ".~                  -
                                                                                                           . '--"~"- ~ ~          'itlz4PASO Roe~ES
                                                                                                                                        '.
                                                                                                                                    '~;~;~)-;;(r:; >~
                                                                                                                                                              .              "". /
                                                                                                                                                                           ,'"
                                                                                                                                                                                         :                                     L..'_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "I
                             'OA"H"~ III.Z".~~t            r:,
                                                                                                                                       ri'"'~ ~'
                                                                                                                                 11. '_, .               _       /'       _ 'ON
                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ···.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '?L _
                                                                                                                                          35~38'\~.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \ L.,
                                                                                                                                                              f;-;"                                                                                    '-,
                                      '        ...,
                                                                                                                                                            y                                                                                             '-,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                           ' \ , -",                 N'.,.         A, • •   '''r                                                                         .
                                                  .....,   '-,       • • • • -.0"               _,
                                                       "----':'::""---'                    '/                                                         ,                                                                                        {                                       o              a    a
                                                                    '~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ii!  <1             10   12
                                                                    --C.:05            3\                                                     '\ ~
                                                                                                                                             'l1'.'.i;              _                                                                         I!                                        .!!i!Ii!I!r~.)!iIiIIiiI-=~:::J!I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MILES
                                                                                              \      .
                                                                                             ".: j /39-41
                                                                                                        /                                    ~A'''A' '.'."~A"'"                                                                     .. ~.~
                                                          MCRRO SAY                          1t---...."~
                                                                                              I, ':;"'.~., • __
                                                                                                                                                                    y'"                       d.~~        _-1   ~ ----"-"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   " - L-. f"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -""--".  !
                                                                                          10~.; ;~,ii!-'
                                                                                                                                                                            .-M . . . . . . .
                                                                                            /'     ,j-":..~.W.O"D P ••" .                                               •  ._~.                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ",
                                                                                                                   " ~ ',:<~."~_:'20
                                                                                                                         14111', , )                  S'>/l LUIS 08,90
                                                                                       (! "-                   .
                                                                                                                 .                 -1).- --
                                                                                                                                  (--           ,-"..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -j
                                                                                           '\"' . . ~.:, .. "::111            ii$ll      5 111\,
                                                                                                                                                       '                        l":<O.:
                                                                                                                            r~''-''-'''25-27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J
                                                                                                         '-.-        .-                                  ._.'
                                                                                                                '"                   ""'&              za"e                                                                               ~          ~
                                                                                                              i''',"'~
                                                                                                              ','-",-, "EACM                 .""'"'"      _. . ARRO,'0 O,,"O(                                                          ,,
                                                                                                                                                       ~:'3'f'~                                                                                               "~.~_
                                                                                                                             -                \ .... -.... '                                                                                             <':>.                        ~
                                                                                                                 GRGVER C.ITY \                                                                                               .   '
                                                                                                                            W'NO                18,)                                                                            ,                                    , "
                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                I'      I
                                                                                                                                               } '-" • 7·
                                                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                                                                              I.
                                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                                             ""OMe.
                                                                                                                                                                         ~ . ..,
                                                                                                                                                                            ':I(~                ..---~'OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                , --",-r'
                                                                                                                                                                             -. L/ .~. ~ ,'I,."'"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,     ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =....'"
                                                                                                                                          /                 r           -- -\                          '.
                                                                                                                                                                     -"--1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -----  '~,      T\
                                                                                                                                     (
                     IIIiI!I  Short-Term Monitoring Sites
                     A 24-hour Monitoring Sites
                               Short-Term and 24-hour Monitoring Sites

Maximum noise levels observed during the survey were generally caused by local automobile traffic or
heavy trucks. Other sources of maximum noise levels included occasional aircraft overflights, construction
activities and nearby industrial/commercial equipment or machinery. Background noise levels in the
absence of the above-described sonrces were generally caused by distant traffic, wind, birds, the surf or
insects.
One factor that is difficult to quant.ify, but is often mentioned by persons who reside in rural areas, is the
greater expectation for a quiet living environment by persons who have made the choice to live away from
urbanized areas. This factor, coupled with the quiet existing background noise levels discussed above,
greatly increases the likelihood that noise from a new noise generating land use will be perceived by
residents of these areas as a significant intrusion over existing conditions.
Results of the community noise survey indicated that existing background noise levels in many areas of
the county that contain noise-sensitive land useS are relatively quiet. To preserve quiet conditions, noise
level standards and policies (see Policy Document) have heen adopted which will prevent degradation of
the existing noise environment as much as possible.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2,  TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT                   27                           ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                             TABLE 4-1
                                               Summary of Community Noise Survey Data
                                                                                   Level, dB
Map.                                                                                                                Estimated
Loc. #                 Location                    Lo       ~    Lrnax (Source)              Lmin (Source)            Lru,*
       COUNTY URBANfVILLAGE AREAS
       Avila Beach
  1     Avila Valley Drive (1/2 miles south of     41       42   59 (traffic, aircraft)      32 (dist. traffic)     46-50 dB
       San Luis Bay Drive)
       Cambria
  2     Sunbury Avenue and Weymouth Street         45       38   58 (birds)                      36 (dist. traffic) 44-48 dB
       CaYUcos
  3     Cayucos Drive and Birch Street             58       41   72 (traffic, hammering)     39 (dist. traffic)     54-58 dB
       Heritage Ranch
  4     Gateway Drive and Heritage Road            38       34   58 (traffic, blasts)        30 (crickets)          39-43 dB
       Los Ranchos/Edna
  5     6030 Kathy Court                           42       34   57 (traffic)                32 (dist. pump)        41-45 dB
       Oceano
  6     Oceano School                              50       31   62 (traffic)                31 (ocean)             46-50 dB
       Nipomo
  7     Nipomo Park                                51      36    66 (children)               29 (dist. traffic)     48-52 dB
       SanMiguel
  8     Joint Union Elementary School              57      52    70 (H;vy 101)               41 (dist. traffic)     58-62 dB
       Santa Maxgarita
  9     Margarita Avenue and "E::' Street          45      38    63 (children)               35 (dist. traffic)     44-48 dB
                                                           ~.
                                                             28
                                                   TA_.. " 4-1 (Continued)
                                       SlllIlIIJaIy of Community Noise Survey Data
                                                                              LeveL dB
Map.                                                                                                      Estimated
Loc. #                  Location                Lo       L"    L..ax (Source)          Lmin (Source)        Lm,*
       South Bay
  10    1821 Don Avenue ••                      41       36    66                      24                 42-46 dB
       Templeton
  11    Fortail Court                           43       43    59 (wind)               36 (dist. traffic) 47-51 dB
       COUNTY RURAL AREAS
       EI Pomar-Estrella Planning Area
  12    Hog Canyon Road (halfway                42       36    63 (traffic)            27 (wind)          42-46 dB
          between Von Dollen Road &
          Estrella Road)
  13    Union Road and Geneseo Road             43       39    61 (traffic)            30 (wind)          44-48 dB
       San Luis Obisno Planning Area
  14    Johe Lane (near Foothill Road)          45       41    53 (wind)               34 (dist. traffic) 46-50 dB
  15    1595 Tiffany Ranch Road                 45       27    61 (aircraft)           21 (crickets)      41-45 dB
       South Counll Pla:nning Area
  16    Stanton and Viejo                       50       30    70 (traffic)            27 (crickets)      46-50 dB
       CITIES
       San Luis Obisno
  17    2325 Parkland Terrace ••                48       38    82                      27                 46-50 dB
 18     Brookpine Drive (south end             46        33    56 (traffic)            30 (crickets)      43-47 dB
          of road)
 19     Conrad L. Smith School                 45       40     54 (aircraft)           29 (wind)          46-50 dB
 20     Bishop's Peak School                   46       30     59 ("ind)               26 (crickets)      43-47 dB
                                                          29

                                                  TABLE 4-1 (Continued)
                                           Summary of Community Noise Survey Data
                                                                            LeveL dB
Map.                                                                                                     Estimated
Loc. #                 Location                Lo       L"  Lmax (Source)            L"un (Source)         Lm,*
       Paso Robles
  21    Vine Street and 28th Street ••         53       46  83                       28                  52-56 dB
  22    Turtle Creek Park                      44       35  56 (industrial)          33 (dist. traffic)  42-46 dB
  23    Centennial Park                        45       38  61 (traffic)             35 (dist. traffic)  44-48 dB
  24    Call-Booth House (Northwest corner     50       39  69 (traffic)             37 (dist. traffic)  48-52 dB
          of Vine and 13th)
       Pismo Beach
  25    930 Fresno Street ••                   43       34  70                       25                  41-45 dB
  26    El Viento (near Morgan Drive)          47       48  64 (traffic)             35 (traffic)        52-56 dB
  27    Terrace and Shoreline                  51       48  63 (traffic)             40 (wind)           53-57 dB
       Grover Beach
  28    Grover Heights Park                    50       42  63 (traffic)             40 (distant AlC)    49-53 dB
  29    240 No. Eighth Street ••               47       39  72                       26                  50-54 dB
  30    Mentone Park                           54       39  73 (traffic)             35 (wind)           51-55 dB
       Arroyo Grande
  31    Alder Street and Ash Street            54       38  68 (traffic)             36 (Hwy 101)        51-55 dB
  32    La Cresta Drive and Platina Lane       49       35  66 (traffic)             35 (crickets)       46-50 dB
  33    225 Short Street ••                    53       37  84                       26                  50-54 dB
  34    Via Bandolero and Via Poca             48       31  63 (traffic)             27 (crickets)       44-43 dB
                                                       ~
                                                         30
                                                                                                        -.

                                                            TABLE 4-1 (Continued)
                                                  Summary of Community Noise Survey Data
   Map.                                                                                                                               Estimated
   Loc.lI                     Location                  Ln        L"    Lmax (Source)                      Lrnin (Source)               Lon*
             Atascadero
      35       4320 Estrada Avenue .,                   48        44    75                                 30                         49·53 dB
      36       Pinal Avenue and Sonora Avenue           44        36    55 (birds)                         35 (crickets)              43-47 dB
      37       9355 Mountain View Drive                 43        41    52 (children)                      35 (wind)                  46-50 dB
      38       Cascabel Road (1/2 mile north            42        43    56 (wind)                          31 (dist. traffic)         47-51 dB
                of Santa Lucia Avenue)
              Morro Bay
      39       Tide Avenue and Nevis Street"            53        46    83                                 23                         52-56 dB
      40       Anchor Street and Morro Avenue           49        37    65 (traffic)                       33 (dist. traffic)         46-50 dB
      41       2060 Ironwood Avenue                     55        40    82 (traffic)                       36 (Vlind)                 52-56 dB
LD = Average Leq of two 15-minute samples obtained between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. exceptfor sites where 24-hour monitoring was conducted.
L" = Leq for one 15-minute sample obtained between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for sites where 24-hour monitoring was conducted.
• Lan estimated from Lo and   L"
•• L dn 24-hour monitoring site
Source: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
                                                                   31

                                                            Figure 4-2
                                     Ambient Noise Levels
                                      City of Pismo Beach
         dBA
    TO                                                                   :;J0
                                                                                                                    I
    "/\\jt"~
                                                                                             Ldn • 43.3 dB
                                                                                    ,f'
                                                                              \V /
       ,~
                                                                                                              __Ji'
    00
                                  ~~~
    40
                                                                              v~'"~
                                                                                                                       /7
   30
   20  L!_ _~_ _ _ _L-__L-__J -__ ~ __-L__ ~ ____L-__ ~ __ ~ __-L__ ~ ____L-__ ~ __J -__-L__ ~ __ ~ ____L-__J -__-L__-L__ ~
     earn              9am           Noon           3pm             8pm           9pm          MIdnIght         3am
                                                         Time of Day
                                                  I~Lmln       +Leq      ""*"Lmax)
930 Fresno SI. 8/20-21/90
                                                                                                                   BBA~
                                                                 32

                                                      Figure 4-3
                                Ambient Noise Levels
                              City of Arroyo Grande
         dBA
                                                                                                      I
    100 ,'--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------,
     90                                                                        CLd n • 52.4 dB
     80
     70
                                           .,
                                                                                       \ ~: -*y~'.
     BO~         .;.
                                      >                                                           ~~
                                                                             \-*
                                                        ~
     60
                                      *         1   :            '''-t,
                                                                                              :I(
     40
    30
                                                                     ""  ~-----.               .~
     20 [L-~ __~___L_ __L_ __L_ _~_ _~_ _L__ _L__ _L_~_ _~_ __L_ __L_ __L_ _~_ _~_ _~_ _L__ _L_~L_~_ _~
      8am            gam        Noon          3pm           Bpm         9pm       Midnight        3am
                                                  Time of Day
                                              ~Lmln    +leq     -*"Lmax'
225 Short St. 8/23-24/90
                                                                                                     BBA      L-/
                                                         33

                                                   Figure 4-4
                               Ambient Noise Levels
                                  City of Grover Beach
        dBA
        ,r--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------,
                                                                                                I
    80
    70
                                                                         I  Ldn· 48.1 dB
    80  f f - - --'"
    60
    ;
    40                                                                                               1
   30
   20 LI___L_ __L_ _~_ _L__ _L__ _L_~~~__~__~___L_ __L_ __L_ __L_ _~_ _~_ _L__ _L__ _L___L_~___J__~
      eam          eam         Noon        3pm          6pm          9pm      Midnight      38m
                                               Time of Day
                                           ~Lmln    -t-Leq  """*-Lm;:J
240 Eight St. 8/21-22/90
                                                   ~,
                                                                                               BBA
                                                                                                           ~,
                                                        34
                                                                                                        ',-" "

CHAPTER 5 REFERENCES
1.     California Department of Health Services, Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of the
       Noise Element of the General Plan, 1990 (included in the 1990 State of California General
       Plan Guidelines, State Office of Planning and Research).
2.     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Information on Levels of Environmental Noise
       Requisite to Protect Puhlic Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety. March,
       1974.
3.     California Department of Health, Office of Noise Control, Model Community Noise Control
       Ordinance, April, 1977.
4.     U.S. Environmental Protection          Agency,    Model     Community      Noise  Control
       Ordinance,Septemher, 1975.
5.     Federal Highway Administration, FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model,
       Decemher, 1978.
6.     Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc., Aircraft Noise Assessment, Chandler Ranch Specific Plan
       EIR, July, 1990.
7.     Federal Aviation Administration, Integrated Noise Model, Version 3.9, October, 1982.
8.     PRC Engineering, Inc., Future Noise Exposure Map (2005) Oceano-County Airport.
9.     PHC Engineering, Inc., Airport Master Plan. Update Study. San Luis Obispo County Airport,
       December, 1986.
10.    Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc., Airport Capacity CNEL Contour Map. San Luis Obispo
       County Airport, January 8, 1991.
11.    Department of the Army, Environmental Noise Study No. 52-34-0493-89. Noise Contours
       for Camp Roberts. California, June, 1989.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT               35                             AOOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
APPENDIX A TRAFFIC DATA
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 2, TECHNICAL REFERENCE DOCUMENT 36 ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                                                                                             FHWA Model RD-77-108: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
HWA     Model    RD-7",          ,!     Brovn"-Buntin       Associates, Inc.                                                 Calveno Emission Curves               Run Dete: 05-15-1991
alveno Emission "urves                           Run Date: 1215-15-1991                                                      Project Number: 90-001                Run Time: 15:14:16
roject Number: 9121-1211211                      Run Time: 15:14:13                                                          Year: 1991
ear: 1991                                                                                                                    50ft Site
oft Sile
                                                                                                                             INPUT DATA SUMMARY:
NPUT DATA SUMMARY:
                                                                                                                             Segment         ADT    Day%     Eve%     Nite%     %MT     %HT   Speed     Distance       Offset
                                           Eve%      Nite%       %MT      %HT       Speed     Distance        Offset
egment               ADT     Day%
                                                                                                                                  46       5000     94.0      0.0        6.121  2.8     1.2    60.0        100.0          0.0
                             90.121         0.0       10.0       5.121    2. 1       5121.121    1121121.121     121.0            47     1612100    85.0      0.0      15.121   8.6   11. <I   65.121      1121121.0      121.121
                 38121121
                             90.0           0.0       1121.0     5.0      2. 1       5121.121    1121121.121     121.121                            85.0      0.0      15.0     8.6   11. 4    65.0        11210.0        0.0
         2       55121121                                                                                                         48     2340121
                             89.0           0.0       11. 121    5. 1   1121.1       4121.121    1121121.121     0.121                              81. 0     0.0      19.0     8.3   12.5     55.0        100.0          0.121
         3       58121121                                                                                                         49     112112100
                             89.121         0.121     11. 121    6. 1   1121. 1      4121.121    1121121.121     121.121                            81. 121   0.121    19.121   8.3   12.5     65.0        11210.0        0.0
         4     11213121121                                                                                                       50      170121121
                                            121.121   11.121     6.1    1121.1       40.121      1121121.121     121.121                                               16.121   5.8   18.2     65.0        10121.0        121.121
        5        74121121    89.121                                                                                              51        521210   84.0      121.0
        ,:,                                 121.121   11. 121    6. 1   1121.1       4121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                               16.0     5.8   18.2     65.0        10121.0        121.121
               127121121     89.121                                                                                              52        8840     84.121    0.0
                                            121.121   11. 121    1.5      121.7      4121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                               12.0     3.5     2.5    60.0        100.0          121.0
        7     124121121      89.121                                                                                              53        5100     88.121    0.121
                                            0.0       11. 121    1.5      121.7      4121.121    1121121.121     0.121                                                 12.0     3.5     2.5    60.0        11210.0        121.0
        H     1971210        /J'J. !II                                                                                           54        8500     88.0      121.0
                                            121.0     13.121     1.9      121.9      45.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        3.121   3.0    60.121      10121.0        0.121
        9     3121121121121  87.121                                                                                              55        240121   88.121    121.0    12.0
                                            121.121   13.121     1.9      121.9      45.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        3.121   3.0    6121.0      11210.0        0.0
     1121     443121121      87.0                                                                                                56        400121   88.121    0.0      12.0
                                            121.121   15.121     3.121    1.2        65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.2     5.3    7121.121    10121.0        121.0
    II        21121121121    85.121                                                                                              57      4012100    89.121    121.0    11. 0
                                            121.0     15.121     3.121    1.2        65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.2     5.3    70.0        10121.121      121.0
    12        328121121      85.0                                                                                                58      6680121    89.121    121.121  11. 121
                                            0.0       12.121     3.3      1.5        7121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                                                5.3    70.0        11210.121      121.121
    13         178121121     88.0                                                                                                59      5201210    90.0      121.121  10.121   2.3
                                            0.0       12.121     3.3      1.5        7121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.3     5.3    70.0        100.121        121.121
    14        278121121      88.0                                                                                                60    133200       90.121    121.121  10.0
                                            0.0       10.121     2.4      121.8      7121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.6     5.9    70.0        11210.0        0.0
     15       21700          90.0                                                                                                61      4512100    90.0      0.0      1121.0
                                            0.121     1121.121   2.4      121.8      7121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.6     5.9    70.121      100.0          121.0
    15        31219121121    9121.0                                                                                              62      957121121  9121.121  0.0      1121.0
                                            0.121     1121.121   2.9      121.8      7121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.6     5.9    7121.0      100.0          121.0
    17        15121121121    90.121                                                                                              63      5001210    90.0      0.121    10.121
                                            0.0       1121.121   2.9      I2I.B      7121.121    1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.6     5.9    7121.0      11210.0        121.0
     18       21121121121    9121.0                                                                                              64      8381210    9121.121  0.0      1121.0
                                            0.0         5.121    4.4      1.2        65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.6     5.9    7121.0      10121.0        0.0
    19           82121121    95.0                                                                                                65      4312100    9121.0    0.121    1121.0
                                            0.121       5.121    4.4      1.2        65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.6     5.9    70.121      1121121.0      0.0
    2121         95121121    95.0                                                                                                66      7300121    9121.0    0.121    1121.0
                                            121.121     5.121    5. 1     2.2        65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.7     6.3    7121.121    100.0          121.0
    21           651210      95.0                                                                                                67      5601210    9121.121  0.121    1121.121
                                            0.0         5.121    5. 1     2.2        65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        2.7     6.3    70.0        100.0          0.0
    22           86121121    95.0                                                                                                68    1002121121   90.121    0.121    10.0
                                            0.0         5.121    1.9      121.4      55.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        3.0     7.0    70.121      11210.0        0.0
    23           8121121121  95.0                                                                                                69      4412100    89.0      0.0      11. 0
                                            121.0       5.121    1.·9     121.4      65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        3.0     7.0    70.0        11210.0        0.0
    24           98121121    95.0                                                                                                70    102121121121 89.0      0.0      11. 0
                                                        5.121    1.9      121.4      65.0        1121121.121     121.121                                                                6.6    7121.121    11210.0        121.0
    25           25121121    95.121         0.121                                                                                71      3312100    86.0      121.0    14.0     3.121
                                            121.121     5.121    1.9      121.4      65.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        3.0     6.6    70.0        100.0          0.0
    25           37121121    95.0                                                                                                72      69900      86.0      0.121    14.0
                                            0.121     1121.0     3.121    1.2        55.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        3.9     8.5    55.0        10121.0        0.0
    27           9121121121  9121.121                                                                                            73      2412100    86.0      0.0      14.0
                                                      1121.121   3.121    1.2        55.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        3.9     8.5    65.0        100.121        0.0
    28        174121121      9121.0         121.121                                                                              74      5391210    86.0      0.0      14.0
                                                      1121.0     2.7      1.6        55.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        4.6   13.3     7121.0      100.121        121.121
    29           6121121121  9121.121       0.0                                                                                  75      1712100    86.0      0.121    14.0
                                                      1121.121   2.7      1.6        55.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                              13.3     70.121      100.121        121.0
    3121         94121121    9121.121       121.121                                                                              76      312120121  86.121    121.121  14.121   4.6
                                                      1121.121   2.7      1.6        45.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        4.6   13.3     70.0        100.0          121.0
    31        119121121      9121.121       121.121                                                                              77      15500      86.0      0.121    14.121
                                                      1121.121   2.7      1.6        45.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        4.6   13.3     7121.0      10121.0        0.0
    32        31215121121    9121.121       121.121                                                                              78      30200      86.0      121.121  14.121
                                            121.121   1121.121   2.2      1.5        45.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                        5.6   16.0     60.0        11210.0        121.0
    33        25121121121    9121.121                                                                                            79        2450     90.121    0.0      1121.0
                                            121.121   1121.121   2.2      1.5        45.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                              16.0     60.0        11210.121      121.0
    34        461121121      9121.121                                                                                            80        341210   9121.121  121.121  1121.121 5.6
                                            121.0     1121.121   2.2       1.5       45.121      1121121.121     121.121                                                                1.7    50.0        100.0          0.0
    35           28121121    9121.121                                                                            121.121         81        301210   91. 121   121.121    9.121  4.3
                             9121.121       0.0       1121.0     2.2      1.5        45.121      1121121.121                                                                            1.7    50.0        11210.121      121.0
    35           48121121                                                                                        121.121         82        6700     91. 0     121.121    9.0    4.3
                             9121.121       121.0     1121.121   2.3       1.2       45.121      1121121.121                                                                            1.7    5121.121    100.0          0.0
     37          19121121                                                                                        0.0             83      11000      92.121    0.121      8.0    4.3
                             9121.0         121.121   1121.121   2.3      1.2         45.121     1121121.121                                                                                   50.0        10121.0        121.121
     38          3121121121                                                                                                      84      23900      92.121    0.121      8.121  4.3     1.7
                                                      10.121    10.4       3.1        45.121      1121121.121     0.121                                                                                    100.0          0.0
     39               5100   '1111.0        0.0                                                                                  85      21900      92.0      121.0      B.0    2.0     3.121  10.121
                                            0.0       10.0      10.4       3. J      45.0         1121121.0       0.121                                                                                    100. ~1        0.0
     ,:}!.71      1100       '::1~1" !ll                                                                                         eG      41,)000    92.0      0.0        8.0    ;c.0    3.0    40.0
                                                       Lb. ttl    ~J. b    e. -;     bllJ_0       100.121         0.0                                                                                      100.0          0.0
    "11           4 '<~)VJ   1'4,    ill     Vl. 00
                                                                                                                                 87      29000      92.0      0.0        8.0    2.0     3,0    40.0
                                                                           ,C! •. /   bOO. 0      1110.0          0. til
     4.:           /';1/)0    ~'I.1i.J       ~~. \/I   Ib.OO     :-1. "                                                          88      52000      92.0      0.0        8.0    2.0     3.0    40.0        10i1l.0        0.0
                                                                  ;:.4      1. 1     65.0         10"'.0          0.0                                                                                                     0.0
     4 J          ~10li)     ':H.0           0.0        b. V)
                                                                                                                                                    92.0      0.0        8.0    2.0     3.0    40.0        100.0
                                                                            1.1      65.121       1121121.0       0.0            e9      10400
                  ':':b01.iJ  'H.11          11.0       b.1II    2. 4                                                                                         0.0        8.0    2.0     3.0    40.0        H)V1.   (II    0.0
     ·1"
                                                                                                  100.0           0.0            '3v.1   17000      92.0
     '1",         J'~0~~     , "1. I/)      1'.0        f~.  0    2.8       1.2      50.0
                                                                                                                         A-I

                                                                                              FHWA Model RD-77-108: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
FHWA Model RD-77-108: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.                                           Calveno Emission Curves           Run Date: 05-15-1991
Calveno Emission Curves                   Run Date: 05-15-1991                                Project Number: 90-001            RUn Time: 15:14:22
Project Number: 90-001                    Run Time: 15:14,18
                                                                                              Year: 1991
Year: 1991                                                                                    Soft Site
Soft Site
                                                                                              INPUT DATA SUMMARY:
INPUT DATA SUMMARY:
                                                                                                            ADT Day%      Eve%     Nite%     %MT     %HT      Speed      Distance      Otis ..
                                               Nit .. %  %MT   %HT Speed  Distance   Offset   Segment
Segment         ADT      Day%       Eve%
                                                                                                          7410  93.0       0.0        7.0    1.0     1.0       45.0         100.0         0.
                                                10.0     2.0   2.4  60.0     100.0      0.0      136
    91     14300         90.0        0.0                                                                        92.0       0.0        8.0    2.5     2.5       45.0         100.0         0.
                                                         2.0   2.4  60.0     100.0      0.0      137      4600
    92     29000         90.0        0.0        10.0                                                                                         2.5     2.5       45.0         100.0         0.
                                                                    50.0     100.0      0.0      138     12100  92.0       0.0        8.0
    93     17000         90.0        0.0        10.0     2.5   2.5                                                                                             45.0         100.0         0.
                                                                             100.0      0.0      139      4600  92.0       0.0        8.0    2.5     2.5
    94     30000         90.0        0.0        10.0     2.5   2.5  50.0                                                                                                    100.0         0.
                                                                                        0.0      140     18180  92.0       0.0        8.0    2.5     2.5       45.0
           17000         90.0        0.0        10.0     2.5   2.5  36.0     100.0                                                                                                        0.
    95                                                                                                    4400  90.0       0.0      10.0     5.0     5.0       45.0         100.0
                                     0.0        10.0     2.5   2.5  36.0     100.0      0.0      I'll
    95     30000         90.0                                                                                   90.0       0.0      10.0     5.0     5.0       45.0         100.0         0.
                                                10.0     1.0   1.0  40.0     100.0      0.0      142     10000
    97     10100         90.0        0.0                                                                                   0.0      12.0     1.0     1.0       50.0         100.0         0.
                                                         1.0   1.0  40.0     100.0      0.0      143      5900  88.0
    98     20000         90.0        0.0        H'J.0                                                                                        1.0     1.0       50.0         100.0         0.
                                                                    40.0     100.0      0.0      144     13000  88.0       0.0      12.0
    9'3     8500         90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0                                                                                             50.0         100.0         0.
                                                                             100.0      0.0      145     11000  86.0       0.0      14.0     3.0     3. 1
   100     11000         90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  40.0
                                                                                        0.0      146     19500  86.0       0.0      14.0     3.0     3. 1      50.0         100.0         0. '
                         90.0        0.0        10.0     2.5   2.5  52.0     100.0                                                                                                        0. I
   101     13000                                                                        0.0      147      2900  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       60.0         100.0
                         90.0        0.0        10.0     2.5   2.5  52.0     100.0                                                                                                        0. ,
   102     22000                                                                                          5000  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       50.0         100.0
                                     0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  35.0     100.0      0.0      148
   103       2800        90.0                                                                                   90.0       0.0      10.O     1.0     1.0       48.0         100.0         0. I
                                                10.0     1.0   1.0  35.0     100.0      0.0      149      2300
   104       7000        90.0        0.0
                                                                                                                           0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       48.0         100.0         0. I
                                                         1.0   1.0  41. 0    100.0      0.0      150      6500  90.0
   105       3300        90.0        0.0        10.0                                                                                         8.5    10.0       50.O         100.0         0. I
                                                               1.0  41. 0    100.0      0.0      151      2500  90.0       0.0      10.0
   105       5500        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0                                                                                                   50.0         100.0         0. I
                                                                    40.0     100.0      0.0      152      4000  90.0       0.0      10.0     8.5    10.0
   107       2900        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0                                                                                                          100.0         0.1
                                                                             100.0      0.0      153      3000  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       35.0
             5000        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  40.0                                                                                                                  0.1
   108                                                                                  0.0               6000  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       35.0         100.0
                                     0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  40.0     100.0               154
   109       3000        90.0                                                                                   90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       34.0         100.0         0.1
                                                10.0     1.0   1.0  40.0     100.0      0.0      155      6500
   110       5000        90.0        0.0                                                                                            10.0     1.0     1.0       34.0         100.0         0.   C
                                                         1.0   1.0  32.0     100.0      0.0      156      7000  90.0       0.0
   111       6100        9111.0      0.0        10.0                                                                                10.0     1.0     1.0       48.0         100.0         0.   C
                                                               1.0  32.0     100.0      0.0      157      5200  90.0       0.0
   112     10500         90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0                                                                                         1.0       48.0         100.0         0.   !
                                                                             100.0      0.0      158      6000  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0
             5800        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  35.0                                                                                                                  0.   ,
   113                                                                                  0.0      159     23000  92.0       0.0        8.0    0.5     0.5       60.0         100.0
                                     0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  35.0     100.0
   114       8000        90.0                                                                            32000  92.0       0.0        8.0    0.5     0.5       60.0         100.0         0.   (
                                     0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  33.0     100.0      0.0      160                                                                                      0.   ,
   115       6300        90.0                                                                                   90.0       0.0      10.0     2.0     2.4       60.0         100.0
                                                10.0     1.0   1.0  33.0     100.0      0.0      161     14300
   115     10500         90.0        0.0                                                                                            10.0     2.0     2.4       60.0         100.0         0. (
                                                               1.5  39.0     100.0      0.0      162     29000  90.0       0.0
   117       4500        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0                                                                                         6.4       45.0         100.0         0.1
                                                                    39.0     100.0      0.0      163     11000  92.0       0.0        8.0    5.0
           17000         90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.5                                                                                             45.0         100.0         0.   ,
   118                                                                       100.0      0.0      154     18000  92.0       0.0        8.0    5.0     6.4
                         90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  35.0                                                                                                    100.0         0.   I
   119       5500                                                                       0.0      165      2000  90.0       0.0      10.0     2.5     2.5       45.0
                                     0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  35.0     100.0                                                                                                        0.   I
   120     12000         90.0                                                                            16000  90.0       0.0      10.0     2.5     2.5       45.0         100.0
                                                10.0     1.0   1.0  31. 0    100.0      0.0      166
   121       4200        90.0        0.0                                                                        90.0       0.0      10.0     2.5     2.5       50.0         100.0         0.   I
                                                         1.0   1.0  31. 0    100.0      0.0      167      5200
   122     13000         90.0        0.0        10.0                                                                       0.0      10.0     2.5     2.5       50.0         100.0         0.   I
                                                               1.0  35.0     100.0      0.0      158     24000  90.0
   123       3600        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0                                                                                 1.0     1.0       50.0         100.0'        0.   I
                                                                    35.0     100.0      0.0      159      3600  90.0       0.0      10.0
   124       7300        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0                                                                                             50.0         100.0         0.   I
                                                                             100.0      0.0      170     12000  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0
   125       2800        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  40.0
                                                                                                                                                               50.0         100.0         0.   I
                                                                             100.0      0.0      171      5700  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0
             5400        90.0        0.0        10.0     1.0   1.0  40.0                                                                                                    100.0         O.   ~
   125                                                                       100.0      0.0      172      8100  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       50.0
   127       5237        92.0        0.0         8.0     1.0   1.0  55.0                                                                                                                  0. I
                                                                             100.0      0.0               3000  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       45.0         100.0
             5110        92.0        0.0         8.0     1.0   1.0  55.0                         173
   128                                                                                  0.0                     90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0     1.0       45.0         100.0         0.11
             523'/       92.0        0.0         8.0     1.0   1.0  55.0     100.0               174     10000                                                                            0. Q
   129                                                                                  0.0                     90.0       0.0      11').0   -2.5    2.5       15.0         1 JLI'~. 0
                                     0.0         8.0     1.0   1.0  55.0     100.0               175      4300
   I.''''
   1 l
           152b0
                1 ':111)
                         ''),.'.0
                         ':1 J. III  0.           i. ILl 1. °  1.0  45.O     100. ~.    O.0      17G      6:000 "'0.0      0.0      10.1/1   Lo ;"l  L.S       'l~. l.{t    1 "-10. ~,    ~J. l(
     _~      ~J                           (',1
                                                                                                                                             1.0     1.0                    1 tL10. 0     Ill. I
                                                 'I. III 1.10  1.0  45.0     101'1.0    0.0      177      34,~0 '')0.0     tiJ.0    10.0                       '15. '"
   LJ":      bJ1:l1O     '~.J.  0    0.0                                                                                                             1.O       45.0         100.0         Ill. I
                                                         1.0   1.0  45.0     100.0      0.0      l'I8     6800  90.0       0.0      10.0     1.0
   LLJ       c:,l'~0     ·J3.1O      It). 0       /.10                                                                                                         38. it)      100.0         0. Q
                                                                             100.0      0.0      179      3200  90.0       Ill. 0   11ll. ~I 1.0     1.0
           ::7650        93.0        0.0         7.0     1.0   1.0  45.0
                                                                                                                                                                            U:r0.l;'J     l:).
   131                                                                                  0.0               7800  '.~\Il. 0  0.0      lit•• 0  1.0     I . ft.'  3B.0                            I
                                     ~1.  !t.    1.1<1   1.0   1.0  15.0     100.O               181t)
   135       3800        9.1. '"
                                                                                            A-2

CHWA Model RD-77-108: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.                                                                       FHWA Model RD-77-108: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
:alveno Emission Curves                              Run Date: 05-15-1991                                                 Calveno Emission Curves          Run Date: 05-15-1991
'roject Number: 90-001                               Run Time: 15:14:24                                                   Project Number: 90-001           Run Time: 15:15:22
                                                                                                                          Year: 1991
(ear: 1991
                                                                                                                          Soft Site
30ft SitE'
INPUT DATA SUMMARY:                                                                                                       INPUT DATA SUMMARY:
                                              EvE'?      Nite?       7.MT    %HT    Speed    Distance      Offset         Segment       ADT    Day7.  EveY.   NiteY.    %MT
3egment              ADT          Day!.                                                                                                                                          %HT  Speed  Distance     Offset
                 3500            92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     30.0        100.0        0.0             225    51000     92.0     0.0      8.0    1.5     2.0
   181                                                                                                                                                                                  45.0      100.0         0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     30.0        100.0        0.0             227    15200     92.0     0.0      8.0    1.0
   182           3600                                                                                                                                                           1.0     30.0      100.0         0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     3.0     40.0        100.0        0.0             228    23000     92.0     0.0      8.0    1.0
   183        10400                                                                                                                                                             1.0     30.0     100.0         0.0
              17000              92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     3.0     40.0        100.0        0.0             229    12900    92.0      0.0     8.0    0.5      0.5
   184                                                                                                                                                                                 35.0      100.0         0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     3.0     40.0        100.0        0.0             230    20000    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5
   185        29000                                                                                                                                                             0.5    35.0      100.0         0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     3.0     40.0        100.0        0.0             231    12700    92.0     0.0      8.0    1.5
   18b        52000                                                                                                                                                             1.5    30.0      100.0         0.0
              21900              92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     3.0     40.0        100.0        0.0             232    14000    92.0     0.0      8.0    1.5
   1 It'1                                                                                                                                                                       1.5    30.0      100.0         0.0
              40000              9.!.0         0.0        8.0        2.0     3.0     40.0        100.0        0.0             233    15100    92.0     0.0      8.0    2.0
   188                                                                                                                                                                          2.0    30.0      100.0         0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     30.0        100.0        0.0             234   23000     92.0     0.0      8.0    2.0
   189           4100                                                                                                                                                           2.0    30.0      100.0         0.0
              10000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     30.0        100.0        0.0            235    16800     89.0     0.0    11. 0    1.5      0.7
   190                                                                                                                                                                                 35.0      100.0         0.0
   1'31       16400              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     40.0        100.0        0.0            236    28000     89.0     0.0    11. 0    1.5     0.7     35.0      100.0         0.0
              24000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     40.0        100.0        0.0            237    13500     92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5
   192                                                                                                                                                                         0.5     40.0      100.0         0.0
              12300              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     35.0        100.0        0.0            238    27000     92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5
   19J                                                                                                                                                                         0.5     10.0      100.0        0.0
   194        12000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     35.0        100.0        0.0            239      9700    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5     0.5     35.0      100.0        0.0
                 2700            '32.0         0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     33.0        100.0        0.0            240    19000     92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5
   1'35                                                                                                                                                                        0.5     35.0     100.0         0.0
              15000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     33.0        100.0        0.0            241    14000     92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5
   196                                                                                                                                                                         0.5     40.0     100.0         0.0
   197        11500              CJ2.0         0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     33.0        100.0        0.0            242    23000    92.0      0.0     8.0    0.5      0.5     40.0     100.0         0.0
              15000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     33.0        100.0        0.0            243     2000    90.0     0.0     10.0    2.5
   198                                                                                                                                                                         2.5    45.0      100.0         0.0
   199           2700            92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     35.0        100.0        0.0            214    16000    90.0     0.0     10.0    2.5      2.5    45.0      100.0         0.0
   200           8000            92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     35.0        100.0       0.0             215     2900    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5      0.5    30.0      100.0         0.0
   201           8900            92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     40.0        100.0       0.0            246      5800    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5      0.5    30.0      100.0        0.0
   202        12000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     40.0        100.0        0.0           247      3600    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5      0.5    30.0      100.0        0.0
   20J        11400              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     35.0        100.0       0.0            248      4300    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5     0.5     30.0      100.0        0.0
   204        32000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0~5     0.5     35.0        100.0       0.0            249      3000    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5     0.5     30.0      100.0        0.0
   205        11400              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     35.0        100.0       0.0            250      4000    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5     0.5     30.0      100.0        0.0
              17000              92.0          0.0        8.0        0.5     0.5     35.0        100.0       0.0            251      4100    92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5     0.5
   206                                                                                                                                                                                35.0     100.0         0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        1.5     2.0     30.0        100.0       0.0            252    32000     92.0     0.0      8.0    0.5     0.5
   207        12800                                                                                                                                                                   35.0     100.0         0.0
              18000              92.0          0.0        8.0        1.5     2.0     30.0        100.0       0.0            253      5900    93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0
   208                                                                                                                                                                        1.0     40.0     100.0         0.0
              15000              92.0          0.0        8.0        1.5     2.0     30.0        100.0       0.0            254    17200     93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0     1.0
   209                                                                                                                                                                                40.0     100.0        0.0
              40000              92.0          0.0        8.0        1.5     2.0     30.0        100.0       0.0            255    11100    93.0      0.0     7.0    2.0      2.0
   210                                                                                                                                                                                35.0     100.0        0.0
              15000              92.0          0.0        8.0        1.5     2.0     40.0        100.0       0.0            256   32400     93.0     0.0      7.0    2.0      2.0
   211                                                                                                                                                                               35.0      100.0        0.0
              31000              92.0          0.0        8.0        1.5     2.0     40.0        100.0       0.0            257     9200    93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0      1.0
   212                                                                                                                                                                               35.0      100.0        0.0
              12500              92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     2.0     45.0        100.0       0.0            258   25700     93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0      1.0
   213                                                                                                                                                                               35.0      100.0        0.0
              19000              92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     2.0     45.0        100.0       0.0           259      6500    93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0      1.0
   214                                                                                                                                                                               35.0      100.0        0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     2.0     45.0        100.0       0.0           260    19100     93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0
   215        18000                                                                                                                                                           1.0    35.0      100.0        0.0
                                 92.0          0.0        8.0        2.0     2.0     45.0        100.0        0.0          261      7900    93.0     0.0      7.0
   215        20000                                                                                                                                                  1.0      1.0    25.0      100.0        0.0
                                               0.0        8.0        1.5     1.5     40.0        100.0        0.0          262    22900     93.0     0.0      7.0
   217        21000              92.0                                                                                                                                1.0      1.0    25.0      100.0       0.0
              34000              92.0          0.0        8.0        1.5     1.5     40.0        100.0        0.0          263      5900    93.0     0.0      7.0
   218                                                                                                                                                               1.0     1.0     25.0     100.0        0.0
                 4800            92.0          0.0        8.0        1.0     1.0     40.0        100.0        0.0          264    17200     93.0     0.0      7.0
   219                                                                                                                                                               1.0     1.0     25.0     100.0        0.0
   ;~ ~I...?t 1 ,,"l)tM)         '.!~:  _ !lJ  0.0        .",.0      1.0     1.0     40.0        100.0        0.0          265    15100     93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0     1.0     25.0     100.0        <11.0
                                 "J ..... VJ   Ii'. t,)    i.',. It) 1. ',.  I . "   35. ,.1     100. Q,      Q:. \(}      266    43800     93.0     0.0      7.0
      .: I.   11.:Hlll.('\,'1                                                                                                                                        1.0     1.0     25.0     11<)1<).1<)  ILl. til
                                   J £_. !U                ::.. 0    1 . :.) 1. .:-  35.1/}      101/}. VI    1lJ. ID      267    10;>00    93.0     0.0
              .~ ' j t!) V) L~'!               to. It)                                                                                                        7.0    1.0     1.0     25.0     100.0        0.0
              2J000              'J..:. ")     tJ.0       8.0        0.5     to.:.J  4~,. 10     100.0        10.0         258    30500     93.0     0.0      7.0    1.0
      ..:J                                                                                                                                                                   1.0     25.0     100.0        iii. 0
              J200,)             ·J:C:.0       0.0        8. (I      0.5     0.S     45.0        112HZ>. 0    0.0          269     5200     93.0     0.0      7.0
      2')                                                                                                                                                            1.0     1.0     25.0     100.0        0.111
                                                                             ~. L)   4~L  0      100.0        1/1.0        270    15200     93.0
               JJ(,.H':)t·'      'J.:.    V'I  ".,. I..~   ~.I.  L;  1. "                                                                            0.0      7.0    1.0     1.0     25.0     lIiJ0. tlI   0. \~
                                                                                                                      A-3
                                                                                             , ,
         c

                                                                                                                  FHWA Model RD-77-11il8: Brown-Buntin Associates, Inc.
'HWA Model RD-77-HJ8:                Brown-Buntin Associates,          Inc.                                       Calveno Emission CUrves              Run Date: 1il5-15-1991
:alveno Emission Curves                         Run Dale: 05-15-1991                                              Project Number: 90-001               Run Time: 15:17:32
'roject Numb!?r:      9121-1211211              Run Time:     15:15:27                                            Year: 1991
'eer: 1991                                                                                                        Soft Site
jaft Site
                                                                                                                  INPUT DATA SUMMARY:
 NPUT UATA SUMMARY:
                                                                                                                                 ADT    DayY.    EveY.    Nit.eX    XMT       Y.HT  Speed    DistancE'       Offset.
                                                                                       Distance       Offset      Segment
;egmen t       ADT         O"yX         Eve%.      Nite/.       /'MT    /'HT  Speed
                                                                                                                                        93.0      1il.1il    7.0    1.0       1.0    33.0        llillil.1il    1il.0
                                                                                                         0.0         316      8000
    271    15400           93.0          0.0          7.0       2.0     2.0    40.0       l1il0.0                                                          10.1il   1.0       I.Iil  42.0        100.0          0.1il
                                                                                                                     317       3541     91il.0    0.0
    272    47700           93.0          0.0          7.0       2.0     2.1il  40.0       100.0          1il.0                                             10.0     1.0       1.0    42.1il      l1il0.0        0.0
                                                                                                                     318      5201il    91il.0    0.0
    273      5300         93.1il         0.0          7.0       1.0     I.Iil  30.0       l1il0.0        1il.0                                               6.0    1.1il     1.0    31. 0       100.1il        1il.1il
                                                                                                                     319     31971      94.0      0.0
    274    1831il0        93.0           0.0          7.0       1.0     1.1il  30.0       100.0          0.0                                                 5.0    1.0       1.0    31. Iil     l1il0.0        0.1il
                                                                                                                     321il   45400      94.0      0.1il
   275      3000          93.0           0.0          7.0       1.0     I.Iil  45.121     100.0          0.1il                                             10.0     1.0       1.0    34.1il      llillil.1il    0.0
                                                                                                                     321     11510      91il.1il  1il.0
   275      8800          93.1il         0.0          7.0       1.0     I.Iil  45.0       100.121        0.1il                                             10.0     1.0       1.0    34.1il      100.1il        0.1il
                                                                                                                     322     1551il0    90.0      0.0
   2'17    12585          ')0.0          121.121    10.0        1.0     I.Iil  35.121     1121121.121    1il.0                                                      1.0       1.0    31il.0      101il.0        0.0
                                                                                                                     323     10899      91il.0    1il.0    11il.1il
   278     1801il0        90.0           111.0      10.0        I.Iil   1.1il  35.0       1121121.121    1il.1il                                           10.0     1.0       1.1il  30.0        l1il0.1il      0.0
                                                                                                                     324     15500      91il.0    0.1il
   -;:"19  12980          9"'.0          0.111      10.0        1.0     I.Iil  30.1il     100.0          1il.1il                                                    1.0       1.0    34.0        100.0          0.0
                                                                                                                     325     l1il855    90.1il    0.0      10.1il
   280     19500          90.0           111.0      10.0        1.0     1.111  31il.0     10121.1il      1il.1il                                           10.1il   1.0       1.1il  34.1il      100.1il        1il.0
                                                                                                                     325     1551il0    90.0      0.0
           28157          90.0           0.0        10.0        I.Iil   1.0    30.121     1121121.121    0.1il                                                      1.0       1.1il  33.1il      101il.0        0.0
   281                                                                                                               327      7833      91il.1il  1il.1il  10.1il
   282     42250          90.0           0.111      1111.0      1.0     1.0    30.0       100.121        0.0                                                        1.0       I.Iil  33.0        100.0          0.0
                                                                                                                     328     1121il1il  90.1il    0.0      10.0
            7000          90.0           0.0        10.0        5.0     1.5    35.121     100.121        0.1il                                                                1.0    32.0        11il1il.0      0.0
   21:33                                                                                                             329     12518      95.1il    0.0        5.0    1.0
            8200          90.0           0.111      10.0        S.1il   1.5    35.0       1121121.0      0.0                                                                  1.1il  32.0        11110.0        1il.0
   21:34                                                                                                             330     18001il    95.0      1II.1il    5.1il  I.Iil
            3701il        90.0           0.0        10.0        1.9     0. 1   35.121     11210.121      0.0                                                                  1.1il  34.0        100.0          0.0
   285                                                                                                               331      7747      91il.1il  0.1il    10.0     1.0
   285      5200          90.0           0.111      1111.0      1.9     0.1    35.0       100.0          0.0                                                        1.1il     I.Iil  34.1il      l1il0.1il      0.1il
                                                                                                                     332     1101il0    90.0      0.0      10.0
   287      5100          90.0           0.0        10.0        1.9     0.1    35.0       1121121.121    0.0                                                                  I.Iil  35.1il      100.0          0.0
                                                                                                                     333       6314     90.1il    0.0      llil.0   1.1il
            7100          90.0           0.0        10.0        1.9     0.1    35.0       100.0          0.0                                                        I.Iil     1.0    35.1il      100.0          0.0
   288                                                                                                               334       9001il   90.0      0.1il    10.1il
           17000          90.0           0.0        10.0        1.3     2.5    45.0       100.0          0.0                                                                  2.5    45.0        l1il0.0        0.0
   289                                                                                                               335       9301il   90.1il    1il.1il  10.1il   2.5
           2201il0        90.0           0.111      1111.0      1.3     2.5    45.0       100.0          0.0                                                                  2.5    45.0        100.0          1il.0
   290                                                                                                               335     18000      90.0      0.0      11il.0   2.5
            2320          90.0           0.0        10.0        0. 1    0. 1   35.0       100.121        0.0                                                                  2.5    45.0        llillil.0      0.1il
   291                                                                                                               337       931il1il 90.1il    1il.0    10.0     2.5
            5000          90.0           0.0        10.111     0.1      0.1    35.0       100.121        0.0                                                                  2.5    45.1il      100.0          0.0
   292                                                                                                               338     18000      91il.1il  0.0      10.0     2.5
   293      5400          90.0           0.0        10.0        1.3     2.5    45.0       11210.121     0.0                                                                   1.0    45.0        101il.1il      0.0
                                                                                                                     339       9250     90.1il    1il.0    10.1il   1.0
   294      7400          90.0           0.0        1(/1.0      1.3     2.5    45.0       100.1il       0.0                                                                   1.1il  45.1il      llillil.1II    0.0
                                                                                                                     341il   12901il    90.0      0.0      11il.1il I.Iil
   295     13400          90.0           0.0        10.0        2.0     2.0    35.0       llillil.0     0.0                                                                   1.0    45.1il      100.0          0.1il
                                                                                                                     341       351il1il 90.1il    0.0      10.1il   1.0
   295     7371il0        90.0           0.0        10.0        2.1il   2.0    35.121     100.0         0.0                                                         1.1il     I.Iil  45.1il      llillil.0      1il.0
                                                                                                                     342       5001il   91il.0    1il.1il  11il.1il
            9500          90.0           0.0        1111.0      2.0     2.0    35.0       100.0         0.0                                                                   1.1il  45.'0       11il0.0        0.1il
   297                                                                                                               343       6381il   90.1il    0.0      10.0     1.1il
                          90.0           0.0        10.0        2.0     2.0    35.0       101il.0       0.0                                                                   1.0    45.0        100.0          1il.0
   298     41900                                                                                                     344       9800     91il.0    0.1il    llil.1il 1.1il
                          90.0           0.0        10.0        1.0     1.0    45.0       100.1il       0.0                                                                   5. 4   35.1il      100.1il        0.0
   299         900                                                                                                   345       4440     90.0      1il.0    llil.1il 1.8
                          90.0           0.0        10.0        I.Iil   1.0    45.0       100.0         0.0                                                                   5.4    35.1il      101il.0        0.0
   300     33800                                                                                                     345      5560      91il.0    0.0      llil.0   1.8
                          90.0           0.0        10.0        1.0     1.0    30.0       l1il0.0       0.0
   301     15700
                          90.0           0.111      1111.0      1.0     1.1il  31il.0     100.0         0.0
   302     25500
                          90.0           111.0      10.0       2.0      2.1il  45.0       100.0         0.0
   303      5000
           54700          90.0           0.0        10.0        2.0     2.0    45.0       100.0         0.0
   304
            2000          90.0           0.0        10.0        2.0     2.1il  35.0       100.0         0.0
   305
                          90.0           0.0        1111.0      2.0     2.0    35.0       100.0         0.0
   31il5   11000
            3400          90.0           0.0        10.0        2.0     2.0    35.0       100.0         0.0
   :31il7
                                         0.0        10.0        2.0     2.0    35.0       100.0          0.0
   308     15700          90.0
                          90.0           0.0        10.0        2.0     2.0    35.0       101il.1il      0.0
    )1.119  6800
                          90.0           0.0        10.0        2.0     2.0    35.0       100.0          0.0
    -,1(:' 16'300
                                         U.U        10.0        1.0     1.0    35.10      100.111        0.0
    -'1 J   <:,llt10      '90.0
               400                       0.0        10.0        1.'"    1.0    .J5.\O     J00.1O         0.0
    31":    'J            '9".0
                          '3(1.0         0.0        10.0        2.'"    L0     40.0       100.10         0.0
    JIJ     .J'10'"
     11·1   b::;"'ltl     ':ll). Q)      ".0        1 ~1. (1    2.0     2.1'1  41O.VJ     Jil10.0        0.0
     'I',   ',r,]   !       ) ; . (I     ~, _ (,-1    .,.. f)   I. ('1  1.1.1   JJ.1/1    1 ,1\,). l1    0.0
                                                                                                                 A-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  "'.

                                                                                  Figure 3-1
                                                                              Major Noise Sources
 (
                                                  -l
                                                     '~. /::\;
                                                          .
                                                        "Ai
                                                        /'
(
                                                               . -- -_._- '-~
(
     •II
          Stationary Noise Sources
          Airports
                                   i
                                    }
                                   '''''-''''~"
                                                J
      A   Camp Roberts
                                                                                 8
    -t+t+ Railroad
          Highways
   -0-

                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 4-1
                                        .. ~\   ~'
  (                                          ""'''<~~-,B                                                                                                      Community Noise Monitoring Locations
                                                    11°,,,,,
 (
                                                                                                     >f/.Y~~-::'~~:;>.
                                                                                                    _/               -"A".
                                                                                                  f"                     \.::::-_~.::~::~_
                                                                                               d                                           ':~ ,_
                                                               -:,i_L.."..---···"--.. . /,;.::,· ~                                                '.-:,
                                                             .-'                                                                                     -' ..::;~--
                                                                                                                                                                 c:::...~,'-,;,
                                                                                                                                                                                -',--.
                                                                                                                                                                                  -',-.
(   II1II Short-Term Monitoring Sites
    ~     24-hour Monitoring Sites
     ,. Short-Term and 24-hour Monitoring Sites                                                                                                                                           26


TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION ...................................... 1
                1.1 Purpose and Limitations of this Manual ............................... 1
                1.2 Terminology ................................................... 1
CHAPTER 2 DETERMINING NOISE EXPOSURE ........................... 3
                2.1 Noise Element Documentation ...................................... 3
                2.2 Noise Source Characteristics ....................................... 3
CHAPTER 3 NOISE MITIGATION .................................... 5
                3.1 Site Design ....................................................                                    5
                3.2 Standard Noise Mitigation Packages ...................... .' ..........                              5
                        3.2.1 Exterior Noise ..........................................                                  5
                        3.2.2 Barrier Design ..........................................                                  6
                        3.2.3 Interior Noise ...........................................                                 9
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1        Design Manual Flow Chart ........................................... 2
Figure 2        Chart for Locating Noise Exposure Information ............................ 4
Figure 3        Examples of Barrier Situations ......................................... 8
LIST OF TABLES
Tahle I         Determination of Noise Barrier Effectiveness .............................. 7
APPENDICES
Appendix A      Techniques for Noise Control ........................................ A-I
Appendix B      Example of Attic Vent Baffle Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B-I
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                                                           ADOPTED JUNE 21. 1993
  CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
  1.1     Purpose and Limitations of This Manual
  This Manual is a guide to reducing outdoor and indoor noises from rail, road and air traffic. This Manual
  does not address noise from stationary sources. This Manual is not intended to be used to address
  complex acoustical situations where the elevation of the noise sender and noise receiver differ significantly
  or where the noise source is shielded by buildings or topography. An acoustical expert must study these
  situations.
  Figure 1 is a flow chart illustrating the process to follow when applying this Manual's recommendations.
  This Manual contains standard noise mitigation packages which can reduce exterior noise up to 5 dB and
  interior noise up to 30 dB. These standard noise mitigation packages can be prescribed by the City to
  achieve compliance with this Element in relatively simple situations. When anthorized by the City, these
  standard mitigation packages may be used in lieu of detailed acoustical analysis.
  1.2 Terminology
  Chapter 2 of the Noise Element Policy Document (Volume 1) contains definitions of acoustical terminology
  used throughout the Element. Unless otherwise stated, all sound levels referred to in this manual are A-
  weighted decibels (dB).
)
  GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
  VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                       1                            ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                                   FIGURE 1
                                                          Design Manual Flow Chart
START HERE
                                                               Does noIse exposure exceed
 Determine future noise exposure from
                                                                maximum allowable standards                No
 Technical Reference and Policy                                                                                         No mitigation
                                                               In Chapter 4 of Polley
 Documents of Noise Element                                                                                             required
                                                               Document?
                                                                             Yes
                                                                      Mitigation required
             Noise mitigation In
                                                                                                              Interior noise mitigation
            outdoor activity areas
                                                                             Have all of the following conditions been complied with?
 Have all of the following conditions been complied
 with?                                                                       • Required NLR • 30 dB
                                                                             • <5 single-family dwellings or offices. churches.
 • <5 single-family dwellings or offices. churches.                            meeting halls with < 10.000 sq, ft, floor area
   meeting halls with < 10.000 sq, ft, floor area                            • Noise source Is a single, street. highway. railroad or
 • Noise source Is a single street. highway or                                airport (no combinations of noise sources)
   railroad (no combinations of noise sources)
 • Existing or future noise exposure does not exceed
                                                                                               Yes                                    I No
                                                                                                                                              !
   65 dB LdnfCNEL                                                            May use standard mltlgallon
 • ProJect site Is flat and site & noise source are at                                                                  Cannot use Design
                                                                             packages In Design Manual
   about the same elevation                                                                                             Manual. Expert should
                                                                                               or                       be consulted,
                                                                                       Expert may be
                                                                                       consulted
 Cannot use Design
                                No       Yes       May use                     or
 Manual. Expert
                                                   Design Manual
 should be consulted,
                                                                                                                  Alternative site design or
                                                                                                                  building orientation may
                                                        I                                                         reduce need for acoustical
                                                                                                                  trealment of building
                             Mitigation through site design
                                                                      Expert may be
                             Is preferred alternative
                                                                      consulled
                              (see Appendix A)                  or
                                                       T
                             Standard mitigation package
                             may be used If mitigation thru
                              site design Is nof possible       or
          GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
          VOL 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                              2                                    ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

CHAPTER 2 DETERMINING NOISE EXPOSURE
2.1 Noise Element Documentation
The noise exposure information contained within the Policy Document and Technical Reference Document
should be used to determine if a particular project site requires expert analysis or mitigation measures.
Remember, stationary noise sources should be evaluated by an acoustical expert.
The flow chart in Figure 2 shows where noise exposure information for a particular project may be found.
Once the noise exposure information is located, it may be used to determine if the proposed project is
consistent with the policies and goals of this Noise Element.
2.2 NOise Source Characteristics
In determining the magnitude of noise impact and strategies for reducing noise impact, it is important to
be aware of the characteristics of noise produced by different sourceS. The most important characteristics
of the three transportation noise sources this manual has been designed to address are described below:
•        Tmffic: For purposes of noise assessment, traffic is divided into three categories with differing
         heights of noise propagation:
                 Automobiles:                             o feet above the crown' of the road.
                  Medium trucks (only two axles):         2 feet above the crown of the road.
                  Heavy trucks (three or more axles):     S feet above the crown of the road.
•        Railroads: The effective source height of railroad noise is mostly determined by noise emitted by
         the locomotive, which is generally assumed to be 10 feet above the rails. However, the effective
         height of noise for a locomotive blowing its horn is increased to 15 feet above the rails since the
         horn is situated on top of the locomotive. In many situations the effective source height of trains
         is even greater than the heights noted above since the rails rest on a gravel bed that is often three
         or more feet higher than surrounding terrain.
•        Aircraft: Aircraft in flight near an airport are usually a few hundred to several thousand feet
         above the ground. When aircraft noise exposure is an issue, generally the aircraft are overhead
         or are at least 30 degrees above the horizon. In such situations, the Use of barriers to reduce
         exterior noise levels is not feasible.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                       3                               ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

                                                          FIGURE 2
                                      Chart For Locating Noise Exposure Information
                                                                                                                (
                               1. Reduced noise contour maps                  1. Reduced noise contour maps
                                  in Appendix of Policy                          in Appendix of Policy
Topographic adjustments           Document, or                                   Document, or
may be made from Table
2-1 of Policy Document
or Table 3-2 of                2. Rolled full-scale noise                     2. Rolled full.-scale noise
Technical Reference               contour maps, or                               contour maps, or
Document
                               3. Table 3-4 in Technical                      3. Table 3-6 in Technical
                                  Reference Document                             Reference Document
                                                                                                                (
                         1. Reduced noise contour maps in
                            Appendix of Policy Document, or
                                                                              1. Noise contour maps in Appendix
                                                                                 of Policy Document, or
                         2. Rolled full-scale noise contour
                            maps, or
                                                                              2. Chapters 3-6 & 3-7 of
                                                                                 Technical Reference Document
                         3. Figures 3-3, 3-4 & 3-5 in
                            Technical Reference Document
         GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
         VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                     4                           ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
CHAPTER 3 NOISE MITIGATION
3.1 Site Design
The most effective design does not place noise-sensitive land users in excessive noise areas. Using building
setbacks, natural topography, building orientation, and interveniug buildings that do not contain. noise-
sensitive uses effectively reduces noise at a receiving location. Such measures may minimize or eliminate
the need to construct noise barriers.
Appendix A to this Manual provides an overview of various techniques available to mitigate noise. This
information should be used to evaluate, in a geueral way, the acoustical effectiveness of project site designs
aud proposed noise mitigation measures. There is no simple way to assure an effective plan without an
acoustical analysis, therefore, an acoustical analysis is required for all proposed projects, unless the City
waives this requirement.
3.2 Standard Noise Mitigation Packages
Exterior and interior noise mitigation measures will be required as pmt of project approval or the building
permit process for all projects when noise levels exceed the standards of this Noise Element. An acoustical
analysis prepared by an expert will be required to quantify noise exposures and to propose effective noise
mitigation measures. The requirement for an acoustical analysis may be waived, under certain conditions,
by the City. A standard noise mitigation package may then be used to complY'with the Noise Element.
Standard noise mitigation packages are sets of mitigation measures which may be used to reduce interior
and exterior noise by prescribed amounts. These packages may lie used to reduce outside noise levels up
to 5 dB and inside noise levels up to 30 dB. Reductions greater than these amounts will require the
recommendations of an expert after an acoustical analysis has been completed.
3.2.1 Exterior Noise Mitigation
The City may waive the requirements for an acoustical analysis if all of the following conditions are met:
1.       The proposed development is less than five single-family dwellings or is an office building, church
         or meeting hall development with a total project gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet.
         No waiver is permitted for apartments, condos or similar residential developments where multiple
         dwelling units are contained in a single structure or mobile homes when contained in a park or
         setting containing more than one unit.
2.       The noise consists of a single source from rail or road for which current noise exposure
         information is available. Complex noise sources coming from multiple sources such as rail and
         road or more than one road must be addressed through an acoustical analysis by an expert.
3.       The existing or future noise level within outdoor activity areas or at the building facade does not
         exceed 65 dB Ldn prior to mitigation. The existing or project noise exposure for playgrounds and
         parks may not exceed 75 dB Ldn (or CNEL) prior to mitigation.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                       5                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
4.       The topography in the project area is flat and both the noise source and proposed project are at
         the same grade.                                                                                       (
An aconstical analysis by an expert is required if all of these conditions are not met.
The following exterior standard noise mitigation packages may be implemented to reduce noise levels by
approximately 5 dB.
Exterior Package 1 - Traffic Noise Sources:
(Maximum 5 dB Reduction)
Construct a barrier of sufficient height to interrupt line-of-sight between the noise source and receiver.
A noise source height of two feet above the roadway crown shall be used when trucks are less than 5%
of the roads average daily traffic (ADT). When truck traffic is greater than 5% of the AD'!', the source
height shall be eight feet above crown. In both cases, a receiver height of five feet above grade of the
outdoor activity location shall be used.
Exterior Package 2 - Railroad Noise Sources:
(Maximum 5 dB Reduction)
Construct a barrier of sufficient height to interrupt the line-of-sight between the noise source and receiver.
A noise source fifteen feet above rails shall be assumed when the noise source is a railroa!! grade crossing.
At other rail locations, a noise source height of ten feet above rails shall be assumed. When determining
the total height of a railroad noise source, the height of tbe rail bed must be added to the source heights
described above. Use a receiver height of five feet above grade of the outdoor activity area of concern.
Aircraft Noise: Mitigating exterior noise from aircraft overflights is not possible in most cases. No package
is offered or provided.                                                                                         (
Industrial/Commercial Noise: The unpredictability of source heights, noise spectra and noise levels
associated with commerce and industry prevents the offer of a package. An acoustical analysis will be
necessary.
3.2.2 Barrier Design
Use 'rable 1 for barrier design assistance: A scaled cross-section of the proposed barrier showing relative
source, barrier, and receiver heights and distances between source, barrier, and receiver will be required.
Figure 3 provides examples of noise barrier cross-sections for simple and more complex site conditions.
The closer the barrier is placed to the source or to the receiver, the greater the lIoise reduction.
Effective barriers must consist of massive, tight-fitting materials, such as grouted concrete block or stucco
wall. No openings are permitted in the wall or at the ground/wall interface. Other noise barrier materials
may be acceptable if recommended by an acoustical expClt. The use of wood is not recommended due to
warpage, shrinkage and deterioration problems.
A line-of-sight barrier will reduce sound by about 5 dB. Reductions from 5 to 15 dB are difficult to achieve
and must depend upon design by an expert. Noise reductions exceeding 15 dB from barriers are generally
not feasible.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL.  3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                      6                                ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                 'l'ABLE 1
                               Determination of Noise Barrier Effectiveness
 Step 1:        Select an appropriate scale on graph paper to accommodate the distance from the
                noise source to receiver and the heights of the noise source and receiver (e.g. 1"=20',
                1"=50', etc.).
 Step 2:        Mark a point representing the effective height of the noise source above the crown of
                the road or top of the railroad track.
 Step 3:        Scale off the distance from the noise source to the receiver and mark a point that is 5
                feet above the building pad or outdoor activity area of concern.
 Step 4:        Using a ruler, draw a straight line between the noise source and receiver. This line
                represents line· of-sight between the noise source and receiver (See Figure 4-1).
 Step 5:        Determine the location of the proposed noise barrier between the noise source and
                receiver, and draw a vertical line that extends from the ground to a height that
                intercepts line-of-sight. The height of this line represents the minimum height of a
                noise barrier necessary to reduce exterior noise by approximately 5 decibels. Higher
                barriers will further reduce noise levels.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                      7                            ADOPTED JUNE 21. 1993

                                                        FIGURE 3
                                        Examples of Noise Barriers
                              12
                       )
                           'P             St,p #4
                                     (I ine-of-sight)                 J 15
                                                                     Step
                                                                                        \
                                                                                      Step #3
                     ~--···---~----------1
              Source
                                                                        -----··-·1 Receiver
                                                                  6'    Borrier             5'         Building Pod
                                                                        (min. height)
                                                                                                     I
                      <                        19 '                  )(         8'        )
Note: Truck traffic > 5% ADT
                                  Example of Simple Barrier Situation
                              (may use standard noise mitigation packages)
                                                                                                                    (
   t 1)'
    '5'
              r.d
     o          \
                                    5
                                         IblTler (",tn. h6lqht)
    -5'
                                                                                              "
   -tJ'
                                                                                            Hlghll7f
Note: Truck traffic > 5% ADT
                                 Example of Complex Barrier Situation
                                       (consult an acoustical expert)
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL. 3,  ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                               8                           ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

3.2.3 Interior Noise
It is not possible to measure interior noise levels in buildings not yet constructed. It is equally difficult
to measure interior noise once the building is occupied due to interference caused by activities and the
length of time required to obtain representative results.
Interior noise levels can be estimated if the exterior noise level is known and the outdoor to indoor NLR
for the building is known. The NLR provided by a building should equal or exceed the arithmetic
difference between the exterior noise level and the required interior noise level prescribed in Table 2 of
the Policy Document. As an example, if the exterior noise level is 70 dB Ldn and the required interior
noise level is 45 dB Ldn> the minimum building NLR must be 25 dB Ldn- (70 - 45 = 25)
The following interior standard noise mitigation packages can achieve NLR reductions of 15, 20, 25 and
30 dB. If more than 30 dB is required or the City questions the effectiveness of standard noise mitigation
packages in a given situation, the recommendations of an acoustical expert will be required.
All of the followiug conditions must be met in order for the following standard noise mitigation packages
to be used:
1.       Required Noise Level Reduction (NLR) is equal to or less than 30 dB.
2.       Less than 5 single·family dwellings or offices, churches, meeting halls with less than 10,000 sq.
         ft. floor area.
3.        Noise source in question consists of a single transportation noise source (roadway, railway or
         airport) for which np.to-date noise exposure is available. An acoustical analysis will be required
         when the noise source is a stationary noise source or consists of multiple transportation noise
          sources.
For all of the following noise mitigation packages, careful workmanship, including caulking of joints and
base plates and installation of weather stripping, is essential to ensure the proper performance of building
assemblies. Acoustical "leaks" in walls and roof/ceilings shonld be avoided by properly sealing penetrations
and by eliminating flanking paths.
Interior Package 1 - 15 dB NLR:
Construct to latest edition of the Uniform Building Code. A 15 dB NLR is achieved even if windows aud
doors are partially open for ventilation.
Interior Package 2 - 20 dB NLR:
Construct to latest edition of the Uniform Building Code and:
1.        Install air conditioning or mechanical ventilation system so that doors and windows may remain
          closed.
2.        Mount windows and doors in low air filtration rate frames (0.5 cfm or less, per ANSI
          specifications).
3.        Install solid-core exterior doors with perimeter weatherstripping and threshold seals.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl.  3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                      9                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

Interior Package 3 - 25 dB NLR:
                                                                                                               (
Implement Interior Package 2 and:
1.       Build stucco or brick veneer exterior walls. Wood siding with a one-half inch minimum thick
        fiberboard (soundboard) underlayer may also be used.
2.       Install window and door glass in each room that does not exceed 20% of the floor area of the same
         room.
3.       Box roof and attic fans which face the noise source. (See Appendix C for example of a suitable
        vent treatment.)
To reduce aircraft noise exposure, complete all the steps in Interior Paclmge 3 outlined above and:
1.      Fit fireplaces wit.h tight-fitting dampers and glass doors.
2.       Underlay roofing materials with one-half inch minimum solid sheeting.
3.       Do not install slty lights in rooms which will be occupied (as opposed to storage).
Interior Package 4 - 30 dB NLR:
Complete mitigation measures in Interior Package 3 and the following measures:
1.       Attach interior sheetrock of exterior wall assemblies to studs by resilient channels. Staggered studs
         or double walls are acceptable alternatives. '                             ,
                                                                                                                (
2.       Install laboratory-tested window assemblies with a STC rating of 30 or more. (Windows that
         provide superior noise reduction capability and that are laboratory-tested are sometimes called
         "sound-rated" windows. In general, these widows have thiclter glass and/or increased air space
         between panes. However, standard energy-conservation double-pane glazing with an 1/8" or 1/4"
         air space may be less effective in reducing noise from some noise sources than single-pane glazing.
To reduce aircraft noise exposure, complete all Interior Package 4 measures, those listed for aircraft noise
under Package 3, and eliminate all fireplaces.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                       10                               ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
APPENDIX A TECHNIQUES FOR NOISE CONTROL
Any noise problem may be considered as being composed of the following three basic elements: the noise
source, a transmission path and a receiver. The emphasis of noise control in land use planuing is usually
placed upon acoustical treatment of the transmission path and the receiving structures.
The appropriate acoustical design for a given project should consider the nature of the noise source and
the sensitivity of the receiver. The problem should be defined in terms of tho noise level criteria (Ldn> L eq ,
etc.) contained within the adopted policies of the Noise Element, the location of the sensitive receiver
(inside or outside), and when the problem occurs (daytime or nighttime). Noise control techuiques should
then be selected to provide an acceptable noise environment for the receiving property while remaining
consistent with local aesthetic standards and practical structural and economic limits. Basic noise control
techniques include the following:
Use of Setbacks:
Noise exposure may be reduced by increasing the distance between the noise source and receiving use.
Setback areas can take the form of open space, frontage roads, recreational areas, storage yards, and other
non-noise sensitive uses. The amount of noise attenuation provided by this technique is limited by the
characteristics of the site and the noise source. Each douhling of distance from the noise source will
reduce noise exposure by about 4 to 6 dB.
Use of Barriers:
Shielding by barriers can be obtained by placing walls, earthen berms or other structures between the
noise source and the receiver. The use of earthen berms may he acceptable but an acoustical expert
should he consulted. 'I'he effectiveness of a barrier depends upon blocking line-of-sight between the source
and receiver, and is improved with increases in the distance the sound must travel to pass over the barrier
as compared to a straight line from source to receiver. The use of barriers to reduce noise is discussed
in Chapter 3.2.1 where standard noise mitigation packages designed to reduce noise by 5 decibels are
recommended for certain prescribed situations. For situations other than those described in this Design
Manual, the recommendations of an acoustical expert should be obtained.
Building Localion and Orientation:
Buildings containing noise-sensitive uses may be located on a site so that they are outside the area
 requiring noise mitigation. Buildings can be placed on a site to shield other structures or areas and to
prevent an increase in noise level caused by reflections. The use of one building to shield another can
significantly reduce overall project noise control costs, particularly if the shielding structure is insensitive
to noise. As an example, carports or garages can be used to form or complement a harrier shielding
adjacent dwellings or an outdoor activity area. Similarly, one residential unit can be placed to shield
another so that noise reduction measures are needed for only the huilding closest to the noise source.
 Placement of outdoor activity areas within the shielded portion of a building complex, such as a central
 GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
 VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                      A·1                              ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

courtyard, can be an effective method of providing a quiet retreat in an otherwise noisy environment.
Patios or balconies should be placed on the side of a building opposite the noise source, and "wing walls"
can be added to buildings or patios to help shield sensitive uses. Shielding by buildings can reduce noise
impacts by up to 15 decibels. The exact amount of reduction depends on the efficiency of the design.
Where project design does not allow using buildings or other land uses to shield sensitive uses, noise
control costs can be reduced by orienting buildings with the narrow end facing the noise source, thereby
reducing total area of the building requiring acoustical treatment. Some examples of building orientation
to reduce noise impacts are shown iu Figure A-I.
                                                         FIGURE A-I
                                CD                                                      CD
      CD>          em              em            ern                CD>            em      =               em
             en      ......Q!              en            =--               =                  =          =
                              13                           13
                                       Cl
    1     b    Poor        0
                              \]
                                  I    G
                                             IllI!er
                                                           \]
                                                                              Poor
          em          em              cern           CD>               CO>                   ern        em
                 en
                              =               t:=»         co                 en      co           c::n      co
                                   (J;                   IO(';J
                                                                                                         ~
                               'V
                               f;J Q                      z;;,
               P{JOf                        B,tter                           Poor
                                CD                                                      CD
Another option in site design is the placement of relatively insensitive land uses, such as commercial,
storage or parking areas, between the noise source and a more sensitive portion of the project. Examples
include development of a commercial strip along a busy arterial to block noise affecting a residential area,
or providing recreational vehicle storage along the noise-impacted edge of a mobile home park. If existing
topography or development adjacent to the project site provides some shielding, as in the case of an
existing berm, knoll or building, sensitive structures or activit\)' areas may be placed behind those features
to reduce noise control costs (Figure A-2).
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                                A-2                           ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993

                                                 }o'IGIDm A-2
Site design should also guard against the creatiou of reflecting surfaces which may increase on-site noise
levels. For example, two buildings placed at an angle facing a noise source may cause noise levels within
that angle to increase by up to 3 dB (see example No.3, Figure A-I). The open end of a "U"-shaped
building shonld point away from noise sources for the same reason (see example No.4, Figure A-I).
Landscaping walls or noise barriers located within a development may inadvertently reflect noise back to
a noise-sensitive area unless carefully located.
In some cases, external building facades can influence reflected noise levels affecting adjacent buildings.
This is primarily a problem where high-rise buildings are proposed, and the effect is most evident in urban
areas, where an "urban canyon" may be created. Bell-shaped or irregular building facades, setbacks and
attention to building orientation can reduce this effect. Avoidance of these problems, as well as attaining
an effective, aesthetic site design reqnires close coordination between local agencies, the project engineer
and architect, and the acoustical consnltant.
Acoustical Design of Buildings:
When structnres have been located to provide maximum noise reduction by barriers or site design, noise
reduction measures may still be required to achieve an acceptable interior noise environment. The cost
of such measures may be reduced by tbe thoughtful placement of rooms. For example, bedrooms, living
rooms, family rooms, and other noise-sensitive portions of a dwelling can be located on the side of the unit
farthest from the noise source, as shown by Figure A-3.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL.  3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                     A-3                            ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                                                                                                (
                                                FIGmmA-3
                              BR.        BR.                       LR.
                                                                              DR.
                               DEN
                                                 HIGHWAY
                                                                                                                 (
Bathrooms, closets, stairwells and food preparation areas are relatively insensitive to exterior noise
sources, and can he placed on the noisy side of a unit. When such techniques are employed, noise
reduction reqnirements for the building facade can be significantly rednced, although the architect must
tske care to isolate the noise impacted areas by the use of partitions or doors.
When structures containing noise-sensitive uses are to be located in a noisy environment, interior noise
exposure may be reduced through tbe acoustical design of building facades. Standard noise mitigation
packages are recommended in this Design Manual for noise level reduction (NLR) values of 15, 20, 25 and
30 decibels. If an NLR greater than 30 decibels is required or if there is a question about the effectiveness
of the standard noise mitigation packages in a certain situation, the reviewing agency may require an
acoustical analysis.
Use of Vegetation:
It is sometimes assumed that trees and other vegetation can provide significant noise attenuation.
However, approximately 100 feet of dense foliage (so that no visual path extends through the foliage) is
required to achieve a 5 dB attenuation of traffic noise. The use of vegetation as a noise barrier should not
be considered a practical method of noise control unless large tracts of dense foliage are part of the existing
landscape.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                     A-4                              ADOPTED JUNE 21 , 1993
Vegetation can be used to acoustically "soften" intervening ground between a noise source and receiver by
increasing ground absorption of sound. Vegetative barriers have been shown to reduce tire noise and
other high frequency components of traffic noise. Planting of trees and shrnbs is also of aesthetic and
psychological value, and may reduce adverse public reaction to a noise source by removing the source from
view, even though noise levels may be largely unaffected.
Sound Absorbing Materials:
Absorptive materials such as fiberglass, foam, cloth, and acoustical tiles are used to reduce reflections or
reverberation in closed spaces. Their outdoor use is usually directed toward reducing reflections between
parallel noise barriers or other reflective surfaces. Maintenance of absorptive materials used outdoors is
difficult because such materials are easily damaged by sunlight and moisture. Their application as an
outdoor noise control tool is limited to cases where the control of reflected noise is critical.
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOL.  3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL                     A-5                            ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
APPENDIX B                       EXAMPLE OF ATTIC VENT BAFFLE
                                 TREATMENT
                                                 A
                                                  v
                          Wall                      IX
                                                    IX
                                      xxx x
                                           ~
                                              ><     "I
                                                    ~
  Acoust ically
  Lined Baffle                 ""                   ~
                                                           - - - Vent Open ing
                                                    ~
                                                        '"
                                                     '\
                                                     b.
   Line-of-S ight                  .i
   Path Avo ided
                                  W
                                    I7'Y"
                                    T     K
                                          R
                                             ><
                                    !
                                                 A
                                                  v
GROVER BEACH NOISE ELEMENT
VOl. 3, ACOUSTICAL DESIGN MANUAL             B-1             ADOPTED JUNE 21, 1993
                                    -ro~ ::!?(Ji,.t..!U-N\J
                                    QplpILe. WP'(
             OPEN SPACE - CONSERVATION
                      f   ELEMENT
                    GEN R L
                \ .      PLAN
                          CITIES OF.
                                 . '.  ',.            '-
  ., "",-" .        ARROYO··GRANPE·
                        GROVER ·CITY
L
              San Luis Obispo County,              CaHforJ:1.~a              ....
                                                                   . - ;;-,'
                                           HAHN, W"ISE .
                                           ASSOCIATES, c.·c_.cC.1
                                           Fla.n.ning-Consult's.rits
                                           s~_!l-. Os;rlos, Oa.lifornia.

1
                                RESOLUTION NO.     1045
1               A RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ARROYO
                GRANDE ADOPTING THE OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENTS
                OF THE ARROYO GRANDE CITY GENERAL PLAN.
          WHEREAS, the.Planning Commission of the City of Arroyo Grande
    has prepared-a general plan report; together with general plan maps,.
    entitled the "Open Space" .plan required by Government Code Section
     65561, and' the "Conservation" plan required by Government Code'Sec~
    tion 65302(d),and did all things legally and technically required
    by law to develop reports and maps·adequate.i~ scope and authority
     to serve the purposes of a general plan; and
          WHEREAS, pursuant to Government Code Section 65501 et seq. the
    City·Council gave required notice and did hold a public .hearing on
    June 26,1973, for the purpose of considering the adoption of the
    Open Space and Conservation Elements of the General Plan report and
    maps; and at·which public hearing the Open Space and Conservation
    Plans; report and' maps· were displayed, -.explained and" reported upon;
    and
          WHEREAS, said Opell Space and Conservation Elements of the Gen~
    eral PlEIn report Elnd·maps·thereof are necessary for sound future
1   community development, the preservation of community values, and the
'1  promotion of the general health, safety, convenience and welfare of
    the citizens of the City of Arroyo Grande;
          NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL·OF THE CI'l;'Y OF ARROYO GRANDE
    DOES HEREBY RESOLVE AS FOLLOWS:
          Section 1. The City Council of the City of Arroyo Grande does·
    hereby.find alld determine. that the public interest, convenience and.
    necessity require·that the Open Space and Collservation Elements of
    the General Plan, as amended, be adopted.
          Section 2. The' Ci ty •. Council of the. ci ty. of . Arroyo Grande does'
.,I hereby.adopt 'j::he:Open Space and Conservation.Elements·of the General
    Plan, as amended by Addendum· No. 1, dated June 19, 1973, together
    with the maps and descriptive material.
          Onmotion.of Councilman Millis, seconded by Counqilman de Leon
    and on· the following.rollcall,vote, to wit:
          AYES:     Councilmen Millis, Talley, de.Leonand Mayor Schlegel'
          NOES:     None
'\
          ABSENT:   Councilman wood
    the foregoing resolution. was passed and adopted this 26th day of
    June, 1973.
 ,                                      sl   Calvin H. Schlegel
 ,                                                  Mayor

!
J
   ATTEST:   sl Ines A. del Camp
]       I, Ines A. del Campo, City Cler)( of the City of Arroyo Grande,
   County of San . Luis Obispo, State of California , do hereby qertify
I  that the foregoing Resolution No. 1045 is a true, full and correct
   qopy of said resolution passed and adopted by the City Council of
   the City ,of Arroyo Grande at a regular meeting of said Council held
   on the 26th day,of June., 1973.
        WITNESS my hand and·· seal· of ,the City of Arroyo Grande affixed
   this 27th day of dune, 1973.
                                        sl Ines A. del cam~o
                                      City Cler)( of the Ckty of
                                           Arroyo Grande
1
           (SEAL)
 '
!

                                RESOLUTION NO. 73-304
                A RESOLUTION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF THE
                CITY OF ARROYO GRANDE ADOPTING THE OPEN SPACE
                AND CONSERVATION ELEMENTS OF THE GENERAL PLAN.
          WHEREAS, the Planning Commission of the City of Arroyo Grande has
     prepared a general plan report, together with general plan maps, en-
     titled the "Open Space" plan required by Government· Code Section 65561,
     and the· "Conservation" plan required by Government Code Section 65302
     (d), and did all things legally and technically required by law to
     develop reports and maps adequate in scope and authority to serve the
     purposes of a general plan, and
          WHEREAS, pursuant to Government Code Section 65501 et seq. the
    City Planning commission gave required notice and did hold a public
    hearing on June 19, 1973,for the purpose of considering the i:l.doption
     of the Open Space and Conservation Elements' of the General· Plan report
    and maps, and at which public hearing the ,Open Space and Conservation
     Plans, reports and maps were displayed, explained and reported upon,
    and
          WHEREAS,the Planning Commission of the City of Arroyo Grande
    has a responsibility to plan for the desirable future growth and
    development of the City of Arroyo Grande;
          NOW, THEREFORE, THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF ARROYO
    GRANDE DOES HEREBY RESOLVE AS· FOLLOWS:
          section 10 The Planning commission of the City of Arroyo Grande
    does hereby find and determine that the public interest, convenience
    and necessity ,require that the Open Space and Conservation Elements
    of the General Pian, as amended, together with the maps be adopted.
          Section 2. The Planning commission of the City of Arroyo Grande
    does hereby adopt the Open Space and Conservation Elements of the
    General Plan, ,as amended by Addendum No.1, dated June 19, 197s,
    together with the maps and descriptive material.
          Section 3., The Planning Commission Chairman is authorized and
j   directed to certify this approval upon the Open Space and Conserv(l.-
    tio~ Elements of the General Plan as amended and forward to the City
    Council for consideration.                                           .
]         On motion by Commissioner Pope, seconded by Commissioner Spier-
    ling, and by the following roll call vote, to wit:
          AYES:     Commissioners Calhoon, Goulart, Pope, Spierling
                    and Chairman Jones
          NOES:     None
J
.'.
          ABSENT:  Commissioners Gullickson and Porter
    the foregoing Resolution was adopted this 19th day of June, 1973.
    ATTEST:   s/ Pearl Phinney             s/ Raymond E. Jones
             Secretary                    Chairman
]
 ,

I
   THE OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
,          AND
I THE CONSERVATION ELEMENT
          OF THE
!      GENERAL PLAN
           FOR
      ARROYO GRANDE
       GROVER CITY
       CALIFORNIA
     Adopted June, 1973
•
;
  Hahn, Wise & Associates, Inc.
     Planning Consultants

1
                                  Preface
           The Open Space and Conservation EZements presented
     herein inc Zudes the basic datadeve Zoped in the Open Space
     EZement prepared and adopted by San Luis Obispo County.
     AZso incZuded is the basic data for the Conservation EZement.
          The PZan aZso uses the Fame guideZines and objectives
     as the County Open Space PZan where appZicabLe.
          The first four sections deaZ with the principZes,
     objectives,  recommendat~on8,  and basic data foZZowedby the
     two specific pZanning areas which incZude Arroyo Grande and
     Grover City.
          An Open Space and Conservation PZan is set out for
     each of the PZanning Areas as weZZ asa review of basic data,
.. , existing condi.tions, principZes and objectives, Open. Space
.I
   ,
     and Conservation requirements and the need for both Open
     Space and Conservation.
   i
~
'1
 j
1                              TABLE OF CONTENTS
-,,
                   ARROYO GRANDE - GROVER CITY, CALIFORNIA
                        OPEN SPACE & CONSERVATION ELEMENTS
                                                            Page
      -I. . 'SUMMARY' & OBJECTIVES                             1
.,           A•   Open Space                                  1
                  Conservation                                 4
     II.     OPEN SPACE - GENERAL                             6
             A.   State Open Space Requirements                6
             B.   Other state Laws . Related to Open Space.   9
             C.   The Need for Open Space                    11
             D.   Land for Parks                             12
             E.   Obstacles to Open Spa ge                   12
    III.     CONSERVATION- GENERAL                           16
             A.   State Conservation Requirements            16
1            B.   Other State Laws Related to Conservation   17
            Co'   The Need for Conservation                  22 .
 .
d           D.    Apathy to Conseryation Practices           24
            E ..  Coordination wi th Other Agencies          25
            F. -  Coordination between the City and County   25
     IV.    OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION CONSIDERATIONS       26
            A.    Location                                   26
            B.'   Climate                                    26
            C,    Geologic                                   28
            D.    Topography                                 28
J          E.     Soil Types                                 31
           F.     Vegetation                                 33

I
       G.   Natural Resources                  33
       H.   Hydrology                          35
1
J
           1.    Water Supply                  36
       I.   Hazard Lands                       38
            1.   Seismic Hazards               38
           2.    Landslid~s                    40
            3.   Flooding                     41
      J.   Fish, Wildlife and Natural Habitat 41
      K.   Existing Public Lands              42
      L.   Agricul tural- Lands-              'l3
      M.   Recreation anc;i Park Land         45
      N.   Inter-relationship of Open Space
           Considerations          -          47
   V. THE OPEN SPACE PLAN - COUNTY            50
      A.   Agricultural Lands                 50
      B.   Recreational Lands                 53
      C.   Scenic & Sensitive Lands           58
      D.   Multi-Use Lands & Wildlife Habitat 62
      E.   Rural Lands                        64
      F.   The County Plan                    67
  VI. THE OPEN SPACE PLAN - PLANNING AREAS    69
      A.   Agricultural Lands                 69
      B.   Recreation Lands                   70
      C.   Wildlife Habitat                   71
      D.   Natural Resource Lands             72
           Watershed & Water Recharge Lands   72
      F.   The Plan                           73
J
   VII. THE ACTION PROGRAM FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE      78
        OPEN SPACE PLAN
        A •. Need for Open Space Implementation           78
         B.  Current Methods of Open Space
             Impleme~tation and Results                   78
        C.   Other Open Space Implementation
             Possibilities .                             82
        D.   Possible Methods of   Fina~cing Open Space  85
  VIII. THE CONSERVATION PLAN                            87
        A.   Watershed and Water Recharge Lands          87
        B.   Natural Vegetation                          88
        C.   Soil Types                                  89
        D.   Natural Resource Lands                      90
        E.   Wildlife Habitat                            90
        F.   Recl;'eational La~ds                        91
        G.   Flood Control·                              92
        H.   Soenic Lands                                93
        I.   The. Plan of the Two Cities                 95
    IX. THE ACTION PROGRAM FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF
        THE CONSERVATION PLAN                            98
        A.   Need for Conservation plan Implementation   98
        B.   Conservation Pla~
             Implementation a~d Results                  98
        C.   Othel;' Conservation Implementation
             possibilities                              100

TABLE OF MAPS                                Page
     l.   Location Map                        27
     2.   Geology-                            29
     3.   Topography                          30
     4.   Soil Types                          32
     5.   Vegetation                          34
     6.   Hydrology                           37
     7.   Hazard-Areas                        39
     8.   Agricultural Land                   44
     9.   Recreation and Parks                49
    10.   Open Space and Conservation Plan 76-77
References and Acknowledgements
      I.   SUMMARY & OBJECTIVES
           A.   Open Space
                As indicated in the Open Space Element of the General Plan
]     for San Luis Obispo County, agricultural lands supply a great source
      of income in San Luis Obispo County.        It is imperative that this
1
J     source of income be protected by the cities as well as the County.
l               The first objective of the Open Space Element is:
q
                To preserve and protect the good and productive agricul-
j     tural land and agricultural economy of the areas' surrounding the.
     Ci ties, particularly in Arroyo GJ::Ctrld", Vi01+~E!'Y~
                Recreational land is an important amenity of San Luis
1    Obispo County and the Planning Area of the,two Cities.         The prime
.-:~
     objective in the preservation of open space is:
                To preserve land for recreational facilities, 'encourage
     private recreational development and other open uses' in categories
     characteristic· and beneficial to the residents of the Planning Areas
     of the two Cities  andth~  County as. well as to meet the. tourist I s
     needs.
                An environment which includes a variety of wildlife is
     an enjoyable place to live.   The preservation of habitat is the key
     to abundance and well being of all fish and wildlife species.
                The objective of this section is:
                To preserve and maintain open space within the Planning
     Area as a means of providing natural habitat for all species of·
     wildlife compatible with urban living.
                Scenic lands are a prized asset to the Planning Area of
     the two Cities as manifested by efforts to guard them by zoning.
     The variety of scenic interests are one of the principJ.e attractions
                                              L

                                                                         1'_-
 to tourists and are, therefore a commercial asset.                      ~
           The prime objective of the two Cities is:
           To conserve, preserve and maintain the scenic lands of
 the Planning Areas of the two Cities and steeper lands to the           r::
                                                                         r
east.
           Continued care must be taken to protect open space lands
that are also valuable watershed areas such as the Lopez Dam and
its watershed.   This objective of the Open Space Element is:
           Along with San Luis Obispo County to preserve the quality    'V'".'
                                                                        rc
of existing water supply and adequately plan for the expansion          "
and retention of valuable water supplies for future generations.
           The Open Space Element of the General Plan is a compila-
tion of the foregoing sections reflecting existing conditioris and
the objectives of the two Cities to preserve and protect 'open space   rh
in their respective Planning Areas.
           Implementation of the Plan will depend largely on coordin-
ation between the Cities and the County of San Luis Obispo.   Pre-
sently the County is using or proposes many methods of implementation.
These include:
           Agricultural Zoning and Agricultural Preserves~
           Open Space Zoning including Open Space Districts-           [
                                                                       t'
           Scenic Area Zoning.
                                                                         "
           Flood Plain Zoning.                                           ii
           The County also implements open space planning in the area
through their subdivision regulations.   The County Subdivision
Ordinance also requires recreation facilities in any residential
development or in-lieu fees.
                                     2.
                                                                       l
              The County Open Space Plan recently adopted recommendation
    for the preservation of open space; namely open space eligible for
   the Open Space Subvention Act to be put under contract.
              Other methods, of implementation adopted as policy by the
   County are scenic easements and encouragement of private .open
   space development through the use of development of land for golf
   courses, hunting and fishing preserves, private campgrounds, bicycle
   ways, public footpaths, and other uses that add to the recreational
   opportunities for the County and more particularly the. Planning Area·
   of the two Cities.
              other.Open Space implementation possibilities are:
              Public land ownership and control, road abandonment, State
   excess lands, deed restrictions ,.tax incremei1.tfinancing.
              There are also many methods of financing open space, such
   as:
              Taxation through user· fees, motel "bed" tax, real estate
   transfer tax, property taxes, gasoline tax, building and construction
   tax.
              Federal funds for open. space grants either through HUD
   orLand' and water Conservation Fund or wildlife· Restoration Fund .•
             Private funds can sometimes be' obtained through private
   conservation organizations, such as the Nature Conservancy groups
   and philanthropic individuals..
.,
 ,
                                         3.

B.      Conservation
        The first objective of the Conservation Element is:
      . To preserve and protect -and .enhanc.e.·the natural vegetation.   l:~.'
        The natural vegetation in the Planning Area of the two Cities
 is enhanced by climate and location of topographic features.
 Grass is a prevailing ground cover in the low lands of the area.
 scattered oaks in the. hills give some portions the appearance of
 a park.    It is important that this natural vegetation be preserved
 in a<l far a<l i t is feasible to prevent the loss of <loil in the
 hill<lide areas, a<l.well as to preserve the rural atmo<lphere.
        The objective ofthi<l portion i<l:
        To preserve and maintain the natural vegetation as a means
 of providing natural habitat; maintain the rural atmosphere of
 the Planning Area and to protect the slopes from erosion.of soils
 on the hillsides.
                                                                        t
       Approximately .twenty-five (25%) percent of the good soil,       r
                                                                        l
as rated by the Soil Conservation Service, in the planning area
occurs immediately around Arroyo Grande.       The high quality of
the soil results from runoff from Arroyo Grande Creek.
       The soils in the planning area vary from good cultivable
soil, fairly good soil to soil suitable only for grazing.               r:
                                                                        L
       The prime objective of the two cities is:
       To conserve, preserve and maintain the good soils in and
around the Planning Area and to preserve them for one of the
major natural resources of the County which is agriculture.
       Riparian habitat, and wetland habitat have been greatly
reduced in the past and are now in short supply.       Most of the
                                       4.
                                                                        E
                                                                        [

     natural habitat for fish and game is in the foothills and the
     mountains to the east of the Planning Area.    Habitat is the key
]    to abundance and well being of all fish and wildlife species
     compatible with urban living.
]
        While agriculture is one of the primary resources of the
1   Planning Area of the two Cities, there are other natural re-
    sources, such as sand and gravel deposits;     Harvesting of many
1
J   of these is and will be detrimental to the scenic beauty of··the
    area and must be accomplished with great care.
        The objective of this section is:
        To preserve and protect· the good ·and productiveagricul-
    tural land of the Arroy Grande Valley area and to protect the
1
  i natural resources of the Planning Areas and at the same time
    protect the scenic resources of the Planning Area.
        Water supply is also a great resource of the area.    The
    construction of Lopez Dam with its large watershed, as far
    north as Avila and south to the Nipomo Mesa area, provides
    for domestic water and serves to prevent saltwater. intrusion.
    It is imperative that . the watersheds be protectedby.the Cities
    and the County.
d       The objective of this section of the Conservation Element
    is:
.
J       To preserve and protect the source of the water supply and
    the various streams supplying that water.
                                    5.

,II.   OP~rSPACE   GENERAL
       A.   state Open Space Requirements
            The Government Code of California clearly sets forth the
  intent of the Legislature in adopting open space requirements.
                                                                     f
                                                                     !
  Section 65!;i6lreads as follows:
            "The Legislature finds and declares as follows:
             (a)  That the preservation of open-space land, as de~
  finded in this Article, is necessary not only for the mainten-
 ance of the economy of the State, but also for ,the' assurance of
 the continued availability of land for the production of food
 and fiber, for the enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation
 and for the use of natural resources.
            (b)   That discouraging premature and unnecessary
 conversion of open space land to urban uses is   a,matte~  of
 public interest and will be of benefit to urban dwellers be-
 cause it will discourage noncontiguous, development paj:t,erps
 which unnecessarily increase the cost of community services
 ~o  community residents.
            (c;)  That the anticipated increase in the popUlation,
 of the state demands that Cities, Counties, and the state at
 the earliest possible date make definite pl-ans ,for the p~eger­
 vation of valuable open-space land and take positive action to
 carry out such plans by the adoption and strict administration
 of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as authorized by this
 chapter or by other appropriate methods.
            (d)   That in order to assure that the interests of
 all its people are met in the orderly growth and development
                                     6.,

   of the State and the preservation and conservation of·its re-
   sources, it is necessary to provide for the development by the
   state, Regional agencies, Counties and Cities, including charter
   cities, of State-w,ide coordinated plans for the conservation and
   preservation of open-space lands.
          (e)   That for these reasons this article is necessary
   for the promotion of the general welfare and for the protection
   of the public interest in open-space lands. "
         Section 65560 further defines the following terms as they
  relate to    open~space:
         " (a)    'Agricul tural land'· means land actively used for
  the purpose of Producing an .agricultural commodity for commercial
  purposes.     Land may be considered to be 'actively used' notwith-
I standing the fact that in the course of good agricultural prac-
  tice it is permitted to lie idle fora period up to one year.
I        (b)    'Local Open-Space Plan' is the Open-Space IDlement
  of a County or City General Blanadopted by the board or
  council.
         (c)    'Natural resource land' is land deemed by the
  legislative body to possess or encompass natural resources, the
  use or recovery of which can best be realized by restricting
  the use of the land as provided by this chapter.
         (d)    'Open-space land' is any parcel or area of land
  or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open
  space use as herein defined, and which is designated on a
  local, regional or S.tate open-space plan as any of the
  following:
                                      7;

       )
         (l).Naturalresourceland, as defined herein
         (2)  Agricultural land, as defined herein
         (3)  Recreation.land, as defined herein
         (4)  Scenic. land, as defined herein
         (5)  Watershed or ground water recharge land, as
              defined herein
         (6)  wildlife habitat, as defined herein.
              (6)    'Open-space use' means the use of land for (1)
public recreation ,·(2) enjoyment of scenic beauty,         (3) conser-
vation or use of natural resources, or·· (4) l?roduCtiOn .of food
or fiber.                                                                 ·EJ·
                                                                        . >.;
                                                                           ."
              (f) . 'Recreation .land' is any area of land or water
                                                                          ~~;
designated on the State, or ariy regional or·local        open~space
plan as open-space land and which i s actively used for recrea.,.
tion purposes and open to the public for such purposes with or
                                                                          r·'
without charge.
                                                                          t
              (g)   'Scenic· land' is land designated on the local
Open ·SpaceFlan as open-space land which possesses outstanding
scenic qualities worthy of preservation.
              (h)   , Wa tershed or ground· water. recharge land' is
land designated on the State or any regional or local open-
space plan as open-s.pace land· which is important to the State
iri order to maintain the quantity and quality of water nec-
essary to the people of the State or ·an.y part thereof.
              (i)   'Wildlife habitat' is any land or water area
designated on 'the state or any regional or IOGal open-space
plan as open-space land which is unusually valuable or
                                      8,

]
1 necessary to the preservation or enhancement of the wildlife
   resources of State."
]         section 65563 also requires:
                 "Every City and County shall, by January 1, 1974, (1)  (as
  amended) prepare and adopt a local Open Space Plan for the compre-
  hensive and long-range preservation and conservation of open space
  land within its jurisdiction."
                 B,   Other State Laws Related·to Open Space
                 There are curient:by several other laws which are directly.
  related to the preservation and protection of open space lands.
  They are as follows:
                      1.   Section 65910, Government Code
                           "Every City or County by January 1,1974,(1)
  shall adopt an Open Space Zoning Ordinance consistent with a local
  Open Space Plan adopted pursuant to Section 65563" above.
                      2.   Section 65302  (d), Government Code
                           Each General Plan shall include "a Conservation
  Element for the conservation, development, and utilization of
  nat>iral reSO)1rces including water and· its hydraulic forces; forests;
  soils, rivers and other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, min-
  erals·and other natural resources."
                      3.   Section 11546, Business and Professions Code
                           "The governing bodies of a City or County may
  by ordinance require the dedication of       ~and, the payment of fees·
  in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for park or recreational
  purposes as a condition to the approval of a final subdivision
  map. e .... II
  (1)    SB594 Amended Requirements
                                           9,

                4.  Section 11610.5, Business and Professions Code
                     "No City or County shall approve either the
 tentative or the final map of any subdivision fronting upon the
 coastline or shoreline which subdivision does not provide or have
 available reasonable public· access by fee.or easement from public
                                                                         r
 highways to land below the ordinary high-water mark on any ocean        I
 coastline or bay shoreline within or at a reasonable distance from
 the subdivision."                                                       I
                5.  Land Conservation Act (Williamson Act)                 "
                                                                         m '1
                    Article XXVIII of the State Constitution now
 permits farmlands, landswithin·scl?nic highway corridors, wildlife     i
 habitat areas, timberlands, salt ponds, managed wetland areas, and
 submerged areas to be assessed on the basis of actual use (capita-     I
 lized value), rather than on sales of comparable properties which in
                                                                        r;~
                                                                        r.:.,'
many instances reflect their potential va'lue for possible urban
 development.  As a condition for qualifying for this tax relief,
                                                                        E
which is essentially a stabilization of property taxes, the land
must be restricted in one of two ways.    The owner must enter into   I
a contract, as specified in the Williamson Act, to maintain his·        11
                                                                        III
land in agricultural use for a specified term, or he must grant an
                                                                        F.'.'
open space easement.
                                                                        L
                6.  Open Space Subvention Act
                    Section 14112 of the Open Space Subvention Act,     ~
Title 14, provides for subventions to counties which have open space
agreements on privatI? property and have adopted an open space plan
                                                                        ~
and ordinance.                                                         [F.:.'
                The Secretary of the Resources Agency of the State is
the final judge on whether non-prime lands devoted to open space is   l1'. .
                                  10 :
                                                                      [

     of state-wide significance.
                     The minimum length of any agreement must be ten
     years and must be designated for open space use in the open space
     plan and be of state-wide significance to be eligible for payment.
     These include areas of outstanding scientific, scenic or recreation
     value and areas to preserve wildlife and fish habitat; forest areas
     of importance to provide food and fiber, hazard areas; areas serving
     as connecting links between major recreation areas, such as electric
     or gas utility easements; and areas of historic interest.
                    7.   Proposition 20 - A Coastline Protection Initiative
                    Provides for the establishment of the Coastal Com-
    mission to prepare a plan for the development of-the California
:
..
;.'
    coastline, such plan to protect, restore and enhance the environment
    and ecology of the coastal zone.    The Planning Area is located in
    the South Central-Coast Region which includes San Luis Obispo
    County, Santa Barbara and Ventura County.
               C.-  The Need for Open Space
                    Open space usually means the things the individual
    liked about the area when he chose it as a place to live.
                    Open space means:   The broad expanse of the coast-
.
 j  line and the uncluttered view from the mountains to the ocean.
                    The mountains and the foothills to hike in.
 _-                 Enough parks, golf courses and other open space so
J
    that everyone can enjoy recrea-tion outdoors, close to home and _
J   without having to make a reservation.
                    Far~lands  and grazing land continuing in agricu1-
    tura1 productivity.
                                        11.
            Green space separating each community from the other so
 that you can find the countryside within a few minutes of your home.
            Preserving open space means the kind of area that the
people want in 1990 and 2000.                                                 r
                                                                              [
      D.    Land for Parks
            The Federal, State and County park system provides for the
 facilities needed·for regional parks.     However, an urban park system
should be established and maintained to supplement the regional
facilities.    City parks can provide for visual relief as well as
areas for active play .and cultural experience.        These parks also
                                                                            r
provide for community identity.      City.parks should be focused upon.    I
accessabili ty and usage •   These should include .. passive as well as
active recreation areas and should provide facilities for all ages
from scrambling children to senior citizens.
      E.   Obstacles·. to Open Space
           Today, urban growth, technological advancements and some-
times government po,licies place open space lands in jeopardy.
                     \, .
Listed below are some of the more urgent obstacles to open space
facing the Planning Area of the two cities and more partfcularly
San Luis Obispo County.
           1.    Urban Sprawl
                 The population of the Planning Area of the two Cities
w~s13,393    in 1970 with a projedted population to 20,000 by 1990.
These numbers are significant when they are . ,related to the IOdation
of these new residents and the services they will require,
                 Generally new residential development will occur        r:.'.
                                                                         L
around and in close proximity to the existing Cities.        Prime agri-
cultura.l land in the areas adjacent to the Cities will.be under
                                  12.

      tremendous pressure to give way to the demands of the growth of the
      two Cities.   More and more of our valuable open space will be taken
      away from the Arroyo Grande Valley.      The growth of our Cities  can~
      not be completely stopped, but specific open space provisions can
      give direction to this growth and allow for the aesthetic amenities
     which provide relief to typical urban sprawl.
                2.      The Automobile
                        The automobile has given the American his greatest
     mobility, bllthas also caused several of today's most ser;i.ouspro-:-
     blems •. The automobile and its necessary transportation network
     requires great amounts of land.       The automobile is the primary
     polluter and generates large scale noise pollution when measured
     near "highways '. and freeways.   The greater part of U. S. 101 which
     bisects the.Planning.Area in a north.,..south direction and U.S. 1,
     the coast highway, tranverses relatively hilly terrain an¢! has left
     some of the ugly scars which are left as remainders of new roadways
     in more hilly ,terrain.     Unfortunately the high volumes of inter-
     County and inter-State traffic, much of which is tourist-oriented,
     virtually eliminate many of the pleasures which originally made the
     automobile so attractive and· popular.      The.number of automobiles
     cannot be contro:j.led; however, the automobile itself can be con-
     trolled through the sophistication of the transportation networks
     required.   Automobile access should be based on the intensity of
     use desired, therefore controlling the auto by the scale and condi-
     tion of the roadway.      To accomplish this requires close coordination
 '·· and intergration of all Elements of the General Plan and particu-
II
     larly the Open Space and Circulation Element.
1
 ,
",
                                           13.
 ,

                    3. Land Taxation
                       It is usually the tax payer who must assume the_
 burden of acquiring or preserving open space.      The resident is the      i
 individual who provides the bulk of City and County services and
 any additional tax increases upon the citi:<:ens whether they be
                                                                            rt-
                                                                              -
 owners or renters is becomming increasingly burdensome.      The trad-    r1;
 itional form of utili:<:ing property tax funds for land acquisition
 for parks and open space is becomming extremely limited.      New methods
                                                                           r
of equitable taxation must be explored including Federal and State
               ,~ .
assistance in grant form resulting from hewpribrities placed upon          [
 the state and Federal taxing system.      It is true that most people
pay taxes and most people appreciate the need for open space, but
                                                                           I
new funding sources must be developed so as to not place any addi-
tional strain on the citi:<:ens of the communities.
                    4. Jurisdictional Confusion
                       Many open space conflicts occur between juris-
dictions and governmental agencies.      The-responsibility for certain
lands often create con-fusion between the City, County, State and
Federal governments;      Different departments within the same agency
often operate under different land use policies on the same issue.
The California Planning and Conservation Law is continually being
updated and expanded, making many documents in planning literature
ineffective or incomplete.      Careful programming of work is necessary
to assure that planning remain comprehensive without needless and
expensive overlap or dupljcation.
          F.     Coordination with the County
                  It is necessary, for the effective implementation of
the open space element that the cities and the County coordinate
                                  14.
    their planning decisions both in the planning area and in the
   corporate limits of the City so as to eliminate any conflicting
   proposals on land use in the.planning areas.
                   Fortunately there is close coordination between the
   Cities and the County and it is the intent of this Open Space Plan
   to be in. full coordination with the County Open Space Plan.
                   Open Space Elements of· the two Cities are consistent
   with the projections set forth in the San Luis Obispo County Open
   Space Element.   Minor differences may occur where two jurisdictions
   make proposals· on one land area, but what is important is that the
   two City plans have the same fundamental theme as the County Plans.
   Close coordination between the two Cities and the County will result
   in a framework of harmonious recommendations close to and around
   the corporate Cities.
                                    15.
i'

III.      CONSERVATION - GENERAL
     A.   State Conservation Element Requirements
          Section 65302(d) clearly sets forth the intent of the
Legislature in adopting Conserv"tion Element requirements.  The,          r
                                                                          L
Conservation Element must include a plan for the conservation, and
development and utilization of the following is mandatory:
          1.   Water.
          2.   Forest.
                                                                         tO ,~,'
                                                                         f'
          3.   Soils.
                                                                         I.
         ,4.   Rivers and Waters;
          5.   Harbors.
          6.   Fisherie$.
          7.'  Wildlife.
          8.,  Minerais o
          9.   Other natural resources.
          Components that are permissive as far as inclusion in the
Conservation Element are:
          1.   Land and Water Reclamation.
          2.   Flood Control.
          3.   Water Pollution, prevention,and control.
          4.   Regulation of the use of land in the stream channels
               and other areas.
                                                                     ,  ,["--:
          5.   Prevention, control and correction of soils, beaches         'J
               and shores.
          6.   Protection of watersheds.
          7.   The location, quantity and quality of rock, sand, and   'L:''
               gravel resources.
                                                                        r:
                                                                        k
                                  160
                                                                        f
                                                                        li,
   ]
 1       Section 65302(d) 'was· amended to'require'that:a Conservation Element
         shall be prepared and adopted no later than June 30, 1973.·
   ]          That.portion of the.Conser'ltationElement, including waters,
 I
,
         shall be developed'and.coordinated with any County water agency and
         with all District and City agencies which havedevelopeq, . s.erved,
       i
         controlled or conserved water for any purpose. for the County or City
         for which th~   )?lan is prepared.
 J            B.   Other.Laws Related to a Conservation Element
                   There '. are currently· many' other laws which, are directly
              related to conservation, they are as' follows:
 ~                 State Subdivision' Map Act
 :~           1.
                   Under the S1:!bdi vision Map Act the authority' over. design '.
1. ":J
                   and layout.of sUbqivisions is generally vested·in local
                   government bodieEl.· ·Local government has ,the re.sJ?onsibi-·
                   lity of. approving tentaHve and finalsubdivj,sion maps.
              2.   State Subdivided LandsA.ct
                   Th.e' -Subdivided Lands Act; administered by the, Departmep. t·
                   of ReaL.Estate, is concerned with 'consumer protection •.
                   Befqre. a developer can sell a subdivision lot, ,he must
                   obtain a public report from the Real .EstateCommission •
:'.'.1'.
~                  This   report.informs·pr'1specHv~    buyers about.their
                   rights and obligations,'
                                   .    .   . , the provision,
                                                           .   if any, that has,
                   been ·made.for public. utilities,
                                                ; .  .
                                                        warns.of hazards, 'and
                   provides other -useful infOJ,mation.,
              3.   Environmental Quality Act of 1970
                   The. LegislaHvepoliby and Environmental. Quality Act of
                   1970 requires that it is the policy of the State to
                   "take'all action necessary to provide the,people of the
 'i                                             17.

     State with clean water and air, enjoyment of' the aesthe-
     tic, natural, scenic and historical environmental
     qualities., and freedom from excessive noise."
           In addition it declares that it is the policy of the
                                                                       r/.
                                                                        h
     State to "create and maintain conditions under which man
     and nature can exist in productive harmony to fulfill both
     social and economic requirements of present and future
     generations."
           In 'the implementation of this policy, State agencies,
                                                                      IT'
                                                                      ~.,
                                                                     r;
     boards and commissions, and local agencies are required to
     prepare. and submit environmental impact reports on signi-
     ficant Federal, State and local projects .
4. . Office of Planning and Research
           This office was established to assist in the formula-
                                                                      ..:.'
     tion, evaluation, up-dating of long range' goal and policies   r..
     for land use, population growth and distribution, urban
                                                                    L
     expansion, open space, resource preservation and utiliza-
     tion.   Environmental goals and land use policy to be          [  "'.'
                                                                         1
     developed by this office will be.  a: major step toward
    programming urban developments so as to protect the
     environmental quality in the State.                           f".
                                                                   I'
                                                                   t.:
5.  water Quality Control Act
         . The Porter-Cologne Water Control Act of 1970 charges     t·
                                                                   b
    the State water Resources Control Board with protecting
    the quality of all State waters for the beneficial uses       b
    and enjoyment of the people.     In discharging this res-
    ponsibility the Regional Boards have the authority to
    establish waste. discharge requirements.     Through the
                                                                  l
                                 18.
                                                                  .["
                                                                     .,

J
1         exercise of this authority the size, location, density,
          design and construction practices of urban development
j         are affected.
      6.  Fish and Game Laws
I               The State Fish and Game Code declares that the fish
~         and game belong to the people of the State and charges
          the Department of Fish and Game with·the responsibility
..;
::l       for. protection of these resources.   In addition to regu-
          lating hunting and fishing, the Fish and Game Laws prohibit
I        the destruction of fish and wildlife habitat.
~               These laws prohibit the pollution of the State's water
         by any material injurious to fish, plant or bird life.
         Sediment originating from any development would be
         considered such a pollutant.
                Alteration of a stream or lake bed by public agencies
         or private individuals is prohibitted until the Department
         is notified and makes recommendations for measures to
         protect fish and wildlife.     The recommendations of the
         Department must be followed or disagreements submitted to
         an arbitrator.    Vehicular crossings of stream beds are
         covered by this law •
    . 7. Soil Conservation Provisions of the Public Resources Code
                Soil conservation districts, organized under Division
         9 of the Public Resources Code, concern themselves with
j
         the prevention of erosion and control of water.
               The Department of Conservation, acting through the
         State Soil Conservation Commission and the Division of
         Soil Conservation administers the Soil Conservation Program
                                     19.

    at the State level.    Working through Soil Conservation
    Districts at the 10cal level, tpe state also assists
     local. agencies on Goil conservation matters, conducts
    special studies on soil and vegetation problems, develops     [
    plans for local projects for soil and water conservation.
8.  Forest Practice Division of the·· Public Resources Code       [
          A permit must be obtaineCifrom the State Forester
    for the conversion·of t;Lmber land for purposes other
                                                                  f
    than growing timber, such as urban development.               r
                                                                  E.
          Erosion control measures specified in Forest Practice
    Rules   ap~ly to timber land conversion permits for urban
    use.    If logging takes place, periodic inspections are made
    by the California Division of Forestry to check on the
    operator for compliance with the Forest Practice Rules.
9.  Fire Prevention Provisions of the Public Resources Code
          The Public Resources Code defines hazardous fire areas,
    restrictions on uSlil;anl'! minimum protection requirements.
   administration of which is carried out by the State
   Division of ForestrY.
          The Public Resources Code sets forth PFovisions for
   .the reduction of fire hazards around buildings located on
   land which is covered with flammable material.      A fire
   break of at    lea~tthrit¥   (30) feet is required to be main-
   tained around buildings by removing all flammable vegeta-
   tion or other combustible growth.      Additional widths of
   fire break maybe required under extra hazardous conditions.
   Fire break clearance is alfN.xequired around electric
                               20.

1       transmission poles and towers.
              Burning in dumps as well as in other areas is regula-
 J      ted by permits issued by the state Forester.
 l'           Provisions must be to control erosion in areas where
        vegetation has been removed for fire breaks.
    10. Local Laws
              The most important plans and ordinances that influ-
 j      ence urbanization and its impact· on. conservation practices
'
..•
        include the following:
             1.   General Plans.
              2.   Zoning Ordinances.
             3.   Subdivision Ordinances.
1
',j
              4.  Grading Ordinances.
    11. Federal Agencies
             Federalagenc:lies who's programs have the most signi-
        ficant relation to the impact of urbanization of lands.are:
             1.   Soil Conservation Service (USDA)
j                 The Soil Conservation Service of the U;S,  Depart~
             ment of Agriculture provides information andtechni-
             cal assistanceto·private land owners in soil conser-
             vat ion districts and State and local entities.   While
             the. assistance has been primarily concerned with the
             erosion control.and agricultural land use through
Oi           State-organized Soil Conservation Districts,the
J
             Soil Conservation Service does assist local govern-
             ment in reviewing from a soil standpoint, County
             subdivision plans and proposals as well as other
             types of development;
1                                     21.
 1

                                                                             ,
                       This agency makes basic soil surveys and provides     t
                 soil maps which should be the foundation of local Land
                 Use Plans.    In Addition, generalized interpretive
                                                                             r
                                                                             f
                 maps are provided showing critical areas of soil            I
                 erosion, soil shrink-swell behavior, land capability,
                 suitability for septic tanks and many other inteFpre-
                 tations that are useful.
                 2.    Environmental,Protection Agency.
                                                                            r
                       The urgency for cleaning up streams, lakes and       [
                 other' .water areas' requires' more' finances than the
                 local agency's area will provide.       The Federal water
                 Pollution Control Act provides funding for projects
                 important to environment1:!.l·aspects of urbanization.
                       Through the Environmental Protection Agency,
                 communities can get financial help in the construction
                 of municipal waste trt;!atmentplants with a Federal
                 grant of at least 30% of construction costs.       The
                 Federal share" may be higher under certain conditions,
                 such as when more quality standards in comprehensive
                 basic·compliance.have been developed.
     C.    The Need for Conservation                                       r
                                                                           L
           Frequently natural resources are not adequately considered
in determining the sui tabili ty of·· land per urban type development
and in. regulating development ~    This result's in detrimental impacts   ~
on the soil mantle and the vegetative cove:):" and other environmental·
factors.   Problems are created not only at the. site of the develop-
ment but ,also in adjacent areas.
                                        22.

1         To prevent further degradation of the environment,
    l.egislation and administrative actions are necessary at
 ]
    both the State"and local levels.    Local government must
J   develop and implement improved ·techniques to effectively"
    plan and regulate development of lands within the Plan-
    ning Area and to protect the soil mantle and vegetative
    covering.
         Conservation means:
         1.   To identify, to assess, and quantify the impact
              of urbanization on the soil, vegetation and
~
;:~           related environmental factors.
         2.   To educate the public on the environmental
              consequences of urbanization throughout the
              Planning Area through documentation of facts
              and illustrate methods of preserving environ-
              mental amenities.
         3.   To identify and assess Federal, state, County
              and City regulations and their enforcement as
              they relaj:e to impacts of development on the
              environment.
         4.   To make regulations which would minimize j:he
              detrimental impact of development on soil and
              vegetation.
         5.   To encourage erosion control techniques which
              local agencies may employ to prevent or
              minimize erosion.
1                                2'3.
1
J

D.   Apathy to Conservation Practices
          As described in the Open Space Element, today, the
                                                                  ,."r
flow of metropolitan areas is to the smaller cities and more
rural counties, governmental policies have not encouraged
conservation practices, therefore; urban sprawli the auto~
mobile and the influx of people have caused detrimental
environmental impacts.
          Major factors of urbanization causing environmental    [
                                                                 L
impacts are:
     1.   Removal or damage of vegetation on construction sites.
                                                 .
     2.   Grading of land for homesites, roads and utilities.
     3.   Alteration of natural drainage patterns.
     4.   Creation of impervious surfaces by construction of
          roads, parking areas and homes.
     5.   Pre-emption of land use.
     6.   Introduction of more people and vehicles.
     7.   Disposal of solid and liquid waste.
          Detrimental enfironmental impacts from urbanization
are:
     1.   Accelerated erosion and sedimentation.                 [
     2.   Loss of vegetable cover.
     3.   Polluted water.
     4.   LoSS of fish and wildlife hab~tat.
     5.   Over-use of recreational areas.
     6.   Diminished surface water.
     7.   Reduced ground water recharge.
     8.   Increased flood hazard.
     9.   Diminished grazing lands.
                                24.
        10.   Greater fire hazard.
        11.   Lack of access to public lands, streams and lakes.
        12.   Intensified air pollution.
         There is considerable opposition to establishment of
   strict environmental and conservation practices because they
   run counter to providing areas for urban developments and
  excessive concentration of people in·the foothill areas
  along streams and beaches.
  E.     Coordination with Other Agencies
              It is an absolute necessity that the various depart-
  ments of the two Cities and the County coordinate their planning
  decisions.   It is also an absolute necessity that they
  coordinate their decisions with other .1eve·ls of government.
  Coordination in accordance with the California Division of
  Forestry, the U. S. Soil Conservation Service, and with any
  Water Agency in the area and with all District and County
            ,
  Agencies where the question of water is involved.
  F. .   Coordination between the City and County
              Although the County government is responsible for all
  unincorporated lands, it should also be its responsibility to
  serve as·a coordinating agency in conservation matters.   The
  cities will adopt their own Conservation Element: but close
  coordination between the Cities and County will result in the
  framework of harmonious conservation practices in the Planning
  Area.
J

  IV.    OPEN SPACE, CONSERVATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS -
         PLANNING AREA
                                                                                       r
                         .                              .
                                                                                       r
                               ."
         The. followingcDnservation, environmental· an.dopen space.
  considerations were researche.d and analyzed as a basic foundation
  on which .the bpenSpace Plan is designed •.         Items of major signi-
. fican'cei are inciudedint.his section of theConseirvation and Open
  Space Element of the General Plan for the planning areas of the·
  two Cities involved.
        A.       Location'
               .           . .
                The two Cities' are . located fifteen (15) miles southerly
 of·San Luis Obispo and immediately south of Pismo Beach.              Grover
 City abuts.thei Pacific Ocean  "..
                                     and Arroyo,Grande
                                               .
                                                          lies j1;lst east of
 Grover City.       State Highway 101. serves both Cities with. cormeqtions      ", "~
 to Santa Barbara.and·Los.Angeles         ~o the.sc:,uth and San Luis. Obispo
                                                                                    .~
 and San Francisco to the north,          The City of Grover city is also
 served'by State Highway 1 and the main line of the Southern Pacific
                                                                                     0,
                                                                                     l~
 Railroad.
               Both Cities lie a short distance from the richagricul-.
 tural lands of the upper ArroYo Grande ,Valley •          Much of the economy .
                                                                                     I
of the area is dependant upon agriculture .and tourism.
        B.     Climate
               The climate of the Planning Area which is adjacent to
the Arroyo Grande Valley, . the Nipomo Mesa and waters of San Luis
Obispo Bay and the Pacific· Ocean on the west has a moderate climate.
The summers are long and dry with a narrow range of temperature
and frequent.fogs typical for c6astalareas.
              Winters are only llloderately wet.      The south coastal
                                                                                    [
area averages between 12 and 16 inches of rain per year.               Killing      I,
                                                                                    t,
                                        26.'
                                                                                    f
                                                                                    t

          ,.
          l
         r
         r
      ,< [
      .J
'1,
.,  a    r
         ," ~
          t
         I
         I
          r
          [
          l
         I
          [
          t
          [
    frosts are rare in the Arroyo Grande Valley and the climate permits
    double and triple cropping practices.
          C.    Geologic Regions
                The Arroyo Grande Valley,Arroyo Grande Creek and San Luis
   Obispo Bay have a significant effect on the geology of the area.
   The deposits of alluvium soil in and around Arroyo Grande are signi-
    ficant.    The hilly areas northerly of Arroyo Grande are primarily
   sedimentary rocks non-marine in character.      On the southerly side of
   the city the hills are composed primarily. of middle miocene marine.
   rock..    Grover City and Oceano on the other hand is primarily mar.ine
   terrace deposits and of coarse dune sand along the San Luis Obispo
   Bay.    The portion of the alluvium deposits rise southerly ofOcsano
   and particularly along the east-west portion of Highway land
   easterly of Highway 1 as it-swings northerly toward Pismo Beach.
   This formation provides some of the good agricultural ground in the
   County similar to San Luis Valley.
          Arroyo Grande Creek bisects Arroyo Grande in.an east-west
   direction and then swings south-westerly of HighwaylOl, 'southerly
   of the Grover City limits into the Oceano area and finally into the
   San. Luis Obispo Bay.
          D.    Topography
                The topography map of the Planning Area is shown following.
]  this section.     It·indicates that the elevations run from sea level
.j to approximately five hundred (500) feet.     In the major portion of
J
   the Planning Area the slopes are relatively gentle.      The primary
   differences in elevation are indicated as north and south of the
   built up areas in Arroyo Grande and north easterly from Grand
   Avenue and northerly in the City of Grover City.
h                                       28.

...............                • ...:.",- ••• -.>
                                                                                              GBOLOGY
                             ~
                                   7"
                                           o
                                                .-
                                                     -n
                                                        -   <>
                                                                                                                    +.>,
                                                                                                                       0+
                                                                                                                         "  .0.
                                                                                                                               ">
                                                                    a
                                            LEGEND
                                                                          <:l
              ~-   1Juo.s...
                   ~,.
                   c..._ .......".r...... D<... m
                                                                      -.-~""
                                                                      -   ..
                                                                      -. '<
                   1\"....... , IIM"._ ....... T... ",. D.... ,,,,,
                   1\"....... - . ....                               ::. '»"
                   I\, •..f\......... - ....
              'fERrIAln'
                   I\,o-P\.!,_",,-.,..                                -0
                   ~, ..... M> . .      1.oo<n1'l.1_.1IM'..           -1'10>.
                   _!,OC ...            I'IM".                        -1\0
                   ",.....                11M,..                      . . ....
                   '-"'~~,    ..... ""'...
                             ~roc."
                                                                      -"'
                   ~,_.VOl,CNO"
                   ~totfJj.-,,-               . . . .,
                   ~, ..... v.woIC'" .............TI<     1«;..
                                                                      -", "
                                                                      _I!o
                                                                      ... ~
                   OI., ••,:r... :Ioo......                           .110
               !IM\I1VIlIEI!
                   TOIT'-       r..,...,., ("'.....   WL) Ilo=
                                                                      -"
               JilAAS$lt-Ql!TAtE!IUS_fRIIIItlS~FtiIllll'l'IQII
                   1.00.. "' .........      1\10,,,                   -0                                                ""O~esr
                   F....'''... _....                                  -kl'
                   f .... ."OM ~TI .. VowI"e ... R... v.w." Roc .... 1:\"
                   ~"",,,~,         ........,,,,,,,,,,",-
             ARROYO GRANDE                                                                                 Mm
             and GROVER CITY
             SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNTY,                                           CALIFORNIA
                                     _                   ~G
                                           .... ,....." .... ,....  ......,. . a>oo:IIt......
                                                                                                ----------- ~.--.--

L ~  Lc'c'                             ~             t.: .~::'::.: ~ ij#'[iii:5i """-",,,  ~ ,'<J     ~     ~            ~-~ ~ ~            .:....-~...;J
                                                                                                                                                          - ~.~-
                                                               TOPO.GRAPHY
                                                                                          o.~,\)
                                                                                                  <',
                                                                                                        ~-:"f
        ~.~~~)                                                                                               '<
                                                                                                               ",
                                                                                                                  "
                ('"".                                                                                               " .,
                       ,.-\"\  .
                                <~
                                                                                                                               <.
                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                  '."
                                                                                                                                      " <.,
                                       o
                                        ('"';
                                          ':\~,
                                             ,
                                              "-,,.,
                                               -."
    ARROYO GRANDE
    and GROVER CITY
    SAN l.1,1"tS OBISPO COUNTY.              CALIPORNI..6.
                             . "'- . . .
                                   ' J _'" __
             _ .• ,... """',.... ,11<.

        Because of the prevalence"of relatively gentle, slopes there
  will probably be considerable competition for the land particularly
  in the areas of less than ten (10%) percent cross slope.     As indi-
  cated in the County report this is a major land use problem because
  desirable land use 'patterns'are frequently sacrificed for economic
  profit and mayresultin,ineffioient,use of landresollrces.       This
  occurs partioularly when' the'best agrioulturelandlying within
  the Planning Area is used for urban expansion.
        E.    Soil Types
              There are four (4) distinot soil types in thePlqnning
  Area.    The soil northeasterly and southwesterly of Arroyo Grande
  is Class 1 soil and is very good oultivable land.    It has deep
  soil; relatively level with littleor'no erosion.,    It,is adaptable
I to a wide var:i,etyof agrioulturaluses.To the southeast of'
  Arroyo Grande is Class Gsoil whioh is well suited for grazing.       It
  is not arable beoause of the steeper slopes, ard this area is" sus-
  ceptible to erosion with its shallow soils.    This area requires more
  careful management than Classes 1 through 5.    This olass'is,not
  considered suitable for cultivation.    Surrounding Arroyo Grande
  Valley to tne north and east'of the Planning Area is Class 7 soil
  which is only fairly well suited for grazing.    It has limitations
  for use beoause of steep slopes,shallow soils and exoessive erosion.
  This area requires oareful management praotioes.    Portions of
  Arroyo Grande and Grover City are in Class 4 land whiohis ,oonsidered
  fairly good land suitable for,ocoasional oultiv<;ltion.  It is perhaps
1 best suited for pasture lands or orchards.    There is a narrow band
                                     31.
:"~ ~         L,c: _.        ~          ;::..:,;.;..;;
                                           GENERAL SOIL TYPE
                                                            l~.::~ ~ ",," ~.!I!;.· I,
                                                                                      .... ";...:3 ,LloiI
                                                                                                          - "-''-'" ~ L.----1 ~ ~
                      ...,
                        ...
                             -""
                           e'>
                                 - ("')
                        LEGE'ND
     aE       Very Good Cultiva.ble Land,
                Deep BoH. Nearly Level.
     m        G,ood Cultiva.ble Land. Gentle
                Slopes. MO.deratel~eQ Soil.
     m.l      Fairly Good Land. Beiib _ e l l for
                11&7, Paature. Oreh~ &VIneya
     ~'oil    Well Suited for Grazing or Forestry.
                Steep Slopes.                        ~
     r-~
     L Vll I Fairly Well Suited for ~zlD8' or
                Foresiry. Very Steep Slopes.
     Iiiiii'"
     ma       Land uot Sui1led for Cultivation.
                 Grazing or Forestry, Mar
                 for Wildllfe, Recreation.
         e    Erosion
         ,    Soil
               ARROYO GRANDE
               and GROVER CITY
               8..Ir.N LUIS OlllSPO COUNTY.            CALlPORNIA
                                  . '" .
                          __ ,","""",,;:J

    of Class 8 land along San Luis Obispo Baywhich,is not suited for
    cultivation or grazing; however, ,it may be used for wildlife
    habitat and recreation.
         F.   Natural Vege,tation
              The natural vegetation in the Planning Area of the Two
   Cities is influenced by climate and location of 'topographic features.
              Grass is the prevailing: 'ground, cover in the 'lowlands of
    the area.  Scattered oaks give some portion of the steeper areas the
   appearance of a park.    Chaparral is found in the hills above the,
   wooded sections.   Typical use for these areas is grazing.      The major
   areas of Class 1, 'Qr cultivable land, is in the Arroyo Grande Valley.
   The U.S. SoilConservati6nService Vegetation Classifications were
   used ,for the graphic presentation shown'following this page.
         G.   Natural Resources
              The primary natural resources withinthe'Planning Area'are
   the agricultu,ral soils, in the Arroyo Grande' Valley, and the beaches,
   along San Luis Obispo Bay.    The soils of the Arroyo Grande Valley
   are generally well suited for tru6kfarming and are triple cropped
'1
   annually rotating such vegetables asbeans,broccoli, cabbage,
   cauliflower-, lettuce, celery al1d peppers;
 ,
              The natural land forms and unique    featu~es of the areas
   to the:east of the Planning Area and the areas along the coast are
   of, great value as a natural resource.    The mountains provide enjoy-
 ]
J  ment'and recreation to millions of people annually,      Conservation
   of both the beaches and the,mountain areas is of major benefit to
   every citizen of the County and Si\::ate and can be considered a-prime
   natural resource,
                                     33 •
 J

                                                             VEGETATION
                                                                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                                           L:,:::,:;,::I  Gr.....land
                                                                                                           E*::;:;:;:;*i*i   Agriculture
                                                                                                           I;:;;'t)->};)     Chaparral & Brush
                                                                                                           C=:J              Wooded. Grassland
                                                                                                          Q:]                Beaches
     .,,:.,
              ~
              '.
                   ..   \   '.
                                     ~)
ARROYO GRANDE
and GROVER CITY
SA.N 1.U(S OBISPO COUN'l'Y,               CA.1.IFO:RN ....
        ~_",...",.-_-,_.., ,ff}:;.         ,..".:
                                                                    _..   --...   -   -   ~   .   -   ... __ .-.   __ ._..
     H.   Hydrology
  ,
          Three considerations have a primary effect on land use.
"
     Ground water resources, water quality and flood control.
I         The Arroyo Grande Creek roughly bisects the Planning Area
     of the,two Cities running from the Lopez Reservoir through
    Arroyo Grande, Grover City and Oceano and ,finally emptying
1    into San Luis Obispo Bay.,
~
          In, the South County area, Lopez Reservoir water releases
~    serve the urban areas and replenish ,the ground water basin.
    The water supply has been estimated to be adequate to accommo-
    date projected urban and agriculture demands until the year
    1990.   However, both Arroyo Grande and Grover City have contracts
    for water from the Lopez project.    Grover City's contract calls
    for 800 acre feet, the,total requirement for the city is 950
    acre feet, the necessary balance is pumped from the groundwater
    basin.
          Arroyo Grande's per year entitlement is 2,290 acre feet;
    The total requirement'of:the city can be supplied from this
    source.
          Not all of the communities in the water district have cOn-
    tracted for .Lopez water in sufficient quantities to serve their
    immediate or, future needs.   As indicated above, Arroyo Grande
    has contracted for ample water to meet anticipated needs until
    1990.   However, Grover City and Pismo Beaqh have exceeded their
    contract allotments and are presently looking for supplemental
    water to meet growth requirements.
                                    35.
                                                                         i
 It is estimated by the State Department of Water Resources              ~
Bulletin No. 18, that there is an annual safe yield of sixty-
 five hundred (6,500) acre feet.    The water users within the
                                                                       t
Arroyo Grande basin have not made a determination of ground           [
water rights and the water.users have not pursued water
                                                                      1..
allocations.                                                          ~
      Occasional flooding in the area is due primarily to the
heavy rains.    There are no permanent flood areas;   The majority   I
of them, except along the creek areas and natural drainage areas
will be solved with adequate drainage structures.     The primary
                                                                     f
                                                                     ~
flood area is along Arroyo Grande Creek.     There are other         ~
occasional flood areas easterly of Valley Road and a portion
of the Valley Road High School campus; northerly of Newsome         I
Springs Rbadand along a portion of Cobert Canyon .Road.
of hydrologic features follows.
                                                            A map
                                                                    r
      In Grover City, the principal problem areas are along the     t
north side of Grand Avenue from 2nd Street to 12th Street where
surface flow often overflows the curbs.    There is also heavy     I
storm water flow on Mentone Avenue from 4th Street to 13th
Street where it often nearly tops the gutters and dikes.     South
                                                                   I
on 4th Street to Grand Avenue also has a heavy flow of storm       [
waters.    There is also some flooding along Front Street in the
                                                                   I:.,.
southerly part of the City.                                        k
      1.    Water Supply
            The Planning Area could have an adequate water supply
                                                                   I
      from the Lopez Water Supply Project and ground water
                                                                   L
      supplies if they enter. into contracts for an adequate
      allotment of water.                                          ~
                                36.
                                                                   [
                                                               )                   ~~~\   HYDROLOGY
                                                                                      -',
                          ..-<>
                              -v
                                    (>
                                          .-<
                                              -n
                                                    '.~""
                                                        ,,--,.
                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                  '.-"
                                                               Q
                                                                  \j
                                                                    "" ~
                                                                        '::.
                         LEGEND
~~~ Ground. Water Recharge
                             Areas
.............. ..........- Major Streams
~                            Minor Streams
~:                           Reservoirs
          ARROYO GRANDE
          and GROVER CITY
          SAN LUIS OlUSPO COUNTY,                                      CALIFORNIA.
                              - . -9
                              L....
                              IIM< • ., .. '.....,,."""IIC.
                                                                              -
                                                                       . ......
                                                               ......,"'_""'"

)
               The City of Arroyo Grande is the only major water
         purveyor in San Luis Obispo County to have a current
         supply of water adequate for continued growth during
         the next thirty Years.
               The Cities in the Planning Areas are also eligible
         for water from the State Water Project in the year 1980.
j
.        Each of the present Cities will be eligible for.· approxi-
         mately one thousand (1,000) acre feet . per year with an
         increasing amount each year until 1990 when the full
         entitlement would be delivered them.    The County and
 ~
         Cities in the Planning Area have been paying their share
         of this supplemental source of water through taxes levied
        by the San Luis Obispo County Flood Control and Water
        Conservation District.
   I.   Hazard Lands
        Within the ,Planning Area there is only    one basic hazard
   and this is hydrologic.    The other two basic hazards which are
   pr.esentin the County are geologic and land slide hazard,s.
   Because of their basic unstable quality, these hazard areas
   should often become open space or agriculture lands and
   development of· structures' should not be encouraged,   The three
   major hazards in the County are:
        1.    Seismic Hazards
              As indicated on the following map, the Planning Area
        does not seem to have faultoccti.rrences. The primary
        earthquake faults with the, greatest potential of activity,
        are the San Andreas and the Nacimiento.     There are other
                                 38.

                                                    ~
                                           GEOLOGIC   HAZARDS
                   '.~
                                                              Fault
                                                              Fault (Inferred)
     "'""
       ""r.
             .....
                ""
                   -("'>
                             a
                               e,
                                 'C'"\
                                  .~.
                                     '?'.
ARROYO GRANDE
and GROVER CITY
SA.N LUIS OlllSPO COUNTY.           CALIFORNIA.
                   . '" .
         :~':-'''''''m.t'-,~ ...-",,--...r_
   faults indicated on the 'geologic map. ' 'They are the Huer-
   huero Fault and the East and West Huasna Faults.      The
  West Huasna Fault is approximately five miles easterly
   of Arroyo G~ande; the West Huasnaand Nacimiento Faults
   are from twenty to twenty-five miles easterly of the Plan-
  ning Area.   All the faults run in the same general direction
   as the San Andreas Fault - northwesterly throughout the
  County.
  2.    Land Slide Areas
        Data on land slide areas within San Luis Obispo
  County are incomplete.   However because of the topography
  and type of soil it does not seem to be susceptible to
  land slides except for possibly the hilly or mountainous
  areas to the east of the Planning Area.
        Areas where concentration of known land slides exist
  in the County are in several small canyons extending
  northeast of the Estrella Rive; along fault traces of the
  Nacimiento Faults just west of Atascadero Los Tablas
  region; and southwest of Santa Margarita.      There,are also
  concentrations of slides in the zone of clayey material
  overlying igneous and shale bedrock along the coastal
  slopes of the Santa Lucia Range, Port San Luis in the
  hills behindCayucas.
"       In general, younger sedimentary and fairly    consoli~
  dated rocks of,pleistoceme and pliocene age are more
  subject to erosion and land sliding than some of the
  relatively hard and sedimentary rocks of the tertiary
                          40.
      or older periods.
            The Franciscan formation of the mountainous coast
      area of the County is a zone of both weak and resistant
      rock.   Land slides are common in the sandstones and
      shales of the Franciscan terrain and the shore line has
      been deeply etched into these rocks wherever erosion is
      active along the coast.
      3.    Flooding Hazards
            The Planning Area is subject to spot flooding when
      heavy rainfall occurs as indicated in the hydrology por-
      tionof thisseqtion.'    The Cities are not considered
      within the primary flood plain.
J.    Fish, Wildlife and Natural Habitat-
      As stated previously most of· the natural habitat for the
fish and game is in the mountain areas to the east of the Plan-:-
ning Al;-eas; there are varying amounts of wildlife in the foot-
hills surrounding the Planning Area.     Retention of this habitat,-
therefore, ·is.basic when planning for fish and wildlife.
      Development and reclamation-projects have a-pronounced.
effect on fish and wildlife.    The effects range from entirely
detrimental to enhancement.    In planning any alteration to the
present environment, consideration should be given to the·
effects on fish and wildlife.     Even though most of this habitat
is not within the. Planning. Area it is ;vital to the-surrounding
area.
      Riparian habitat, and wetland habitat have been greatly
reduced in the past and are now in short supply.     Any alteration,
except for fish and wildlife enhancement· should not be
                              41.

1
1      supported by the two cities in the Planning Areas.     Environment
J      which includes a variety of wildlife even though not directly
       in.the Planning Area still makes a more enjoyable place for
1      people to live.
1           Present land uses which result in siltation and pollution
      of streams or coastal waters should be carefully monitored and
~l    if necessary, corrected, to assure clean and productive habitat.
      K.·   Existing Public. Lands
~           Of the 2,122,248 acres in San Luis Obispo County, some
~
      14.53% are in Federal ownership and 0.96% in State ownership,
      0.98% in County ownership and 0.10% in City ownership.       School
]     Districts and special districts account for 0.04%.      Total
      government ownership is 16.61%.     The public owned lands within
J
ll    the Planning Are·a outside of local government ownership are the
~ ... State beaches and the State-owned golf course westerly of·
~
      Highway 1.   The following map indicates the present Pismo State
j     Beach, the golf course and possible future acquisition westerly
      of Highway 1.   Existing ownership at the present time is 969
      acres.   Proposed future acquisition. is 857 acres.    There is .
      presently 30,400 feet of ocean frontage; the proposed acquisi-
      tion would add 7,000 additional feet.
            In addition to these holdings there are, of course, the
      County Camp. Ground at,. Oceano Beach itself running. several miles
      on the westerly edge of the Planning Area.     The park and
      recreation facilities in each of the Cities and the Planning
      Area is also shown on the map on page 49.
                                            42.

 L.   Agricultural Lands
      Agriculture is the most important economic activity in the
Arroyo Grande Valley and the Nipomo Mesa.    The areas in the large
valley bottom land west of the Santa Lucia Range which are under             1"
                                                                            r,.
the moderating influence of the Ocean are valuable crop lands.     The       >0:
soils are very deep, well drained and inherent fertility is very
high.   There is a very long growing season with water.available and
the area is presently beyond urbanizing factors.
      Agricultural use of suitable land has been and is expected for
some· time to remain a valuable and desirable· use of open space.   'It
is a use, which unlike many other uses, is capabie of functioning         lI!
                                                                          ~
without expensive government services.    Its aesthetic values are
well known and its environmental impact for the most part, is less
detrimental than most other uses.
      Numerous secondary benefits to the public are provided to the
public through agricultural use.    It provides visual relief from       F
                                                                         t
urban areas and serves to dissapate the air pollution emanating from
such areas.   Of benefit to the agriculturists is the possibility of
                                                                         i
utilizing his land for other compatible uses.    Such activities and
camping and horse ranches can provide additional income to ranchers
as well as relieving some pressures on public recreation.,
                                                                        [£.;'.'
      Up to the present time six (6) agricultural preserves have been
established in the County amounting to approximately 400,000 acres
or 20% of the County.   The current program has been successful in
eliminating the speculative value for many agricultural properties;
however, it has yet to preserve either those areas adjacent to the
                                                                        r
Cities and communities or the better agricultural lands.    New
                                                                        L
efforts are being made to rezone or create preserves in both the
                                43.

                                                          AREAS
                     .-
ARROYO GRANDE
and GROVER CITY
S .... N LUIS OBISPO COUNTY.                  CALIPORNIA.
           ".M. '9':'
            .....,."'I ....."rt.,K.
                                         - ....~.
                                    ......,.. _.,....
                                                                I,
    upper and lower Arroyo Grande Valley.    It appears that some of
    these efforts will be successful.
         The agricultural uses of San Luis Obispo County as a whole
    are divided into six (6) categories, each with uses of the same
    approximate size; crop land, marginal crop land, orchards, vine-
    yards, .dry farm and range land and marginal range land.   The
    categories or classifications all depend on the type of soil,
    the steepness of terrain and the availability of water.
   M.    Recreation and Park Land
         San Luis Obispo County is recognized as an outstanding area
   for year-round outdoor recreation.    The County's forests, beaches,
1   lakes and parks offer limitless activity for those who enjoy
I.
   swimming, tennis, picnicking,. golfing, boating, fishing, hunt-
j  ing. or scenic excursions.
         Most·of the public recreation facilities are on the westerly
I  fringe of the Planning Area but are within reach of all residents
   of the two Cities and their Planning Areas.
I        As. stated previously, the Pismo Beach State Park and golf
   course are westerly of Highway 1 in the Grover City-Oceano area.
   along with the County Camp Grounds.    Each of the Cities, of course,
   have a Park and Recreation Program locally.    In addition there
   are many thousands of acres of public and private recreation
   land in the mountains to the east of the Planning Area.
         Much of the recreation planning has emanated from the County.
   Arroyo Grande also has a Park and Recreation· Element and a
I  Beautification Element.    The County Recreation Plan of 1966
   sets' vital guidelines for the basis of recreation. planning in the
1  the. County.   Bowever it dealt primarily with recreational
                                 45 •
.

 activities, in contrast to the emphasis on open space needs and     i
 conservation.
      In 1965 the County approved an extensive program of acqui-     i
 sition and management of over six thousand (6,OOO) acres of BLM
                                                                     r
property throughout the County.      Much land will be acquired
for open space, while other parcels will have a minimum devel-       i
opment.   Under. joint powers agreement with Monterey County an
extensive recreational study of Nacimiento-San Antonio Basins
was'undertaken in 1969.     This study involved an evaluation of    r
                                                                    I:
the two. lakes as a StatE;l-wide recreationalresoilrpe and set
standards and principles for their development,                     I
      The County has undertaken two other recreational studies
which are currently, in progress;     The first involves the        I
                                                                    ~
Tri-County study (San Luis, Monterey, Santa Cruz) environmental
study of the coast line and coastal zone.      The second involves
                                                                    F
a comprehensive environmental study of Morro Bay and its water-     t
shed.   A multi-agency task force ,composed of all levels of
government, 'will make an.extensivestudy of. the ecology and       I
recreation and development potential of this very . sensitive
watershed.
                                                                   I
      Each of the. two Cities in the Planning Area have also dev-'
                                                                    E
eloped studies indicating their'recreational needs and have
made some progress toward actually providing these facilities.      ~
      The State Department of Parks and" Recreation has acquired
                                                                   [
several large properties in the County ,and are negotiating for
addi.tional lands for open space preservation and recreation
                                                                   h
development.   Other State and Federal agencies have developed
                                                                   I;.•
recreation,facilities in ,connection with reservoirs.     The U.S. Ii
                                 46.
                                                                   [

   Forest Service has developed camping and other recreation faci-
   lities within the National Forest.    The County has developed
   major regional recreational facilities at Lopez Lake easterly
   of the Planning Area, Nacimiento and Santa Margarita Lakes.
        Gradual County acquisition of BLM property has been pro-
   grammed over a period of fifteen years.     The yearly allocation
   of funds has been set aside 'for this program.    In future years
   some recreational facilities will be established within these
   remote parcels.   The State Department of Parks and Recreation
  is planning acquisition of additional lands along the coast on
  the western fringe of the Planning Areas as has been indicated
  on the section of Public Lands.
        Private recreation facilities playa key role in the San
  Luis Obispo leisure time activities and the activities of the
  residents of the two Planning Areas.     Each of the Cities has
  some recreation facilities within the incorporated areas and
           ,-
  are contemplating additional areas devoted to passive and
! active recreation.
        A ,description of the City, County and State facilities in
  those areas will be given in the city section of the Plan.
  The Planning Area recreation facilities are indicated on the
  map following this section.
  N.    Inter-Relationship of Open Space Considerations
        All relevant considerations have been summarized in this
  portion of the Open Space Element.     Topic by topic, each com-
  ponent of the natural and human environment has been explored
  and analyzed in terms of its relationship to planning open
  space needs.
                                     47.
      It is necessary at this point to restate the fact that,
although each consideration is unique and can be studied
independently, they must now be tied into a workable system
of  environmentalnecess~ties  which will result in a functional
Open Space Plan.   The following are recommendations on the
major considerations and coordinations of these independent
solutions into a manageable Open Space Plan.
                              48.
1                                  RECREATION
                                                                                       .--
                                                                                           PLAN
                   'c-"
 1,                      .~    t·~··
 J                             .:...
                                 r ,
                                       0"
                                  I  ,-t
                                                                                                                     ,,
                                                                                                                                  --
                                                                                                                                      >-
                                                                                                                                     /'
.!
~: '                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                      ./-
                                                                                                      \     •       ".V ,
                                                                                             - .p
                                                                                                             y.'""/'
                                                                                                ,,~
                                                                                             Q.'>       \.
                                                                                                           '-'
~.•J
                                                                                                                          " .. :"
                 LEGE.ND
      Propo.ed
     ~---.,
     , _ _ _ .JI
     ~
     ,..-----,           State Park
     ''''      ,
     L _____ ..J
                         City,County Parks
..                       Schools
.J
f                        Greenbelt
                        ARROYO GRANDE· GROVER CITY
                            SA.N LUIS             OBISPO           COUNTY,      CALIF.
                                          t
                                           ......            x(()'? .........
                                            ......,.........""",,. """',.._..."
 1
  )
  ;
 JI

 ]
1   v.     THE COUNTY'S OPEN SPACE PLAN
           The Open Space Plan of San Luis Obispo County is composed of
J   recommendations for agricultural land, wildlife habitat, natural
    resource land, scenic land, wildlife watershed,watersrred and water
    recharge lands, multi-use land, rural land and hazard lands.      The
1   composite of all these topics form the Open Space· Plan for San Luis
    Obispo County.   T4e following are the specific items discussed:
·1
 J         A.   Agricultural Lands.
.,f             The preservation of the County's agricultural resources
 J
    is paramount and current efforts must be devoted to changing the
]   trends acting to degrade the agriclil tural economy.   Agricultural
    use of suitable land has been and is expected for some time to
    come to remain a valuable and desirable use of open space.     It is
    a use which, unlike most other uses is·capable of functioning
    without extensive government services.    Its aesthetic values are
    well known and its envirbnmentalimpact for the most part, is much
    less detrimental than most other ·uses.   It is a use ·of land worthy
    of encouragement and .preservation.  Not only is agriculture impor-
 'I tant to the County, but to the State and to the. Nation.    This. is
  j
  '
    evident not only from the economic gains of agricultural production
 I  but from the primary and secondary benefits to the public which
U
    are'provided through agricultural use including providing valuable
    and desirable open space, visual relief from urban areas and serves
    to dissipate air pollution emanated from urban areas.
          As stated previously six agriculture preserves have been
I   established, accounting for approximately 400,000 acres
1
                                     50.

 (20% of the County).   Although 'the current 'program 'has 'been silccess-
ful in eliminating the speculative value from many agricultural pro-
perties,it has yet either to preserve those 'areas adjacent to the
cities and communities or much of the better 'agricultural lands.
       The minimum criteria to qualify for 'agricultural preserves
status should be established 'and all owners" 'of commercial agricul-
tural land should be encouraged to participate in the program.        The
safeguarding of agricultural lands is essential as a protection
afforded other types of land use.
       Objective:
       To preserve and protect the productive agricultural lands and
agricultural economy of San Luis Obispo County.
       Recommendations:
       1.   Continuation of agricultural uses in designated flood
       hazard and gelogic hazard areas of the County should be
       encouraged.  Agricultural preserve contracts should be
       available for viable farming operations in these hazard
       areas, even if they are within urban reserve lines.
       2.   The extension of agricultural uses into marginal areas,
      where severe erosion and siltation would result should be
       discouraged.
       3.   The depletion of ,existing underground waterresourbes
       should be supplemented by serving urban water needs through
       importation, desalinization or surface water impounds.
       4.   The exploitation of underground water,supplies should
      be discouraged and a program of supplementing and recharging
      aquifers should be studied.    Available Lopez Water, both
      surface and underground supplies, should be adjucated to
                                51.
   provide for equitable and fair distribution of available
   water.
   5.    Precise agricultural  ~oning should be established
    for all commercial agricultural land.   Appropriate lot
   si~es should be included to protect rural landsfrompre-.
   mature and detrimental land division.
   6.    Rural ranch properties should be encouraged to
   establishallowable.compatible uses complimentary to
i  agricultural uses·of the.property.
   7.    The county should be divided into designated agricul-·
I  tural areas and thereafter applications for. agricultural
   preserves should be accepted from owners' of qualified
,  agricultural property.
   8.    Prime agricultural lands wherever possible, should be
   separated and protected from other uses and only those
   uses related to agriculture should be located on prime or
   good agricultural lands.
   9.   Agricultural uses should be encouraged as a means of
   providing open space.
  10.    Prime agricultural la.nd must be ree6gnb:ed as· an
                                                    ,
   equal to ather major land uses and given the prQbection
   it deserves as a developed use.
  11.   Annexation policies should be considered and the
   County requested to establish greenbelts on the J)er.iphe,t'y
   of Cities to prevent unreasonable expansion irito prime
   areas.
                         52.

 B.   Recreation Land
      Once taken for granted but now recognized as a priceless
possession, the Recreation Plan, adopted in 1968, emphasized
that San Luis Obispo County was endowed with a combination of           r
                                                                       i
                                                                       l
unique and varied natural resources.      It recognized the impor-
tance of our recreational resources as an economic asset.
The objectives of that document were founded upon using the
                                                                       1.
recreation resources.     The report, prescribed a comprehensive       l'
program of resource development and protection so that all could
derive maximum benefits from the County's assets without des-
troying them.
     The broad category of recreation land includes the wide
range of uses, ranging from heavily developed sports :facilities
to isolated regions for hunting.      Each category of recreational
uses has a different impact on the land, separate conflicts
with other land uses and distinct land use requirements.
      Intensive recre'ation includes day-use activities, organized
sports facilities, travel-trailer parks, and other high density
activities.   If they destroy natural values and .have the char-
acteristics of urban development, intensive recreation activites
should not be considered as open space.      Intensive recreation
use has a moderate to severe impact on the environment, and
fragile ecological zones should be avoided.      However, unique
natural features, if protected, can be' a prime factor in d e t e r - [
mining location of intensive recreational land.      Caves, water
falls, coast line promontories, striking land forms and other         [
unusual features provide important focus of interest for a
recreational area.   Land use for intensive recreation, if well
                                53.
 ]
 i         managed, can retain scenic watershed and limited wildlife
           value, but is incompatible with agricultural use.
 J               Extensive recreation on the other hand includes low in-
           tensity activity such as hunting and hiking, which have a low
           environmental impact.    Land uses for extensive recreation can
           have steep slopes and geologic instability - it is not a major
           problem.   Such uses can be somewhat compatible with agricul-
           turaluses; however, problems of maintenance, vandalism, fire
           hazard and agricultural damage may result unless adequate
           policing is provided.
 iJ~.'.'.
                Wilderness areas are a special form of extensive recreation
           areas.   Open space designated for wilderness classification must
l
d,        be virtually untouched by roads and other signs of civilization.
          Only those modifications, such as trails, which invoLve very
a         little environmental impact can be allowed.     Wilderness areas are
 t        highly compatible with scenic, watershed, and wildlife values.
~
                Water-oriented recreation may be intensive or extensive,
          but is considered separately because of its dependence on water
          access.    Included are·swirnrning,fishing.and bOating activities.
          Except for access considerations, shore facilities associated
          with water recreation have the same characteristics and needs
          as intensive recreation uses,
                San.Luis Obispo's enormous potential for recreation is both
          a valuable assest and a serious problem.     The County has a
          virtually unparalleled opportunity for recreation.     However, the
          County also has the responsibility for keeping key recreational
          land and open space.    Another problem involving County recrea-
,
j
          tion land is its uneven distribution.     Because of the pressing
                                       54.

 needs of preserving coast line property, interior portions
 of the county are left with inadequate recreational services.
 Recreational facilities are distributed unevenly.   For example,
 coast line communities may have an abundance of beach area,           r
                                                                       L
                                                                       •
 but a deficiency of other park land.
      The County has approved an extensive program for acquisi-
tion and management of over 6,000 acres of ELM property through-
out the ,County.  Much land will be required for open space
while other parcels will have, minimum development.
      The State Department of Parks and Recreation has park
land westerly of the Arroyo Grande-Grover City Planning Area
and is considering extension of those facilities at the present
time.   The U. S. Forest Service has developed camping and
other recreational facilities within the National Forest.
      More parks and other forms of recreational facilities
will be required not only to satisfy the increased population,
but also the increasing amount of leisure time.    Increasing
                                                                   ~i
care must be taken to retain the natural beauty of San Luis        r!
Obispo County.   All proposed recreational facilities will be
carefully implemented to allow maximum use without damage to
the ,environment so that future generations will be able to
enjoy existing amenities.
                                                                  L,:,"
                                                                  L
                                  55.
                                                                  L

]
1          Objective:
           To reserve land for recreational facilities, encourage private.
;1
     recreational development and other open uses in categories character-
   . istic and beneficial to . the· residents of San Luis Obispo county as well
     as to meet tourist's needs today and in the future.
           Recommendations:
           1.    Provide for the orderly acquisition and development and
                 control of the comprehensive recreation sYEitem forSan Luis
                 Obispo County, including the Planning Area.
          2.     Recreation resources should be protected for the future as·
                 those resources are largely irreplaceable natural assets.
           3.    Encourage or provide recreational facilities and other open
                 uses in central locations near all the living and working areas
               . and in areas of outstanding beauty sufficient to meet the needs
                 of the people to be served.
          4.     Proper commercial recreational uses should be encouraged to
                 augment the public recreational programs.
          5.     A priority system of acquisition and improvement of recreation
                 lands should be established by the County through adoption of
                 Part 2 of the Recreation Plans.
          6.     Specific plans should be formulated and adopted by the Board
                 of Supervisors for each County owned property.
          7.     Revenues derived from recreation or tourism should be made a
                part of the County's capital improvement program.
          8.    A committee, advisory to the Board of Supervisors, should be
                established to concentrate upon implementing an orderly program
                of recreation and park expansion and development.
          9 •   Scenic and open space easements, park land, and open space
                                          56.

      dedication should be acquired through subdivision and develop-
      ment process including, but not limited to:   creek reservations,
      wooded areas; flood plains, scenic and historic sites, shore
      land and other suitable areas.  ·Park lands should be evaluated       r
                                                                            L
      upon their practical usability and open space and its environ-
     mental quality.
10.  Standards for recreation improvement, maintenance and operation
     should be established and uniformly administered throughout
     the County.   A County plant nursery should be established and·       r
                                                                           t
     maintained to keep landscape and forestation supplies current
     with park land needs.
11.  Donations·and dedications of recreation lands and open spa:ce
     easements should be encouraged by the County.    Special·
     assistance procedures should be prepared for those wishing to        t
     donate or dedicate their property.
12.  Easements should be acquired for the County trail system.
     Trail links should be included to all major communities and
     the National Forest.   Provisions should be made to.insure the
     proper maintenance and policing of any proposed trail prior to
     its establishment.
13.  Public access to shoreline should be assured and implemented
     at every opportunity.
14.  A recreation zone should be adopted as a portion of the open
     space zoning ordinance, implementing preservation of.recrea-       I
    .tional resources.   Strict grading and development standards
     should be enforced.   All open space designated as potential       L
                                                                        f'!.'
     recreational land should be protected by proper application
     of zoning districts.
                                 57.
                                                                        [

          15.   The county Subdivision Ordinance should be ammended to in-
          clude park land dedication.    The fee, levied on a 'per-lot basis,
1
,j
          should be designated as an alternate to dedication in order ot
          avoid the creation. of small uncoordinated park properties.
          16.  Subdivision of immediate shore line area should be prohibited
          in favor of public shore line easements or dedications and bene-
          ficial public uses.   Adet{uate beach access should be a condition
         of map approval.
         17.    The implementation and operation of ,any future recreational
         programs should be coordinated with'alllevels of:government
         and local organizations,
    C.     Scenic Lands
           In San Luis Obispo County, the entire County is considered as
    scenic land.   Scenic lands are in general, areas which are visible to
    the general public and considered visually attractive.     Scenic lands
    may involve corridors along particular highways.     They also may be
    prominent natural land marks and they may include other,unusual
    features of the,landscape.
           Sensitive lands include areas with fragile ecological charac-
    teristics.   Disturbing the,natural balance in these areas may mean
J   that a rare plant life species would be destroyed, or that other
    unique features would be oblitereated.     Natural landmarks such as
','
    the Morros between San Luis Obispo and Morro, Bay, include mountains
    or other natural features with high scenic value.     Scenic backdrops
    include hillsides and ridges which rise above urban areas ormajor
J   highways.   Scenic vistas are points, accessible to ,the general
    public, which provide a sweeping view of the countrysie or coast line.
1
"
           Most scenic and sensitive lands in the County have   over~lapping
                                     58.
values as well.    Land use for watershed protection is compatible with
 scenic and sensitive values.   Properly managed grazing land can re-
 tain its scenic beauty, some damage to fragile wildlife species may
be inevitable.
      Many land uses however can eliminate or weaken the scenic and
sensitive values of an area.    Urban uses would greatly alter the land-
scape, destroying ecological values, although some scenic value may
be re-established.    Large road cuts and power transmission lines can
ruin the scenic beauty of an area.     r1iningand quarrying uses are also
incompatible with scenic and sensitive values.     Billboards can hide
                                                                             ,
or spoil scenic views.    All of these uses must be controlled if          I
                                                                           "
                                                                           i!
scenic value in the County is to be preserved.
      A scenic highway study of Route 41 and 101 over the Questa Grade     I
has been prepared by the ,Planning Department.
      The County recent1y'adopted into the Scenic Highway System, Lake
Nacimiento Drive and Interlake Road around Nacimiento Lake, the first
County highway so designated.    Two additional routes under considera-
tion are from Avila to Oceano and from the coast to Lopez Lake.
      Agricultural zones have been'used in 'i:hepast to protect scenic
values of an area.    Agricultural zones have been applied to several
                                                                          I
                                                                          f'
scenic corridors,   This Zone does not allow industrial or other uses
                                                                          t
which would destroy scenic values.     New billboards are prohibited in
these zones as well,
      The Zoning Ordinance also provides for "abatement of nonconforming  aI
                                                                          ij
billboards in these zones, with an amortizat,ion period of five years.
      Problems in preserving scenic and sensitive areas have developed
                                                                          L
because of lack,of coordination among various government and quasi-
                                                                          r
                                                                          t
                                   59.
                                                                          r-
]
1    public agencies.   Primarily, problems have arisen because no public
     agency or commission has taken the role of spokesman for scenic
-,
  "
   J
     values.
          Objective:
          To conserve, preserve, and maintain the scenic and sensitive
     lands of San Luis Obispo county and each of its cities.
          Recommendations:
          I.  Prepare 'a'more detailed scenic analysis of the County to
              identify areas of prime scenic value.    The study should
              establish precise corridors for proposed scenic' highways
              and roads in the County.    Natural landmarks, scenic rivers
              and streams, and other scenic landmarks should be identified.
          2.  An inventory of ecologically sensitive areas should be made.
          3.  Implementation of the existing ordinances causing billboard
              abatement should be undertaken.
          4.  Provisions for scenic. preservation should be adopted as a
              part of the open space zoning ordinance.    This zone should
              include two levels of restrictions.    A restrictive zone,
              applying.to scenic backdrops, should include strict grading
              and tree removal' restrictions, including prompt replacement
              of natural vegetation on cuts and fills.    Second, a prohibi-
J             tive zone should be designed for key scenic landmarks,
1             allowing only grazing use, with no grading, mining, quarry-
1
              ing, or transmission lines allowed.    Scenic easements should
              be acquired in conjunction with zoning in this area.
          5.  The subdivision review process should be revised to include
              more emphasis on scenic values.    The subdivision and lot
,             division ordinances should provide for preservation of
,
                                          60.
      trees or other scenic features.
  6.  A county and City Scenic Road System, supplementing State
      Scenic Highways should be established.   Emphasis should be
      placed on the use of these roads for recreation travel
     rather than for commercial or high-speed arterial use.
                                                                      '·<-
      Separate paths for non-motorized traffic should be included     ffi
                                                                      il
     within: the right-of-way.   Land use controls similar to
     those for scenic highways should be applied to the system.
  7. All sizeable marsh areas and lakes in the County should be
     preserved.   Warden Lake and Eto Lake should be purchased
     by the County.   The City of San Luis Obispo should purchase
     remaining marshland on the perimeter of Laguna Lake.     Pismo
     Beach, Grover City and the State should cooperate in pur-
     chasing Soda Lake which should be preserved as a wildlife
     refuge, with additional purchase of small parcels to round
                                                                     !.
     out BLM land.   A scenic easement should be established for     L
     the Dune Lakes and Oso Flaco to insure their preservation.
· 8. The Morro Peaks should be acquired as' scenic lahdIl\arks, with
     a continuous trail, liking San Luis Obispo and Morro Bay.
     Chimney Rock, near Lake Nacimiento, should be protected by
     scenic easement.
  9. ontario Ridge, between Sycamore Hotsprings and Cave Landing
     should be protected by a scenic easement.
10.  The County and State should cooper·ate in acql1iring scenic
     easements or purchaf'ling undeveloped shoreline property.
11.  Scenic easements should be acquired for private properties
                                                                     L
     within the Lopez Lake watershed.
                                 .6'1. -                             t

    D.   Multi~Use  Land and   Wild~ite  Fabitat
         Multi-use open space land generally includes the remote,
   mountainous areas of the County.       This land has several impor-
    tant functions and,. values; property in this category should not·
   be thought·of as "Leftover land".
         Multi-use open space land has several typical natural
   characteristics.    These areas usually have steep slopes (over
   30% is common) and are geologically unstable.       Vegetation con-
   sists of forest or chaparral;       Soils are poor and subject to
   severe erosion if· the land is disturbed.
         Land ownership is a mixture pf private and public domain;
   National Forest and BLM land make up a large percentage of the
l
iJ multi-use open space land.      Private land is usually in large
   parcels, although there·isap increasing breakdown of lot sizes
   in many areas,    Access to mOst lapd in this category is limited
   to unpaved roads or trails.
         ~he  need for preservation of multi-use open space land
   lies in its long-term, intrinsic value to the public.       Conversely;
   such land has low value for     ~ntenpive,  private·use for several
   reasons,    The poor soil and l1eavy vegetation restrict the agri-.
   cultural value of the land.      Other uses are limited by (al
   diff.iculty Of access, . (bl  refUoten~ss from public services, ,and
   (c) frequent lack of private water.
         Multi-use open space lapd has high conservation values.
   These values are extensive in natpre, applying to broad areas
   rather than specific locales, but this does not mean that they
   are less·· important.  The remotenefls and vegetative cover pro-
1
   vide good wildlife habitat, although there is a problem of
                                     62.

 forage and water for larger animals.   A wide variety of plant
 species, some unique to the County, are present in these areas.
 Since headwaters of most of the County's streams are located
                                                                   r
 in this land category, these areas have water management value.  rt.
Much of this area, particularly the National Forest and BLM
land, has value for extensive recreation uses such as hunting
and fishing.   While the scenic value of the multi-use open
space landis often limited by its remoteness, therein lies
some of the most spectacular scenery in the County.               f
                                                                  '.'
                                                                  M
      Floor hazards are also caused by development in multi-use
open space lands.    These hazards may affect the development
directly, in the form of flash floods,    There is also an ad-
verse effect on down-stream properties because of the increased
runoff caused by development.    Geologic and erosion hazards
are present in these areas as well.    Erosion caused by grading
                                                                  t
scars may permanently mar the scenic value of an area and cause   t
siltation downstream.    Mountainous areas of the County are
particularly plagued with earthquake faults, many of which
remain undiscovered but could c'ause great damage at any time.
      Several State and National agencies; as well as the County,
are involved in control of multi-use open space land.    The bulk
of these' areas are· included in the Los Padres National Forest.
The National Forest boundaries include some private ··land as
well as public domain.    The U.S. Bureau of Land Management has
jurisdiction over sizable portions·of the County, including
the Caliente wildlife Management Area and numerous smaller        [
parcels throughout the County.
                                                                  l
                               63.
                                                                  [

         Objective:
         Protect the multi-use open space lands of San Luis Obispo county
    and preserve these areas for wildlife habitat, managed recreational
    facilities such as hunt,.ing, and the scenic values of the area.
         Recommendations:
         1.  Develop specific land use plans for all public lands in the.
             multi-use open space category.
1
 j
         2.  The County should procede with planning all BLM properties
              scheduled for acquisition.
         3.  The U.S. Forest Service should be encourag~d to undertak~
              further studies, considering possible boundary changes to
             reflect watershed limits and other natural characteristics.
.'
         4.  No land should be removed from public domain without careful
             study to determine possible value to any government agency
             or the general public.     All parcels with existing or poten-
             tial value for recreation, water conservation, wildlife
             management, .. historical or scenic value should b~ retained.
             All BLM land adjoining j:heNationalForest should be kept
             in public ownership.
         5.  Public domain classified for retention should be :t:"ounded into
j
j            larger units to provide for better management and utilization.
         6.  Public access to large units of public land, particularly in
             the National Forest, should be improved, .provided that
             sufficient policing and maintenance can be provided.     Emphasis
             should be placed on trail access rather than additional l;aods.
        E.     Rural Residential Land
        Rural residential land is all that land which is used for residen-
   tial purposes and which is outside the Urban Reserve Lines or existing
   communities.    These are included as an Element of Open Space because
                                       64 •

                                                                      ;
                                                                      L.
of their rural nature and their relatively low density.    To be
designated as a rural residential area, the concentration of
residential structures must be such that it is obviously the
dominant use in relation to surrounding land uses.
      Areas which are concentrations of smaller parcels and are
dominated by other than residential uses should be designated
according to that use.    It is important to recognize the forms
of land use in order to the further fractionalization of the
County.    It is a general goal of the County to discourage further
proliferation of small parcel sizes or residential settlement in
the rural areas of the County.    This is to prevent both the.       ~
                                                                     ll!
creation of areas incapable of supporting the required public
services and the unnecessary conversion of adjacent lands due
to the pressures of incompatible uses.
                                                                    If.'t
      Rural residential land uses may be divided into two broad
categories.    The first type is a rural residential area in close  t
proximity to and adjoining an existing urban community and at
least partly dependent upon the.urban area for services.    In most ~
                                                                    m
cases; these areas are the first phase in the breakdown of pre-
dominately rural lands into urban land uses.    The densitiesre-
qui red for inclusion in this land use vary depending upon their
location in relation to physical features, topography and the
suitability of landfor other uses.
      The second type of rural residential lands are those pockets
of development which are isolated from all urban areas and ser-
vices.   In some cases they are isolated and outdated subdivisions.
                                                                    [
In others they are pockets of rural residential lots which have
been fractured due to their desirable residential characteristics.  I.·
                                                                    L
                              65.

 ,j
     Most of these occur in the hill areas with one acre parcels.
-,,        Rural residential areas may be characterized by either perman-
  _I
 ,-)  ent or second homes which may be standard single family dwellings
U    or mobile homes.    These" residences may not be connected with com--
     mercial agriculture or commercial rec.reational enterprises.    There
1     is an increasing occurrence of these types of residences on both
,.., existing parcels and newly created small parcels.     There are-large
:J    areas of fractured rural lands and most of these are the location
      for the new residences.
           It has been-firmly established that ruralresidentia-lands
     have a negative impact on adjacent uses, property taxes, property
     services and aesthetic values,but neither the point-at-which this
     type of land use becomes negative nor the extent of their influence
     has been accurately measured.
           Objective:
           Protect the County and its cities from premature and inadvisable
     rural subdivis-ions.   It is a widely held objective -that present
     rural residential development-should be confined to current locations
     and further breakdown of rural:prpperty- should be avoided.
           Recommendations: -
           1.  No additional-zoning should-be considered which would tend
     to create more-isolated rural residential pockets-or allow furthe'r
j    growth of these existing areas   ~
           2.  A continuing program of rural zoning around urban com-
     munities should be pursued by -the County Planning Commission.
           3.  Minimum lot sizes for isolated rural residential areas
     should be established at their present average ownership size
1    until such time that the most desirable minimum acreages can be
                                        66.
                                                                               .,I
 determined.
                                                                               1
       4.   Assign special holding zones for rural residential areas
 subject to geologic hazards until thorough eningeering investiga-
 tionscan determine whether developmehtis safe, and, if so,
 establish appropriate lot sizes and adequate safeguards.            •.
      5.   Maximum effective lot sizes should be assigned to all
 other rural lands preventing their breakdown until proper open
 space programs can be applied.
      6.   Re-zoning which would tend to create new areas·of undev-       r
 eloped fractured rural land or to allow expansion of .the existing
                                                                          t
areas must be prohibited in both flat land and hill areas.
      7.   Areas of undeveloped fractured rural lands which are
under multiple ownership, and are in proximity to designated
urban areas should be assigned a minimum lot size which would pre-
vent futher land division into lots less than ten acres.    Large
lot slope density standards should be employed in these areas.           [',,,
                                                                         ~
      8.   Areas of undeveloped fractured rural lands which are
under multiple ownership and isolated from existing urban centers       I
and services should be classified according to their most suitable
                                                                        ~
                                                                        1IlJ
use and should be zoned for the enforceable minimum-lot size.
      F.   The County Plan                                              r·"
      The foregoing sections are general discussions of the various
                                                                        L
and varying facets of the Open Space Plan of San Luis Obispo County.
                                                                        l'
                                                                        l!
      This Plan as well as the rest of the te,xt i,sonly one part of    .
                                                                        ; "
                                                                             ,t,
the San Luis Obispo General Plan and should not be considered out
of this context;                                                        f'
                                                                        L
                                 67.
                                                                        r
                                                                        t

 ,
I
1
-,        Although this Element of the General Plan is designed to discuss
 j  open space in San Luis Obispo County it provides for areas to be set
     aside for human settlement consistent with realistic growth projections.
          It must be recognized that land will be needed for urban expansion,
    primarily, for residential, commercial and industrial growth and steps
    should be taken to direct this growth.
          Adequate open space must be set aside in developing urban areas.
          Easements and rights-of-way for public utilities, power·transmi·ssions
    and transportation are necessary for future populations but the intrusion
    upon natural landscape should be negligible.
          Open space in the County may be achieved in many different ways,
    from scenic easement to outright dedication, and it is the diversification
    of usage that makes it most effective.   The National Forests provide
    broad expanses of o.pen space, while the careful planning of densely
    populated residential areas make for a proportional amount. of' open
    space of relief in contrast.   Open space may be used advantageously
    in conjunction with all types of land use as well as unused land.    In
.~1 a County such as S"n Luis Obispo, where there is a de.sire to retain
    the natural beauty and rural atmosphere, knowledgeable application. of
    open space in planning is of utmost importance.
"
J
"
                                       68 •

VI.        THE OPEN SPACE PLAN - TWO CITIES PLANNING AREA
           Following are the recommendations for various facets which
link together to form the Open Space Plan for the Cities of Arroyo
Grande-Grover City and their respective Planning Areas.
      A.   Agricultural Lands
           Good productive agricultural lands lie easterly, southerly
      and southwesterly of Arroyo Grande.    It has good cultivable land
      and is adaptable to a wide variety of agricultural uses.    To the
      southeast of Arroyo Grande are lands which are valuable for
      extensive grazing.   Surrounding Arroyo Grande Valley to the
      north and the east of the Planning Area is fair grazing land.
      It has severe limitations becuase of the steep slopes, shallow
      soils and excessive erosion.   The T.wo Cities are located in an
      area where the land is considered fairly good land which is
      perhaps best suited for row crops, orchards and pasture lands.
           The continued increase in population, the accompanying
      growth in industry, and other urban land uses is a continuing
      threat to the retention of agricultural lands for agricultural
    . purposes.  The safeguarding of agricultural lands is as
      essential as afforded other types of land uses.
           Objectives:
           To preserve and protect good agricultural lands within the
      Planning Area by requiring all future development and extension
      of urbanized uses and in the direction . of the less productive land. I
           Recommendations:
           1.   Good agricultural lands should be protected from other      [
           uses, and only those uses related to agriculture located
                                   69.
                                                                            l
                                                                            r.
]
1                on good agricultural land.
         2.      Agricultural uses should be encouraged as a means of
l                providing open space for the Planning Area.
         3.      Good agrl.culture land must be recognized as an equal to
                 other major land uses and given the protection it
                 deserves as a developed use.
  B.    Recreation and Park Land
        l'-1ore parks and other forms of recreational facilities will be
  required, not only to satisfy the increased population, but also
  the increasing amount of leisure time.
        Additional subdivision developments should include a require-
  ment that recreation and park facilities be provided as a part of·
  that development to provide the necessary recreation and park
J facilities for the future populations of each of the Planning
  Areas.     Arroyo Grande now requires such facilities.
        Objective:
        To require recreation and park land to be set aside as a
  part of any new subdivision development, encourage private recrea-
  tion development and other uses in categories characteristic and.
  beneficial to the present and future residents of the Planning
  Area.     Encourage the State Division of Beaches and Parks. to add
  additional facilities along San Luis Obispo Bay in addition to
  their recent acquistions, but not so restrictive as to prevent
  use by local      residents~
        Recomendations:
        1.      To provide for the orderly acquisition, development
                and control of a comprehensive recreation system for
                the Planning Area.
                                       70.

      2.    Recreation development should be provided as a part of
          'any future residential subdivision.
      3.'   EilCourage and provide recreational facilities whether'
            passive or active in locations near all living and work-
                                                                          rf:.
            ing 'areas to meet the' varying needs of,the people'
            to be served.
      4.    Encourage the Division of Beaches and Parks to proceed
           'with acquisition of additional land to enlarge the present    ~
            state Parks and to increase ,the State ,Beach frontage.
                                                                         E
                                                                         Ii,'
                                                                       , 0,
      5.    Proper corrunercial recreational'uses should be encouraged
            to augment public recreational programs.
     6.     Proposed sites for recreation should be evaluated to
           assure they have maximum flexibility and adaptability
           and adequacy to provide for the constantly changing rec-
           reation needs.
     7.    Encourage full cooperation with the County of San Luis
           Obispo in coordinating the local and County recreation
           programs.
C.   wildlife Habitat
    ,The Planning Areas of the two Cities have limited habitat for
wildlife; however, such areaS as Arroyo Grande Creek, Arroyo Grande,   t
Valley, Nipomo Mesa and the foothills surrounding the areas do
provide habitat for wildlife.      Other habitat particularly for      [':'
                                                                         ':
migrating fowl is Pismo Lake north of G+.over City and the several
lakes southerly of Grover City which should be protected because       ~
of their importance to wildlife.
                                                                       [
     Objeqtive:
     To preserve and maintain open' space as a means of providing      l
                                    71.
                                                                       [
      natural habitat for all species of wildlife including access to
      the ocean beaches and to the water impounding reservoirs.
            Recommendations:
            1.   All pre~ent  wildlife habitat should be protected for
                 their intrinsic .and ecological values as well as their
                 direct benefits to the present and future populations.
            2.  Acquisition of Pismo Lake as well as other lakes
                 southerly of Oceano should be considered asa possible
                 joint Cities-County venture.
            3.  The banks of Arroyo Grance Creek should be protected
                 from encroachment by development.
      C.   Natural ResoUrce Lands
           The primary natural resource in the Planning Area is agri-
      culture.  Agriculture should be protected as the basic land use
      of the area.
           Objective:
           Protect the good agriculture crop lands which are not
      absolutely necessary for the expansion of the two Cities.
           Recommendation:
           continue to promote a program along with the County of
           agricultural land preservation to assure good food supplies
           for all time.
      E.   Watershed and Water Recharge Lands
           Arroyo Grande has an adequate water supply from the Lopez
      Water Supply Project and ground water supplies presently existing.
J
..i.·
   ,  Grover City does not have an adequate allocation.    The Arroyo
      Grande Creek which runs through the good soils of the Arroyo Grande
      Valley also provides water for these soils which have excellent
                                 72.

 recharge capabilities.   Consideration should be given to joint
 land acquisition for water shortage and groundwater recharge.,
The Lopez watershed has an area of 67.4 square miles.         The land
ownership is 2,476 acres with a water surface of 960 acres.
      Care must be taken to keep the present supply of usable water
at a quality which is safe for human consumption and free from
long range pollutants •   Every effort, must, be made', to' keep agri-
cultural irrigation run-Offs, industrial as well" as human waste,
from lowering the water quality ,below permissible standards.
      Objective:
      To preserve the quality of existing water supply in       thePlan~
ning Area and adequately plan along with the County for expansion
and retention of valuable water supplies "'for future generations.
      Recommendations:
      I.   Provide for the safety and welfare of the residents of
           the area by the, continued efforts toward flood control.
      2.   Continue to share the high quality of water and take
           every precaution" to eliminate the' danger of any pollution
           to the Arroyo Grande Creek and its recharge 'areas through,
           agricultural, industrial or human waste.
      3.   Encourage the County to continue a program of developing
           future water sources and to establish the need for future
           facilities.
      4.   Encourage utilization ox the lates,:t scientific techni-,
           questoward reclamation and recycling of waste water.
      F.   The Plans
           The foregoing discussion has combined into broad       cat~gories
the Open Space and Conservation P;Lan for the Planning Areas of Arroyo
                                   73.

Grande and @rdver City.    These Elements of·the General.Plan are
designed to discuss Open Space and Conservation in the Planning Area.
 It must however provide for areas to be set aside for residential
development contiguous .to existing development.
      It is recognized that land will be needed for urban expansion,
primarily in residential,commercial, tourist-commercial, and
industrial growth; however, steps should be taken to make'sure that
this growth is an extension of existing development.      Consideration.
should be given to adoption of a philosophy related to growth
patterns should increased density within the cities be permitted
or continued urban sprawl.
     Adequate open space must be set aside in any new development.
                            \!
     Easements or rights-of,-way must be provided for aCCeSS to any
development along San. Luis Obispo Bay or the Pacific Ocean.
     Easements and rights-of-way for public utilities and trans-
portation are necessary for future development but their intrusion
upon the· natural landsbape" should be kept·. to a minimum.
     Objective:
     To retain the. character and natural beauty of the Planning Area
by the preservation and control of Open Space and enhancement of
the area.
     Recommendations:
     1.    To define the limit of areas of urban growth in the
           Planning Area of each of the two Cities.
     2.    To encourage the development of recreational facilities
           which.will provide open space.
     3.    To encourage the State Division of Beaches and Parks to
           add to the present State Parks lands in the Planning
                                    74.

          Area, in addition to their recent purchase.
      4.  To encourage incorporation of open space and all types
          of development including residential, commercial and·
          industrial.                                                    f
                                                                         L
      5.  To retain the.rural atmosphere of the Planning Area
          through the use of open space,
      6.  Cooperate. with the County to retain agricultural lands
          for open space and discourage anynon-contiguousdevel-
          opment·of housing, commerce, tourist...,oriented commercial, r
          or industry.
      7.  To cooperate with the County in the acquisition of
          important· flyways north and south·ofthe Planning Area.
      8.  Encourage open space through the clustering of develop-
          ment"with passive and active recreation areas.
      9.  To support the definition and establishment ·ofthe use .
                                                                       l
                                                                       ~'.'
          of the primary and secondary ·;filood plains as open space.
    10.   Those areas within the City which have requested and have
          been granted withdrawal from the Sewer District assess-
          ment area should be placed in Open Space Zoning· along
          with the existing Agricultural 'Zoning to maintain these
          areas ··as· agricultural areas.                              r:
                                                                       t
     Following are'the Open Space P;i.ans of the·in,dividual Planning
Areas of the two cities.      EachP;i.an, is illustrative of matters
cloncerning Open Space that are discussed· in the. text.
                                  75.
                                                                       l

.. ..~-. ,~~~-:-: .-':~~;~~,,;;:..  .:".- ;
                          THE      CITy     OF CONSERVATION PLAN
                ARROYO GRANDE
               SAN WIS OBISPO COUNTY. CAUF
                          -_0-- __--.-_
                          ~
                                                         -- 0"
                                                                LBGBNJ)
                                                         !i:llA.. !liI!I!I ,..".
                                                                  [3       Sc:hoOl
                                                         ~~~&              "-""""
                .<'.
                     Ad
                                                                                   -:;'O~ .. ,
                        "":L
                             r·','"":M [{ii " " r;~:;[:"J    irn      ~;!G~J  C(,~: '/:,;:01 :;:m eilLi'] ;:..
        OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION PLAN
        GROVER' CITY
             VOUMTV 0'
         SAN LIJIS OBISPO,
           GALHORNIA
                                                                                                               <
                                                                                                               <
1"
            LaGBN»
          CONSORVATION
             La-lii"""s
             Slrsa...,.
   •...      Bea.cbBS
             Wildlife lI.bUat
             Greenbelt
           O~BN SPAoa
              Urban
              park·S II•I..
              io.rk·C(IV"C"unly
              Aliirlcullure
               Golf Course
                                                          STATE    PARK
                                                                STATE    PARK

    ]
       VIr. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE OPEN SPACE PLAN
             A.   Need for Open Space  Implementatio~
    l
    A
                  Emphasis has been made throughout this report of the
        great benefit that can be gained from a vital and active open space
        program.  A plan for open space maintenance and development will re-
       main just a paper plan unless accurate practical means of implementa-
       tion are given to show how such a plan will "work" and prove to be
       practical.
                  It was discussed earlier that. the property owner now
       absorbs most of the burden in terms of tax payments for community
    ~
    ~  facilities and amenities.    The tax payer has reached the saturation
       point where additional taxes for purchase of open space lands becomes
       totally impractical.    If the acquisition of additional land is needed
 .~
   ..•
  "    to implement the open space and parks and recreation plans, then
    ,
       various new methods of obtaining this land must be found.    The following
       brief statements highlight some of the current, practical methods of
       effectuating open space maintenance and acquisition as well as control
       which should be carefully evaluated as to their parts in the   implemen~
       tation program.    Other methods should also be carefully considered
       and utiliZed where appropriate.
J            B.   Current Methods. of Open Space Implementation and Results
;
....j
                  The following methods have been attempted and found to be
       quite successful, if implemented, in obtaining open space.    It is
       recommended that these be continued and enlarged.
                  1.   Zoning and Subdivisions, General
                       These two forms of regulatory mechanisms give the
       County and its City the power to promote the public health, safety,
1
                                          78.

morals and general welfare.      The two powers are essentially a result
 of the realization of the importance of the whole community's rights
 being more valuable than the right of an individual doing what he
wishes with his land.      Zoning and subdivision regulations are the
 primary method of land use regulation without the use of landpur-,
 chase with compensation.     Because there is not payment or land pur-
chase involved, ,these two forms of land regulations are limited to
the extent which they may be used.       However, inverse condemnation
must be avoided in all instances.
                                                                           E
                                                                          .c,
                a.    Zoning Regulations'
                       (1)  Exclusive Agricultural Zoning
                            The, County has been engaged in a relatively
successful effort to protect its highly productive land through an
exclusive agriculture program which has been" calculated as an imple-
mentation of the County's total Planning Program.       It continues to
be'the County's position that agricultural zoning must continue to
                                                                          r
                                                                         L
play an importa.nt role' in the protection of agricultural lands.
This, backed by the Cities, can be an effective tool which cannot        I
be oVerlooked in accomplishing the desired goals set forth in the,
Open Space Element.
                    ,                                    "
                                                                         I
                b.    Subdivision Regulations
                                                                         t
                      Subdivision regulations help to guide develop-
ment on land which is not yet a part of the, urbanizing pattern.         t
Specific subdivision regulations can effeqtively      g~ide development
by the control and placement of lots, streets, utilities, sewerage
                                                                         £
and water systems.    The regulations can ,also require open space'or    [
recreation lands to be set aside as part of a development.       There-
fore, areas'of valuable open space can be deterred'from development      l
                                      79.
                                                                         [

     by utilizing this type of regulation.
 -,,                        The Arroyo Grande Subdivision Ordinances adopted
  J
      seven years ago has a provision to allow "optional design" when the
      Planning Commission and City Council finds that a proposed develop-
     ment will:
1
   I                 '~ (l)  produce a more desirable and livable community
      that would be affected otherwise, and
                        (2)  create a better community environment through
     dedication of public areas, or setting out open space lands whether
     dedica ted or owned· in common".
                     The Subdivision Ordinance of Arroyo Grande, as
     adopted,.also has a provision "to provide for adequate and appropriate
     public recreation facilities for the subdivision by the dedication
     of land therein or the payment of fees in lieu thereof".
                     Results - Arroyo Grande will require new development
     to provide for either public recreation facilities, privaterecrea-
     tion facilities held in common or open space land held either for
     the benefit of the person in the development or dedicated to the
"
     public.
                     The City of Grover City will incorporate these pro-
     visions in their ordinance in the future, however I a Recreat.ion
     Element must be adopted prior to implementation.
                2.   Scenic Easements
                     Section 51050 of the California Government Code
     establishes that "any City or County which has adopted a General Plan
     may accept grants of open space easements or open space agreements
     on privately owned land lying within the City or County".
.!
                                       80.

                    The purpose 'of 'such easements is for the preserva-
   tionof land as open space in the best ,interest of the State, City
   or County and is important ,to the public for the enjoyment of
   scenic beauty, for the,use of natural resources, for recreation,
   or for the production of"food, 'or fiber and specifically that its
  potential is for future generations.
                    The State presently has an open space reimbursement
  program (Section,14112, open Space Subvention Act).      The County
  should investigate this program and determine the best way to pro-        t··
                                                                            ::
  ceed in initiating open space ,agreements within ,the County.
                    Results - The Planning Commission is currently
  considering the requirement of dedications of scenic easements
  along County roads designated as Scenic"County Roads.
                    The following guidelines are suggested for review
  and acceptance of scenic, easements by both the County and the Two
  ~ities:
         a.   A sUbstcmtial portion of the property must be within
  sight of a public road, park or other,significant open space which
  is in the ownership of, the State, County or other public agency.
         b.   Its relationship to adjacent, parcels under scenic
                                                                          f'
                                                                          ti'
  easement should be considered and its proximity to other areas of       t
  scenic community value should be determined.
.        c.   The impact of reduced tax revenue on the City should be
  evaluated,
         d.   The land must have true scenic beauty to have some,
                                                                         rL
  community value.
         e.   The compatibility of the parcel with the General Plan
  should be evaluated.
                                    81.

1             f.   The possibility of any portion of scenic easement
  land being required for City or State Highway purposes or for any
  other purpose that might require condemnation.
              g.   Compatible uses that may be. allowed On scenic
J
  easement lands.     Uses that may be considered are those that will not
1 mar the landscape, such as riding and hiking trails.
                   Where scenic easements are accepted they shall be:
                   L    Dedicated for a period of not less than ten (10)
  years and shall be irrevocable during that period.     They shall be
  automatically extended at the end Of each year.
                   2.   Existing dwelling units on the property must be
  removed from scenic easement boundaries.
             3.    Encouraging Private Open Space Development:
1                  There are a number of privately oriented uses of open
  space which add substantially to the enjoyment of natural re-
I sources of the area.     Privately used golf courses, open space, cluster
  or condominium development, private recreation campgrounds, all add
l to the usable open space and allow a greater variety of recreation
  facilities.    It shall be the policy of the Cities to encourage and
  stimulate additional private open space development.
       C.    Other Open Space Implementation Possibilities
             1.    Acquisition
                   These jurisdictions should continue to acquire
  those lands which are significant to each one's level or    respopsi~
  bility.  If it is really the intent to preserve open space, there
1 must be a. total mobilization of effort by all agencies and all levels
I of government.    For only through the pooling of cQncentrated action
!
  can implementation be effective.
                                       82.
            2.    Road and Public Land Abandonment
                  All public land should be carefully evaluated as to
 their relationship to the Open Space Element and no right should be
 relinquished until the' review indicates, there are no open space       ,v
                                                                         j
 values involved.
            3.    Lease Excess Roads Lands from State
                  Section 14012 of the Government Code provides:
"the director may lease non-operating right-of-way areas to munici-
palities or other local agencies for public purposes, and may con-
tribute, toward the cost of developing local parks and other
recreational facilities on ,such areas.      The director may accept
as all 'or 'part of the iJonsider'ation' for such lease or for such
state contribution any substantial benefit ,the state, will derive
from the municipality or other local agencies undertaking maintain-:-
ence or landscaping costs which would otherwise be the obligation of
the State.     Such leases shall contain a provision that whenever the
leased land is needed for state highway operating purposes 'the lease
shall terminate.     The department is authorized to classify portions
of State highway right-of-way as non-operating."
                  All property declared to' be, excess by the Division
of Highway should be carefully analyzed to determine if a lease
arrangement might be of benefit to the County.
           4.     Full Fee Acquisition
                  This is essentially the total" acquisition of property
by purchase, condemnation under the power of eminent domain, tax
foreclosure, or gift.    The voluntary purchase agreement would mean
paying the prevailing real estate prices; condemnation would also
involve just compens,ation to acquire open space.'
                                       83.
                   5.   Less Than Fee Acquisition
                        Less than fee acquisition is different from outright
1       purchase of property in that only certain property rights are pur-
       chased.   The land ownership is a combination of rights to use the
        land, for example, the right to develop the land, the right to mineral
1      exploration, and other possible mineral surface uses.     In less than
        fee acquisition, only certain desired rights are purchased, such as
       the right to prohibit tree removal, road construction, or building
       structures.
                       Less than fee acquisition, is therefore, the purchase
~      of a portion of a private land owner's rights in order to retain or
       deter certain types of land uses.     This could be an effective open
       space control.
                  6.   Land Exchange
                       It is currently possible for governmental agencies
       to exchange public land for privately owned land for the purpose of
       obtaining needed open space in proper locations.     As an example, the
       Bureau of Land r1anagement can exchange land which is scheduled for
       disposition.
                  7.   Purchase of Surplus Public Lands
                       Local agencies are often offered the opportunity to
       purchase surplus state and Federal lands.     A discount of 50% is
       usually provided if the land is to be used for parks and recreation
       purposes.   Also the Bureau of Land r1anagement administers large
       amounts of surplus land which can be purchased at avery low price
.'.::1
       by the County or exchanged.
.~
                  8.   Deed Restrictions
                       Contracts, covenants and restrictions are often
                                         84.
 created by the private developer as one tool for controlling the
 type of development which might occur on that property.   These re-
strictionsmight take the form of use restricti~iJ.s, open space,
setback requirements, preservation of· natural vegetatibn, architec-
tural style, or other provisions which might add to the open space
of the developing area.
      D.   possible Methods of Financing Open Space
           1.   Taxation·
                Listed below are several examples of special taxes·
whiqh might be utilized to gather revenue for open space acquisitibn
if deemed necessary:
                a.  User Fees and Taxes - Within controlled and
extensively used areas (such as parks and shorelines).   A fee ·c.an be
imposed upon a user to aid in the maintenance· and development cost.
                b.  Motel "Bed" Tax - By use of a tourist overnight
tax upon guest hotels and motels, large scale funds are available
to finance programs which are constantly designed to draw the tourists
in the first place.
                c.  Real Estate Transfer Tax ~ A minor tax can be
imposed upon the transfer of real estate to be utilized for the
development of open space and park lands related to such real estate
development.
                d.  Horse Tax - The acquisition of designated riding
trails can be financed through a tax placed pn riding horses and
horse rentals as provided for in the Article 14 of the Government
Code under the Pleasure Riding Tax Law.
                e.  Gasoline Tax - A.definite portion of the gaso-
line tax can be designated for scenic highway construction and
                                  85.

  'I
    I
1     beautification.
                      f.  Construction tax on new development including
       residential, commercial and industrial.
                 2.   Federal Eunds
                      a.  HUD Open Space Grants - Although current funding
      of this program is over-subscribed, it could essentially provide
       fifty-fifty matching funds for acquisition of open space and park
      improvements.   However, this program emphasizes open spaces nearer
 j    to urban areas.
                      b.  Land and Water Conservation Fund - This is a
      fifty-fifty matching fund program currently available in limited
      amounts for the purchase of open space lands.
                      c.  wildlife Restoration Fund - The acquisition,
      development and preservation of major wildlife areas are funded under
      this program administered by State wildlife Conservation Board.
                      d.  Other Federal funds are available in limited
      amounts under many minor programs for the maintenance and acquisition
      of open space lands.
                 3.   Private Funds
                      Recently there has been a surge in the number·of
 ;1
J     private conservation groups willing to purchase valuable open space
      lands for the benefit of the community and environment.   This should
      be encouraged as an effective means of acquiring land that might
      otherwise not be obtainable through governmental action or as a
      holding action until governmental funds can become·available.
,I
J
1 "
                                         86.

 VIII.      THE CONSERVATION PLAN - TWO CITIES
       The following are the recommendations for the various facets
 which link together to form the Conservation Plan.
       A.   Watershed and Water Recharge Lands
            Water supply is a great resource of the area.    The construe-
 tion of Lopez Dam with its large watershed, as far north as Avila          i
 and south to Nipomo Mesa Area provides for domestic water.and serves
 to prevent periodic salt water intrusion.    Periodic releases from
Lopez Reservoir help recharge the underground basins.                      f
                                                                           l.
            The most economical future water plan for the County, ac-
cording to the current County Water Resources-Studies, appears to be·
a combination of redistributed surface· reservoir waters, tqe State
Water Project··and undergound water. supplies.
            In the South County Area, which includes the Two City Plan-
ning Area, Lopez Reservoir water releases to serve the urban areas
                                                                           f
and to replenish the ground water basin have been estimated to be
adequate to accommodate projected urban and agricultural demand to
the year 1990.    Anticipated agricultural expansion in the citrus field
in the Nipomo Mesa will place a great:erdemand on the ground water
basin that now exists.    While the present safe yield of the basin
can not sustain this expansion, the safe yield of the larger Nipomo
area is five and one-half   (5~) times as great:.  This fact suggests
that proper distribution of the underground water resources could
facilitate desirable land uses in the area ...
      Care must be taken to preserve the presence of usable water at
a quality which is safe for human consumption and free from long-
range pollutants.    Every effort must be made to keep agricultural
irrigation run-offs, and industrial as well as human waste from
                                   87.

   lowering the water quality below permissible standards.
        Objective:
        To preserve the quality of the existing water supply and ade-
   quatly plan along with .the County for expansion and retention of
   valuable future water supplies for future development whether
   urban or agricultural.
        Recommendations:
        1.   Provide for the safety and welfare of the residents of the
!       2.
             area by continued expansion of the water supply.
             Provide for continued expansion of flood control efforts
             on a regional scale.
        3.   Continue to insure the high quality of water and take
             every precaution to eliminate the danger of any pollution
             to the ground water supply and its recharge areas through
             agricultural human and industrial wastes.
        4.   Encourage the County to continue their present program of
             research into the future water demands of the County to
             establish the need for any future urban growth and agri-
             cultural expansion.
        5.   Encourage the County to plan for future expansion of water
             storage facilities, water from the state Water Project and
             possible desalinization plant at Diablo Canyon.
        B.   Natural Vegetation
             Grass is the prevailing ground cover in the low lands of
  the area.   scattered oaks exist in the steeper areas along the hill-
  sides.   Chaparral is found in the steeper sections above the wooded
  areas.
                                       88.
       Objective:
       To protect the vegetative cover and tree areas which are not
 absolutely necessary for the expansion of the Cities of Arroyo Grande
 and Grover City.                                                             l
                                                                             'i'
       Recommendation:
       Continue to promote a program, along with the County of protec-
 tion of the vegetative cover and the forest lands to insure adequate
 wildlife habitat for all time.
      C.    Soil Types in The Planning Area of The Two Cities
            A high percentage of the good soil as rated by the Soil
 Conservation Service occurs in the Arroyo Grande Valley.   The good
 quality of soil in the Valley results from run-off in the higher areas.
 The soil northeasterly and southwesterly of Arroyo Grande is Class I
 soil and is very good agricultural land.   To the southeast·of Arroyo     r
 Grande is Class 6 soil which is well suited for grazing.   It is not
                                                                           :'l::
 ·arable because of the steeper slopes and this area is susceptible        ..
                                                                           I:.
                                                                           l
 to erosion with its shallow soils.   Surrounding Arroyo Grande Valley
 to the north and east of the Planning Area is Class 7 soil which is
·only fairly well suited for grazing.   It has severe limitations for
 use because of its steep slopes, shallow soils and excessive erosioJ;l.
 Portions of Arroyo Grande and Grover City are in Class 4 land which
                                                                          r,.
                                                                          I.
                                                                          L.
 is considered fairly good land suitable for occasional cUltivation.
 Perhaps its best use is for pasture land or orchards.   The area along
 San Luis Obispo Bay is Class 8 land and is not suitable for cultiva-
 tion or grazing; however, it may be used for wildlife habitat and
 recreationl.                                                            [
      Objective:
      Protect the good soils in the Arroyo Grande Valley and
                                    89.
                                                                         f••

 surrounding fair soils and discourage expansion of development into
the good agriculture lands except where absolutely necessary for the
expansion of the Two Cities.
       Recommendations:
      1.    Continue to promote and support a program encouraging
            both exclusive agricultural zoning and agricultural
           preserve contracts for good and fair soil areas whether
           devoted to crop land or grazing.
      D.   Natural Resource Lands
           The primary natural resources within the Planning Area
are the agricultural soils in the Arroyo Grande Valley and the
beaches along the San Luis Obispo Bay.    Agriculture should be pro-
tected as a basic land use of the area.
      Objective:
      Protect the good agricultural crop lands and grazing lands
which are not -absolutely necessary for the expansion of the Two Cities.
      Recommendation:
      Continue to promote, along with the County, a program of agri-
cultural land preservation to assure the preservation of the good
agricultural lands.
      E.   Wildlife Habitat
           San Luis Obispo County has numerous wildlife species some
of which are still abundant.    Federal, State and County-owned and
managed open space lands assure the continued natural habitat that
most species need.
           Most of the natural habitat for fish and game is in the
mountain areas to the east and the wetlands south of the Planning
Areas.   There are also varying amounts of wildlife in the foothills
                                   90.
                                                                            ,
 surrounding the Planning Area.   Control of access through prohibition
                                                                            i
                                                                            J
 of vehicles in' ·themountainous· and hill areas, preservation of grass
 lands and chaparral covered hillsides and growth along the Arroyo
Grande Creek preserves the natural environment necessary for wildlife      r
                                                                           I.
                                                                           I
 to exist.
      Objective:
      To preserve and maintain wildlife habitat; both dry land and
wetland areas, as a means of providing the natural habitat for all
species of wildlife.
      Recommendations:
      1.   To maintain dry land and wetland areas of habitat for
all species offish and wildlife for their intrinsic and ecological
values.
      2.   To provide for the diversified recreational use of wild-
life and fish.
                                                                         r,
      3.   Provide for scientific and educational use of fish and        !.
                                                                         t
wildlife.
      4.   In planning any alteration to the present environment
careful consideration should be given to the effects on fish and
wildlife.
      5.   Present land uses which result in siltation and pollution
of inland waters should be carefully monitored.
      F.   Recreational Lands
           Other natural resources are the recreational land, the
scenic beauty of the County and the open space areas which have been
preserved for posterity.   The County has been fortunate in its many
                                                                        t
natural attributes, including sandy beaches, rolling hills, lakes
and parks which offer limitless activity for those who enjoy            l
                                  91.

]
1  swimming, fishing, hunting, boating, hiking, picnicking, and many
   other activities.   The County is fortunate too that over 260,000
   acres of these lands are owned and controlled by the various govern-
   mental agencies and  ar~. open to the public in many cases for a vast
   variety of recreational purposes.    The State of California has over
1  21,000 acres for public use and enjoyment.    The County of San Luis
   Obispo has approximately the same area in County ownership.     In
.l addition, it has the Nacimiento and Lopez Reservoir and their recrea-
   tional facilities.
         Objective:
         To reserve land for recreation facilities, encourage private
   recreation development and other uses in categories characteristic
   and beneficial to the.residents of the County and the area.
        Recommendations:
        I,    To provide for the.orderly acquisition and development and
   control of a comprehensive system in the County as well as the Plan-
   ning Area.
         2.   Recreational resources should be protected for the future
   as these resources are largely irreplaceable natural assets.
         3.   Plan carefully to retain the scenic and natural beauty of
j  San Luis Obispo County.    All proposed recreational facilities will
   be carefully implemented to allow maximum use without damage to the
   environment.   Conservation of these resources will be the watch-
   word of the Planning Area and the County.
        G.    Flood Control
j             The man-made reservoirs within San Luis Obispo County
   constructed as flood control and water conservation facilities are
1  as follows:
                                  92.
            1.   Lopez Reservoir.
           2.    Salinas Reservoir.
            3.   Twitchell Reservoir.
           4.    Whole Rock Reservoir •.
           5.    Nacimiento Reservoir.
           Nacimiento and Twitchell are the primary flood control·
 reservoirs.   All reservoirs serve as water recharge supplies and
also provide valuable irrigation water for the County.    The Planning r
Area, while having localized flood areas, is not classified as a       [:
                                                                       lr
primary flood zone.
           Objectives:
           To preserve the quality of the  e~dsting water supply, as.
well as to adequately plan for flood control in all areas of the
County, and more particularly the Planning Area.
           Recommendations:
           1.   Provide for the safety and welfare of the residents
of the Planning Area by continuing the expansion of flood control
efforts on a regional scale.
           2.   Promote the Plan for future expansion of flood con-
trol facilities as well as water storage reservoirs to be utilized
as water supply and recreation facilities.
      H.   Scenic Lands
           The entire County is considered as scenic land.   Scenic
lands are in general, areas which are·or can. be made, visible to
the general public and considered visually attractive.    Scenic lands
also involve corridors along particular highways.    They also may be
prominent natural landmarks and they may include many other natural
features of the landscape.
                                  93.

               sensitive lands include areas with gradual ecological
    characteristics.   Disturbing the natural balance of these areas may
    mean that a rare plant by species would be destroyed or that other
1   unique features would be obliterated.   Scenic backdrops include
    hillsides and ridges which arise above urban areas or major high-
1"  ways.   scenic vistas are points that are accessible to the general
    public, which provide a sweeping view of the countryside or coast
    line.   Most scenic lands in the County have other uses as well.
r~  Land use for water should be protected as compatible with scenic
j
    values.   Properly managed grazing land can retain its scenic beauty.
j              Other land uses can eliminate or weaken the scenic values
~   of an area.   Urban uses greatly alter the landscape, destroying
:;;
    ecological values, although some scenic value may be re-established.
~i) Large road cuts, power transmission lines, quarrying and mining,
j
    can ruin the scenic beauty of an area.   All of these uses must be
;~
d   controlled as the scenic values in the County are to be preserved.
               Objectives:
               To preserve, conserve and maintain the scenic and sensi-
    tive lands of the Planning Area and encourage conservation of these
    sensitive areas throughout the County.
               Recommendations:
               1.   Provide a detailed analysis of areas of scenic and
    sensitive lands throughout the Planning Area.
               2.   Identify areas of prime scenic value and establish
    precise corridors for protection of scenic lands along proposed
J   scenic highways.
               3.   Provide for preservation of natural landmarks,
    scenic rivers and streams and other scenic points and areas
                                   94.
 throughout the Planning Area.    Provide for trails and access corri-
 dors to areas of scenic value and greenbelts.
           4.   ,Protect ecologically sensitive areas within the
 Planning Area.
           5.    Provisions for scenic preservation should be adopted
 as part of the Open Space Zoning Ordinance.    This Zoning Distri9t
 should include a restrictive zone applying to scenic backdrops and
 second; a prohibition zone should be designed for key scenic land-
marks allowing only grazing'use, with .. no grading, mining, quarrying
or transmission lines allowed.
           6.    The subdivision review process should be revised to
include more emphasis on scenic values.
           7.    A strong grading ordinance should be adopted which
strictly controls cut and'fill as well as removal of trees and other
scenic features.
           8.    All sizeable marsh areas and lakes within the Planning
Area should be preserved.
           9.    Areas setout for catch ba$ins for storm water run-.
off, such as 'the present':one at Ash .and Elm streets, should be' pre-.
served as Open Space Area (Arroyo Grande) •
           The Plan of the ,Two Cities
           The foregoing discussion is combined into broad categories
in the Conservation plan for the Planning Areas of Arroyo Grande and
Grover City.
           This Element of the General Plan discusses conservation
in the Planning ArE!a.   It must, however, provide for areas to be
set aside for additional urban development contiguous to existing
                                                                          t
development,
                                   95.                                   ri

1             As in the Open Space Plan it is recognized that land will
   be needed for urban expansion, primarily in residential, commercial,
   tourist-commercial and industrial growth; however, steps should be
   taken to make sure that this growth is an extension of existing dev-
   elopment in order to preserve and conserve the assets of the Planning
   Area.
             Conservation mus.t·be the prime objective in consideration
   of any new development.
                                                              ,
             Rights.,-of ways, public utilities, roads and other methods
  of transportation are necessary for future development but approval
  of the alignment of any of these features should reflect conservation
  practices in the area.
             Objectives:
             To conserve the natural resources, vegetative cover, soils,
  the wildlife habitat, both dry and wetlands, the agriculture resources
  and all other natural resources in the area.
             B.ecommendations:
             1.    To define the limit of areas of urban growth in the
  Planning Area for each of the two Cities and, their Planning Areas.
             3.    In as far as feasible, discourage urban development·
  on good ,agricultural land and in good wildlife habitat, whether
  wet or dry.
             4.    To retain the rural atmosphere of the Planning Area
  through good conservation practices and maintainence of open space.
             5.    To cooperate with the County to retain agricultural
  lands and wildlife habitat,and discourage any non-continguous
  development of housing, commerce or industry.
                                 96.

          6.   To support the definite establishment of the use of
primary and secondary flood plain areas, if any, within the Planning
Area.
          The Conservation Plan maps of the individual Planning
Areas of the Cities of Arroyo Grande and Grover City are shown on
Pages 76 and 770  Each Plan is illustrative of matters concerning
conservation that are discussed in this text.
                                                                      rf
                                                                      I:,.
                                                                      l
                                                                     r,  ..
                                                                      L
                                 97.
l
     IX.   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSERVATION PLAN
          A.    Need for Conservation Implementation
                Emphasis has been made in this report of the vital ,need
     for conservation of the ,natural resources of the area, including
     the water "the vegetation, the soils, the wildlife habitat and the
     other natural resources.     Any plan for conservation would remain
     just,a paper plan unless practical means of implementation are given
     to show how such a plan would work and prove to be practical.
                As discussed i!'! the Open Space Plan, the property owner
    now absorbs most of the burden in terms of tax payments for commun-
1   ity facilities and amenities.        In some cases acquisition of addi-
 J
    tional land will be required to implement,the conservation plans.
    The following statements, ,which, are similar to implementation of
J I
    the Open Space Plan, indicate some of the current, practical methods
    of effectuating conservation plans and controls'which should be
]   carefully evaluated as to their parts in the implementatio!,! program.
          B.    Current Methods of Conservation Implementation and
.i
                Results
J               The following methods' have, been" found quite success ful in
    conservatio!,! practic~s.    It, is, recommended that these be" continued
J   and enlarged.
          1.    Zoning in the, Subdi vision - Gener,al
i
                As indicated in Open Space     Imp~ementation these two forms
    of regulatory mechanisms give the County and its cities the power
\
    to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
                Zoning and subdivision regulations are the primary method
    of land use controls without the use of land purchases, with com-
    pensation.    These, two forms of land regulation are limited to the
                                        98.
                                                                           i.
                                                                           -L
                                                                           ,
extent that they may be used.
          a.    Zoning Regulations
                (1)   Exclusive Agricultural Zoning
                      As stated previously the County has engaged in
          relatively successful efforts to protect its highly pro-
          ductive land through an exclusive agricultural zoning
          program which has been calculated as an implementation
          to the County's total ,Planning Program.   It-sholl1d continue
          to be the County's position that agriculture zoning must
          continue to play an important role in the conservation
                                                                          W.
          of prime agricultural lands.    This, backed by the Cities      t
          can be an,effective tool in accomplishing the desired
          goals set forth in the Conservation Element.
                                                                         (
                      The County also proposes to implementconserva-     r
                                                                         F
          tion throl,lghout the County with scenic conservation dis-
         tricts and design control districts which will help to
                                                                         r"
                                                                         l
         preserve and Protect areas that should be preserved.
         b.    Protection of Flood Plains
               Flood Plain zoning is desirable in areas where pro-
         tection from annual inundation is a basic requirement.
         Prohibition or more, strict regulation of development in        F
                                                                         I
         these areas is a concern to the Two Cities in the Plan-
         ning Area through the use of flood plain regulations or
         correction of the problem areas.
         c.    Subdivision Regulations
               Specific subdivision regulations'can effectively guide
         development into good conservation practices as a condition
         of approval of such development.     The regulations can
                                    99.
  References and Acknowledgements
        San Luis Obispo Open Space Element·
        Arroyo Grande General Plan
        Grover City General Plan
        Department of Parks and Recreati6n- State of California
        Laws Relating to Conservation ahd Planning
             State of California, Resources Agency
             united States Geological Survey
             Soil Conservatiol) Service
  Credi ts
        Staff - San Luis Obispo County
       Staff.- Arroyo Grande and .Grover City
I

Parks and Recreation
Element
City of Grover Beach
                                Parks and Recreation Element Update
Table of Contents
1     Introduction…………………………………………….1
2     Parks………………………………………………………5
3     Recreation……………………………………………….13
4     Special Places- Beach and Natural Areas………14
5     Providing for Parks and Recreation……………..16
6     Funding………………………………………………….17
7     Definitions………………………………………………20
Appendices
      Appendix A- Map of Existing and Proposed Parks and
Facilities
      Appendix B- Consolidated Goals, Policies, and Programs
      Appendix C- Park Standards & Projected Implementation
Costs
      Appendix D- Park and Recreation Needs Assessment
      Appendix E- Maintenance Standards
                                                              Page 1

                                 Parks and Recreation Element Update
1 - Introduction
    Why Parks and Recreation are Important
    Recreation and exercise are fundamental to a healthy life.
    The benefits include greater productivity, less disease,
    and sense of well-being.          As the population grows,
    competition for limited recreational facilities increases.
    As the development and urbanization of our area increases,
    so must the provision of recreation spaces that are
    available to all people.
    Children are the greatest beneficiaries of recreation.
    Many life lessons are learned in recreational pursuits:
    cooperative competition, character building, physical and
    mental health, and an opportunity to escape electronic
    entertainment.
    Health and fitness    experts    agree   that    recreation       and
    exercise result in:
  • more energy and capacity for work and leisure activities
  • greater resistance to stress, disease, anxiety and fatigue,
    and a better outlook on life
  • increased stamina, strength and
    flexibility
  • improved efficiency of the heart
    and lungs
  • loss of extra pounds or body fat
  • help in staying at desirable weight
  • reduced risk of heart attack
                                          El Camino Oaks Natural Area
    Parks and Recreation Mission Statement
    GOAL 1- The City will strive to create quality recreation
    services and facilities that benefit and enrich the quality
    of life for Grover Beach residents.
    Policy 1.1
    The Grover Beach Parks and Recreation Department is
    committed to providing or facilitating quality recreational
    services, including programs, classes, special events, and
                                                                    Page 2

                           Parks and Recreation Element Update
facilities to all members of the community in a courteous
and efficient manner.
                                                         Page 3
                            Parks and Recreation Element Update
Background
At the time of the 1991 Parks and Recreation Element (PRE),
the City had 10.51 acres of parks and 28.5 acres of
dedicated natural open space. Since then the City has added
3.68 acres of parks all in the southeast quadrant of the
City, fulfilling specific parks and neighborhood land use
objectives. In the period 1990 to 2000, Grover Beach added
1,411 new residents.
One facility unforeseen in the 1991 Parks and Recreation
Element, but completed in 1999, was the South County Skate
Park.
The City’s parks and recreation facilities, with few
exceptions, are intensively used and well maintained. The
City offers a wide variety of recreation programs and
services with a minimal level of staffing.
All of the parks are under five acres in size and would be
commonly termed mini-parks, yet they offer a wide range of
recreation opportunities and meet many needs.
It is generally recognized, and confirmed in the Parks and
Recreation Element field survey, that residents of the Five
Cities area regularly cross municipal boundaries to use
park facilities. Arroyo Grande continues to provide the
majority of fields for organized sports, serving Grover
Beach and Oceano residents. Adult and youth sports
organizations anticipate growth over the next ten years,
with more fields needed now. Oceano continues to lack parks
and Oceano residents use Grover Beach parks.
In addition to the park acreage added by Grover Beach since
1989, Arroyo Grande added one baseball field and a
neighborhood park to its park system. The City of Pismo
Beach added Dinosaur Caves Park and Chumash Park along with
sections of coastal blufftop park. These are important
additions to the overall recreation opportunities in the
Five Cities, however, these facilities are basically
neighborhood serving and lack major regional or community-
wide recreation facilities.
Purpose and Relation to Other General Plan Elements
The Parks and Recreation Element is an optional component
of the City's General Plan. The original Element adopted in
1991 recognizes the important role parks play in the make-
                                                          Page 4

                            Parks and Recreation Element Update
up of the city's quality of life. The adopted Element set a
goal of adding fifteen acres of parkland to meet projected
needs.
This document updates the Parks and Recreation Element
adopted in 1991. This Element establishes goals and
policies for guiding the management, renovation and
expansion of existing parks and development of new parks
and recreation facilities. The Element includes Programs
that are action items to implement the goals and policies
in order to meet existing and projected needs and to strive
for an equitable distribution of parks throughout the City.
The purpose of the Parks and Recreation Element is to (1)
give policy guidance for providing of park and recreation
services, (2) document the City's existing park and
recreation resources, including those resources that are
outside of the City's management, and (3) facilitate the
evaluation of park and recreation needs during the land use
decision process.
The Element does not rezone property, nor does it authorize
any public access to lands described here that are
currently in private ownership.
Government Code Section 65300 et seq. requires the City to
have a General Plan that consists of seven mandatory
Elements.    In addition to the required Elements, the
General Plan may include optional Elements that relate to
the physical development of the City.          The Parks and
Recreation Element is an optional Element.          It is an
integral part of the General Plan.      Once adopted, it has
the same force and effect as the other Elements of the
General Plan.
State law requires that the General Plan be an internally
consistent statement of local government policy.           Each
Element of the General Plan must be consistent with all
other Elements. The policies in this plan are consistent
with City General Plan policies and standards.
Adoption and Public Input
A series of workshops were conducted in July 2004 in order
to receive public input on park and recreation needs. An
informal survey was also conducted at several City parks to
gain the perspectives of park and recreation program users.
                                                          Page 5
                                Parks and Recreation Element Update
    Together these comments and ideas      became  the  basis   for
    preparation of a Needs Assessment.
    In July 2004, a Needs Assessment was distributed to the
    Parks and Recreation Commission for review and comment. The
    Needs Assessment was forwarded to the City Council on
    August 2, 2004 for a public hearing and Council comment.
    The Public Hearing Draft PRE and a CEQA document (Mitigated
    Negative Declaration) was circulated for public and agency
    review in August and September 2004.
    The Public Hearing Draft was presented in public hearings
    before the City Council in December 2004 and February 2005.
    The CEQA document was certified and the Element was adopted
    on March 7, 2005 and is now an element of the General Plan.
2 - Parks
    Value and Benefits of Parks
    Parks and trails contribute to a higher quality of life and
    make our communities more livable. A well-rounded City
    parks program also provides the community with a variety of
    substantial health, social and economic benefits, including
    increased property values.
    Active recreation opportunities are important to people of
    all ages to develop and maintain healthy lifestyles. Our
    lives can be enriched by experiencing nature, recreating
    and exercising regularly, and it is valuable to have these
    experiences close to where we live.
    Organized sports facilities, community centers and group
    leagues accommodate important cultural activities for all
    ages. The availability and use of active recreation
    facilities and sports programs have been shown to result in
    a reduction in juvenile crime rates.
    Existing Parks
    The City of Grover Beach Parks and Recreation Department
    manages a wide range of park types with recreation
    opportunities for all ages. The following list describes
    each park and facility owned and operated by the City, as
    well as State owned and managed parklands within the City
    limits. A map of the City with the existing and potential
                                                              Page 6
                             Parks and Recreation Element Update
parks and facilities identified is in Appendix A of this
document.
Parks
• Ramona Garden Park
      The park is partially developed and is planned to
      ultimately encompass about 4.5 acres. The current
      facilities cover four acres and include open grass
      areas, a gazebo, an amphitheater, rose garden and
      stream water feature. Ramona Garden Park Center is
      located on the southeast corner of the park.
                                                           Page 7

                               Parks and Recreation Element Update
• Hero Community Park
      The park completed in 2003, includes a children’s play
      area, basketball court, tennis court, horseshoes,
      small picnic barbecue areas and a restroom. Site area:
      0.78 acres.
• Grover Heights Park
      The park is a 3.2 acre parcel contiguous to Grover
      Heights Elementary School that is leased from the
      school district. Facilities include open turf, tennis
      courts (lighted), basketball (planned for lighting),
      play area, group barbecue area, horseshoes, sand
      volleyball court and a restroom.
• Golden West Park
      The park is about 1/2 acre developed as a passive
      grass and sitting area and horseshoe pit within the
      Golden West housing development.
• Mentone Basin Park
      The park consists of a major storm water drainage
      basin that was developed in the mid 1980’s for sport
      field use and is lighted. The softball field is not
      regulation size. Other facilities outside the basin
      that are intensively used include lighted basketball
      courts, tennis court, and restroom. The Carolan house
      exists on the southwest corner. Site acreage:           3.10
      acres
                                                        th
                                                      16 Street Park
• 16th Street Park
      The park includes a
      recent    addition     of
      1.25 acres dedicated
      as   parkland    with   a
      residential
      subdivision.          The
      facility        includes
      softball    and    soccer
      play    fields     (short
      center    field),    play
      area,    covered    group
      barbecue            area,
      volleyball, horseshoes and a restroom. Site area is
      4.0 acres.
• Costa Bella Basin Park at Farroll Ave and Oak Park
      This 0.40 acre grassy stormwater basin was dedicated
      as a park space as part of a residential subdivision.
      The park is used as a passive grass area.
                                                              Page 8

                            Parks and Recreation Element Update
Other Lands
• Community Gardens
     The site located on Brighton Ave is used for gardening
     on a 0.15 acre parcel.
• “El Camino Oaks” Open Space / Ecological Preserve
     This open space was dedicated as part of several
     residential subdivisions and covers 28.5 acres of
     dense and highly scenic oak woodland. The parcel is
     adjacent to riparian areas along Meadow Creek.          An
     informal hiking trail exists linking 4th street to the
     end of Nacimiento Avenue.
• Charles Street Site
     As part of the open space dedication for the El Camino
     Oaks area, the City acquired land at the corner of
     Charles Street and Nacimiento Avenue. The 1991 Element
     shows this property as a potential park. This land is
     zoned low density residential in the General Plan and,
     if developed for recreation, would need to comply with
     Local Coastal Plan resource protection standards.
Existing Facilities
• South County Skate Park
     Located at 1750 Ramona Avenue, the facility is a
     13,000 square foot concrete skate park with a
     restroom, bench seating, and parking. Site area is
     about 0.5 acre.
• Ramona Garden Park Center
     The center includes a large meeting room, conference
     room, dance floor, kitchen and outdoor barbecue pit.
     Seating occupancy is 125 people.
• Grover Beach Community Center
     Located at South 12th Street and Trouville Avenue, the
     Center is an 8,000 square foot multi-use building
     remodeled in 2002, with a small tot play area and
     parking. The seating capacity is 250.
California Department of Parks and Recreation Lands
• Dune Boardwalk
     The Pismo State Beach natural area park land area
     north and south of Grand Ave within the City is about
     110 acres and includes dunes and riparian woodland.
     The Dune Boardwalk was constructed in 2004 and
                                                          Page 9

                                                              Parks and Recreation Element Update
                    maintained on state land by the City. The pedestrian
                    path extends from the Grand Avenue day use plaza north
                    to the city limit, where it links to a path extending
                    to the Pismo Beach pier.
         • Golf Course
                    The state operates a 9-hole golf course next to the
                    dune area near the end of Grand Avenue.
         • Day Use Plaza and beach access
                    In cooperation with State Parks, the City developed a
                    day use picnic plaza, beach access and restroom near
                    the end of Grand Ave. The day use area includes
                    parking for about 160 cars.
         How Park Needs are Determined
         In the 1970’s as urban and suburban populations began to
         outstrip the ability of many communities to add park lands
         for it residents, national park standards were developed to
         help communities plan for adequate park acreage to meet
         future demand. The standards were expressed in acres of
         parkland per thousand of population.1
         In Grover Beach, some of the park categories listed in
         Table 2 below do not apply to a community of 13,000 in
         population. For example regional parks are generally
         provided by the County or, in the case of metropolitan
         areas, a regional park district.
            Table 2 - 1983 National Recreation and Park Association Standards for Parks
                                ACRES/1,000                              POPULATION
              PARK TYPE                            SIZE RANGE                                     SERVICE AREA
                                  PEOPLE                                   SERVED
            Mini Parks             No std.         0.5 to 5 acres         500- 2,500             Sub- neighborhood
            Neighborhood                                                A Neighborhood
                                      1-3          5 to 25 acres                                   1/4 – 1/2 mile
            Parks                                                        Approx. 5,000
            Community                                                       Several
                                      5-8            25+ acres                                       1 – 2 miles
            Parks                                                       Neighborhoods
            Regional                                                        Several              1 hour driving time
            Metropolitan             5-10           200+ acres           Communities
            Parks
            Special Areas       No Applicable     Includes linear parks, trails, beaches, golf courses, historical sites,
                                  Standard        flood plains, coastal accessways, etc. No standard is applicable.
            Conservancy         No Applicable     Protection and management of the natural/cultural environment with
            (Natural Areas)       Standard        recreational use as a secondary objective.
1
  1983 National Recreation and Park Association Standards for Parks.
                                                                                                               Page 10

                                                 Parks and Recreation Element Update
  Need for Parks
  While the current National Recreation and Park Association
  (NRPA) Standards suggest the need for each community to
  develop its own relevant standards, the traditional NRPA
  standards do provide a starting point for assessing current
  need. The following table applies the 1983 NRPA Standards
  from Table 2 to the City’s current park inventory.
  Experience has shown most communities, including Grover
  Beach, have not been able to consistently meet these
  standards. For example, Table 3 shows that the 2000
  population for the city would require the acquisition and
  development of an additional 64 acres of neighborhood and
  community parkland based on traditional park planning
  standards. While not a community park in a conventional
  sense, the beach area does provide special types of
  recreation opportunities that meet many community needs.
  Table 3 includes the regional park acreage provided by the
  County and State in the Five Cities area, i.e. Pismo State
  Beach and Biddle Regional Park. Regional facilities also do
  not meet the target standards for the region.
  Table 3 - Application of NRPA Standards- Grover Beach
                       NRPA Standard                          Calculated        Existing
                      (acres/1,000 pop)         2000              Need          Acreage      Deficiency
Facility Type                               Population         (in acres)        (2004)      (in acres)
Neighborhood
Park (City)              1-2 acres           13,063             13- 26                   1
                                                                             14.19 acres      (64-116)
Community
Park (City)              5-8 acres           13,063            65-104
Regional Park
                                                                                     2
(County / State)            5-10             50,000           250-500            200          (50-300)
Notes: 1. Natural Area acreage is not included in these figures
        2. Regional includes Pismo State Beach within City, Biddle (County) Regional Park
  There is a growing recognition that recreation and parkland
  demand is best met by a variety of providers acting in
  cooperation because, typically, traditional target acreages
  for parks are not realistic given funding limitations.
  However, as the basis for determining the appropriate
  amount of land that should be provided with new residential
  development the City uses a standard of five acres of park
  land for 1,000 population increase associated with any
  proposed residential subdivision.
  Planning for parkland acquisition also needs to focus on
  co-operative and adaptive strategies. Grover Beach may be
  best served by a self-directed approach based on what
                                                                                           Page 11

                            Parks and Recreation Element Update
citizens in the community determine is the best and most
opportune for themselves.
This Element recommends the implementation of local
community park acreage standards based on community input,
local surveys and review of regional trends. This process
is described in Chapter 5 – Providing for Parks and
Recreation. This kind of local approach to assessing need
is consistent with current NRPA recommendations. This
approach may identify the need for additional park acreage
for some or all types of parks, or it may determine that
parkland needs are being met. Table 3 above is intended to
provide some indication of how the community is doing.
Popular new recreational pursuits can create unmet demand
in a short period. For this reason, sometimes the
traditional models for what needs to be in every park need
to be reexamined. For example, 30 years ago, most small
communities had perhaps one organized youth sport: Little
League Baseball. Today, soccer has exceeded the level of
participation in Little League in Grover Beach, and other
activities such as skateboarding and adult softball have
grown greatly in year-round participation. For planning
purposes, Appendix C includes the basic standards for
neighborhood / community parks in Grover Beach including
the types of facilities and uses that may be a part of
these parks.
Given the long planning timeframe leading to park or
facility land acquisition and construction, recreational
facility planning needs to be flexible, adaptive and
responsive to evolving needs. Determining those needs is
best accomplished by:
• Examining regional trends
• Performing periodic community surveys
• Conducting local workshops, and
• Preparing long range master plans for each facility
Parks Goals, Policies and Programs
GOAL   2-  Provide   park  facilities     with  a   range    of
recreational opportunities for all       ages,  as close     as
possible to where people live.
Policy 2.1
                                                         Page 12

                             Parks and Recreation Element Update
Continue to maximize the use of each park facility by
creatively adapting the recreation opportunities available
as community needs change and evolve.
     Program 2.1.1: Create Master Plans for each facility
     and periodically review and update the plans and
     estimate implementation costs to respond to changing
     needs.
     Program   2.1.2:   When   creating    new,   or   updating
     existing, park and facility plans, consider the
     effects on surrounding neighborhoods for issues such
     as noise, light and glare, and traffic and parking in
     order to minimize impacts on neighborhood quality of
     life.
                                                          Page 13
                                   Parks and Recreation Element Update
Policy 2.2
Seek to partner with the State, County, the neighboring
Cities, the local school district and sports organizations
as opportunities arise to pool resources to meet area-wide
recreation needs.
       Program 2.2.1: Identify projects that could benefit
       from a partnership arrangement such as a community
       pool and new or improved sports fields.
       Program 2.2.2: Maintain open communication with the
       State, County, neighboring Cities and the local school
       district to establish mutual goals and timelines for
       achieving the goals.
Policy 2.3
Maintain a Park Capital Projects list that is regularly
updated and prioritized with input from the community.
       Program 2.3.1: Pursue acquisition and development of a
       three to five acre park in the southwest quadrant of
       the City.
       Program 2.3.2: Pursue development of a Senior Center
       by determining the program of uses and building
       requirements, determining if a joint use facility is a
       viable option, and evaluating options for land
       acquisition.
       Program 2.3.3: Conduct periodic surveys and / or
       public workshops to update, prioritize and adapt the
       ongoing project list for park improvements shown on
       Table 4.
Table 4- Potential Park and Facility Project List
• Cleaver Park
       The 0.84 acre parcel was gifted to the City for development as a
       park. The Parks and Recreation Commission has reviewed conceptual
       alternative plans for development of the parcel as a community
       pool and a passive park, however no formal action has been taken
       on the park. Development as a Senior Center is another option.
• El Camino Oaks Trail
       The informal hiking path within the 28.5 acre ecological preserve
       / open space lands owned by the City could be improved to be
       accessible to more age groups and formalized with signage and
       trail stabilizing features.    The oak woodland is a unique and
       valuable resource within the city. This property includes the
                                                                   Page 14

                            Parks and Recreation Element Update
parcels identified as the potential Charles Street Park on the
uphill side of Charles Street adjacent to the preserve area.
                                                             Page 15
                                   Parks and Recreation Element Update
(Table 4 cont.)
• New Sports Fields- South Grover Park dedication / acquisition
       The undeveloped lands at the southern end of the City include the
       30 acre Okui property at Highland/ South 13th Street and the 10
       acre Hero “North” property on Farroll Road. These lands are zoned
       for residential and light manufacturing uses. When these lands
       develop, the last remaining opportunity to acquire park land large
       enough to accommodate needed sports fields will pass.
       The County of San Luis Obispo has expressed initial willingness to
       explore partnering on park improvements in this area that could
       also serve Oceano residents. In addition, the local youth soccer
       league (AYSO) has expressed willingness to investigate grant
       funding through its national organization.
• Sports fields improvement projects at Schools
       There are few parcels available and affordable to the City for new
       parks and needed sports fields. The City could partner with the
       school district to upgrade, improve and intensify sports fields
       and other recreation facilities on the three elementary schools in
       the city. There would also be maintenance benefits in this
       arrangement.
• Senior Center
       The workshops indicated that more activities for seniors should be
       developed including the idea of a Senior Center. No specific site
       in the City is identified.
• Improvements to Mentone Basin
       This field is lighted and has the potential to meet some of the
       need for sports fields. Although the softball field in the basin
       has a short right field the turf area can be used for soccer. In
       order to have the field available to organized sports the City
       would need to commit more maintenance resources to the field to
       renovate annually after the rainy season.
• Community Pool
       The workshops and survey showed a high interest for a community
       pool. No specific site has been identified in the City and it is
       possible that this need could be filled regionally by a
       partnership among the Cities and / or school district.
• Railroad Corridor / 4th Street Recreational Path
       As part of the widening and realignment of South 4th Street
       identified in the Circulation Element, evaluate the feasibility of
       incorporating a detached recreational path that may be extended
       north along the railroad corridor in the future.
• Charles Street path
       The City of Pismo Beach owns a fenced water tank site next to
       Grover Heights Elementary School. In the past, the City has
       considered acquiring the southern end of this parcel to develop a
       landscaped parkway and pedestrian connection link to Charles
       Street, primarily for school children.
• Ramona Cultural Center facilities
       The Ramona Specific Plan envisions development of a variety of
       civic and educational facilities on the 800 and 900 blocks of
       Ramona Avenue adjoining Ramon Garden Park. These include community
       library expansion, an educational Exploration Station building, a
                                                                   Page 16

                            Parks and Recreation Element Update
youth arts and crafts center, a firefighter’s museum, a children’s
center and associated outdoor use areas.
                                                            Page 17

                                       Parks and Recreation Element Update
    (Table 4 cont.)
    • 6th and Longbranch property
           The City owns a small lot that could be developed for more formal
           recreation such as a tot lot and landscaped sitting area
    • Carolan House
           The Carolan House was relocated to the corner of Mentone Park. It
           is not historically significant in this location. The building and
           / or the underlying land might be better utilized for recreation.
    • Municipal Pier
           The Local Coastal Plan includes a goal to develop a municipal pier
           on state land at the beach. This idea was reaffirmed at the PRE
           workshops.
    • Farroll Avenue and 4th Street Park site
           The Open Space and Conservation Element identifies a potential
           park site at the corner of Farroll Avenue and 4th Street. This
           neighborhood would benefit from a park, however, this land is
           currently zoned for manufacturing uses.
3 Recreation
    Value and Benefits of Recreation
    While parks provide the land, recreation is provided by the
    particular amenities and programs provided within the park.
    Open, green parkland has value; however, that value is
    typically increased when the land also provides amenities
    that can be used or appreciated. In Grover Beach the
    limited amount of park land has meant that recreation
    facilities at each park are intensively used.
    Recreation also includes the various programs offered year-
    round by the City Parks and Recreation Department,
    providing exercise and activities for all age groups and
    all economic backgrounds. A rich variety of recreation
    program opportunities teach our children values, gives
    opportunities for healthy exercise for all ages, and
    provides a format for healthy creativity and competition.
    Types of Recreation Opportunities Offered by the City
    The City offers a wide range of recreation opportunities
    through structured programs administered by the Parks and
    Recreation Department. These include Youth and Teen
    Programs, Adult and Senior Programs, and Special Events and
    Programs. Annual participation in these programs and
    classes is approximately 10,000 persons. The City benefits
    from a strong Volunteer program for recreation assistants.
                                                                       Page 18

                                  Parks and Recreation Element Update
    How Recreation Need is Determined
    The Parks and Recreation Department prepares a quarterly
    schedule of classes, programs and events by tracking
    regional trends, surveying participants
    and,    occasionally,    as     in    2000,
    conducting a community survey to gauge
    public interest and satisfaction with
    recreation    programs.    Certain     core
    programs serving a range of age groups,
    such as tennis classes and pre-school
    and   senior    classes,    are    operated
    consistently year to year; the variety
    of many other classes, events and
    programs changes over time in response
    to needs. The classes, programs and events are offered
    quarterly in an Activity Guide produced jointly with the
    Cities of Arroyo Grande and Pismo Beach.
    Recreation Goals, Policies and Programs
    GOAL 3-Strive to meet the recreational needs of all age
    groups.
    Policy 3.1
    Continue to provide a wide range of
    programs, classes, events and services that respond to the
    changing needs of the community.
         Program 3.1.1: Annually track recreation program
         participation changes, review regional trends, and
         evaluate user response to the recreation programs and
         services in order to adapt and develop the City’s
         yearly recreation program offerings.
         Program 3.1.2: Continue to maintain active cooperative
         relationships with other recreation providers, such as
         the YMCA and other Cities.
4 - Special Places - Beach and Natural Areas
    Special Places Defined
                                                               Page 19

                              Parks and Recreation Element Update
Grover Beach is fortunate to have a variety of special
places, including the coastal dunes and beach and the
Natural Area Preserve along the northern edge of the City.
These places are unique assets in the City that can enrich
the   lives    of   residents,   protect    sensitive    natural
resources, and draw visitors to the area. Coastal and
special natural features are finite and sensitive resources
that require good management, however, with good design and
management opportunities exist for these to attract “eco-
tourism”.
The City’s Local Coastal Program (LCP) includes policies
and programs to conserve these resources while providing
for recreational enjoyment by residents and visitors. Most
of the land on the coast in Grover Beach is owned by the
State. The LCP represents a coordinated effort, mandated by
the Coastal Act, for the City and State to have consistent
goals, objectives and policies for use of the Coastal Zone
recreational lands. These include describing the type of
existing    and   new   facilities    that    can   occur,    the
requirements for pedestrian access, resource protection and
various recreational improvements, including, for example,
the Dune Boardwalk.
Special Places Goals, Policies and Programs
                                     Dune Boardwalk
GOAL 4 - Conserve and enhance
the beach, dune and natural areas
in the City for the use and
enjoyment of the public.
Policy 4.1
Maintain the beach and dune area
for    safe    pedestrian    access
consistent with the Local Coastal
Program and Open Space and Conservation Element.
Policy 4.2
Seek to expand appropriate recreational activities and
services for residents and visitors at the beach that are
consistent with the Local Coastal Program and State Parks
management objectives.
     Program 4.2.1: Update the recreation goals, objectives
     and resource protection and management measures in the
                                                           Page 20

                       Parks and Recreation Element Update
Local Coastal Plan to provide activities such as beach
swings, sand volleyball courts and bike rentals.
Program 4.2.2: Consider the effects of new uses and
services in the beach and dune area on coastal
resources in order to conserve and protect natural
resources.
                                                    Page 21
                                Parks and Recreation Element Update
    Policy 4.3
    Create an urban trails plan and program in coordination
    with neighboring Cities.
         Program 4.3.1: Explore opportunities to improve access
         to the El Camino Oaks Natural Area for the enjoyment
         of the public while preserving natural resources and
         minimizing intrusion on adjoining neighborhoods.
         Program 4.3.2: Explore opportunities to create an
         urban trail link south from Grand Avenue through the
         dunes to Oceano in coordination with State Parks, the
         County and the federal De Anza Trail program.
         Program 4.3.3: Consider the effects of urban trails on
         neighboring land uses, wildlife habitat and natural
         resources in order to minimize land use conflicts,
         native vegetation loss and wetland sedimentation.
5 - Providing for Parks and Recreation
    Decision Process
    Parks and recreation planning is one “special-interest”
    among many when a land development proposal is presented to
    public officials.    Sometimes parks goals can be met and
    other times competing goals override park acquisition or
    expansion.
    This chapter outlines a process for choosing the park and
    recreation facilities the community needs. This is designed
    to make certain that decisions are based upon an
    understanding of our current fiscal resources, input from
    those most effected, and the City’s long-term goals.
    Parks and Recreation Commission
    The Parks and Recreation Commission (PRC) advises the City
    Council and the Parks Manager in the policy, planning and
    development   of   the   City's   park    system,    including
    implementation of this Element. The PRC is made up of five
    members who are appointed by the City Council.
    Periodically, the Parks and Recreation Manager will provide
    the Parks and Recreation Commission an update on the status
    of existing and any proposed significant new projects.
                                                             Page 22

                                Parks and Recreation Element Update
    Whenever an individual, public official or group want
    significant new recreation facilities or a change in
    facility use, a benefactor proposes a gift, or a property
    of interest becomes available as part of a land use
    development proposal, the Parks Manager will process and
    coordinate such requests.
    Parks and Recreation Project List
    The list of potential new parks and improvements to
    existing park lands included in Chapter 2 on Table 4 was
    developed with input from the Parks and Recreation
    Commission and City staff, as well as through public
    workshops, surveys and adopted plans and General Plan
    elements. This list represents the range of possibilities
    at the time of updating the Parks and Recreation Element
    and does not necessarily reflect any particular priority or
    ranking. Appendix D is the Needs Assessment conducted as
    part of this Update.
    Pursuant to Parks and Recreation Element Policies 2.1 and
    2.3, this list will be updated from time to time and
    reflected in the City’s Five Year Capital Improvements
    Program.
6 - Funding
    Funding Acquisition and Development of Parks
    In order for the City to expand the current park and
    recreation system, adequate and dependable funding sources
    will be needed. These funding sources must equally address
    acquisition,   development  and   maintenance    costs.    This
    chapter identifies the existing funding sources for the
    City Parks Program and considers options for future
    funding.
    The development of parks, recreation facilities and natural
    areas within City Parks has been funded by a variety of
    sources including:
    Grant and Park Bond funding
    Grants apportioned under the Park Bond Initiative have
    provided the City with over $375,000 in capital funding
    over the past several years. These funds are used to
    upgrade or add new facilities at existing parks.
                                                             Page 23

                                              Parks and Recreation Element Update
        Development impact fees
        These fees have been a funding source for new or expanded
        parks. The City collects park development impact fees2.
        Since impact fees are assessed on new development, this
        source of revenue generation fluctuates with the rate of
        residential growth. In recent years, development impact
        fees have made possible the purchase of land to expand
        Ramona Park and make improvements at other parks.
        Quimby Act Park Dedications and Park In Lieu fees
        The state Quimby Act makes it possible for cities to
        require that new residential subdivisions dedicate land for
        parks or provide a fee in lieu of a park land dedication.
        The City Municipal Code requires that five park acres per
        thousand       in     added      population       associated        with      new
        residential projects be dedicated with new subdivisions.
        Quimby Act park dedications have resulted in new park and
        open space land including the Natural Area preserve, Hero
        Park, Costa Bella Basin Park and the expansion of 16th
        Street Park. The Municipal Code also establishes formulas
        for determining the amount of fee required in lieu of park
        land dedication applied to residential subdivisions.
        Donations
        Gifts have historically been an important source of park
        acquisition. Donations of land of parks have made possible
        the Ramona Garden Park, the future Cleaver Park and the
        South County Skate Park. Donations are an opportunity for
        individuals and organizations to give a lasting gift to the
        community.
        Funding Recreation Programs
        The Parks and Recreation Department generates about 57% of
        the necessary operational revenue for its recreation
        programs through user fees. The balance is offset by the
        General Fund.
        Funding Maintenance
2
  Development Impact Fees and Park In-Lieu fees are intended to provide new facilities
  which offset the impact of new residential development on existing service levels. These
  fees are assessed on new residential development only. These fees may not be used for
  ongoing maintenance.
                                                                                   Page 24
                            Parks and Recreation Element Update
The maintenance of parks, recreation facilities and natural
areas within City parks has been funded by a variety of
sources including the following:
                                                         Page 25
                                               Parks and Recreation Element Update
        General Fund
        The General Fund currently provides all the funds for
        maintenance of parks. The General Fund also is the primary
        funding source for nearly all City services, including such
        diverse programs as law enforcement, fire protection and
        street improvements. The competition for finite fiscal
        resources limits its potential to fund new facilities and
        ongoing maintenance.
        Grant Funds
        California Park Bond Acts have provided grants to counties,
        cities and special park districts that can be used for
        major maintenance projects. While such funds may not be
        used for daily maintenance needs, like mowing lawns and
        cleaning restrooms, they can provide funds for overdue
        major maintenance. Major maintenance projects such as
        paving deteriorated parking lots and renovating old
        restrooms can help to reduce daily maintenance expenses
        simply by improving the condition of park facilities. The
        availability of grants and bond funding fluctuates over
        time and is often subject to the vigor of the overall state
        economy.
        The City’s Parks and Recreation Department faces two
        funding challenges. The first is the high cost of funding
        new facilities. The second is funding ongoing maintenance
        of existing and new facilities.
        Funding new facilities
        Although in good years the Parks and Recreation Department
        accumulates annual revenues from grants and park in-lieu
        fees, due to the City’s climbing property values these
        funds do not buy much. In today’s real estate market, the
        potential       land     acquisition        costs     of     typical      3-acre
        neighborhood park for land zoned manufacturing would be in
        the range of $540,000; with an underlying zoning of single
        family residential or multifamily residential the cost for
        three acres could be $3 million.
        To develop that park with basic facilities would cost
        roughly $500,000-$700,000.3 At a total cost of roughly $1.0
        to $3.7 million, at best the City would be able to provide
        one new neighborhood park every 5 to 10 years. And this
3
  Typical development could include children’s play equipment, landscaping and irrigation,
  picnic tables, benches, and a basketball court.
                                                                                   Page 26

                               Parks and Recreation Element Update
 would not address what upgrades at existing parks would
 need to be postponed in order to provide this new facility.
 Appendix C lists the estimated costs to implement the parks
 program in the City over the next 10 to 15 year planning
 time frame. The projected costs serve as a basis to
 establish the appropriate level of park impact fees needed
 to fund improvements.
 Funding maintenance of new facilities
 Currently the City’s parks are very well maintained, a fact
 noted by public participants in the Parks and Recreation
 Element update process. As evidenced by the City’s
 experience with the Skate Park facility, the scope and
 nature of maintaining new facilities can be hard to
 foresee. In times when the cost of maintaining existing
 facilities    exceeds     available     funding,     determining
 maintenance    priorities    can   be    difficult.    Deferring
 maintenance during such times generally results in greater
 future costs to rehabilitate neglected parks.
 Appendix E includes park maintenance standards for Grover
 Beach Parks.
Funding Goals, Policies and Programs
GOAL 5-Use a variety of funding sources to expand, acquire,
       develop, and maintain the County’s parks, recreation
       opportunities and natural areas.
Policy 5.1
Continue to list potential park projects in the City’s Five
Year Capital Improvement Project list.
    Program 5.1.1: Maintain and update projected costs for
    new park and recreation facilities to provide a basis of
    reviewing and updating development impact fees collected
    by the City to be used to fund improvements.
Policy 5.2
Continue to require Quimby Act park dedications at the ratio
of five acres of park land for each 1,000 in population
added by proposed subdivisions, or payment of park in lieu
fees as required by the City Municipal Code and park
development impact fees for all new residential development.
                                                            Page 27

                             Parks and Recreation Element Update
   Program 5.2.1: Periodically review and evaluate the
   adopted park dedication ratio and the park development
   impact fee to determine if changing circumstances warrant
   a change in the ratio and / or fees.
Policy5.3
Develop a funding program that balances community need with
available revenues.
   Program   5.3.1:    Explore    funding   arrangements     and
   partnerships with the County, neighboring cities and the
   local school district to pool resources and maximize the
   overall public benefit for needed park and recreation
   facilities.
   Program 5.3.2: Annually review the recreation program
   fees and costs to maintain an appropriate level of cost
   recovery through program and event user fees.
GOAL 6-Provide high quality park maintenance that is cost
effective and environmentally sensitive.
Policy 6.1
In conjunction with accepting or developing a new          park,
estimate the long-term maintenance and operating           costs
associated with the proposed project
Policy 6.2
Ensure that the City receive a net benefit to the City park
and recreation system when a proposed or existing park is
impacted by private or quasi-public infrastructure and other
easements.
      Program 6.2.1: In the development review process of
      projects with facilities proposed to meet park
      requirements should be reviewed by the Parks Manager
      and Community Development Director.
Policy 6.3
Use methods within      City   Park  facilities   that   reduce
maintenance costs.
      Program 6.3.1: Evaluate and implement as feasible the
      use of drought tolerant landscaping, solar oriented
      structures, structures with natural lighting during
      daylight hours, and stainless steel fixtures which
                                                          Page 28
                     Parks and Recreation Element Update
having a longer lifetime   and  are  more  resident   to
vandalism.
                                                  Page 29
                                  Parks and Recreation Element Update
7 - Definitions
Active Recreation. Active recreation tends to involve facilities
and usually larger groups of people. Some examples of active
recreation include items such as community centers, a skate park,
tennis courts, sports fields, and a swimming pool.         (See also
Passive Recreation).
Coastal Access.    Coastal Access provides public access to and
along California’s coastline. Access ways are defined as vertical
and lateral. Vertical access connects the closest public road to
the coast. Lateral access provides access along the coastline,
basically providing an area to walk along the beach, an example
being the Dune Boardwalk Project
Community Center. Community centers or indoor sports facilities
typically provide indoor area for recreation such basketball,
fitness classes, crafts, games, and other similar recreation.
While recreation sites are often limited to a building, parking
and exterior landscaping, these sites may also include some
outdoor recreation.
Enterprise Fund.     Enterprise funds are established to finance
and account for the operation and maintenance of facilities and
services which are self-supporting by user charges with the use
of tax revenues.
General Fund. The General Fund is the main operating fund of the
City accounting for expenditures and revenues for citywide
activities.
General Fund Support.     General Fund Support is the amount of
General Fund financial support to a given budget unit after
revenues and other funding are subtracted from expenditures.
Goals.   Goals are a general expression of community values, an
ideal future result or condition related to the mission
statement.
Impact Fees.     In Grover Beach, Development impact fees are
assessed on new residential development. These funds may be used
to acquire, construct and rehabilitate parks.
Linear Parks. Linear parks are located along a corridor such as
a river, creek, or a trail system. These parks tend to be narrow
and long in configuration. Linear parks may link schools, parks
or neighborhoods and may also serve a community’s transportation
needs. Often a linear park derives its shape by conforming to an
                                                               Page 30

                                   Parks and Recreation Element Update
edge: of the coast, of a river or creek or an abandoned railroad
right of way.
Mini-Parks.    Also known as Pocket Parks, mini-parks are the
smallest type of park. They may range in size from a small
residential lot, in some cases as small as 6,000 square feet, up
to 3 or more acres. In most cases, mini-parks are usually one
acre or less. Because of their small size, mini-parks may be more
passive in nature. Mini-parks serve a distinct sub-neighborhood.
Mission Statement.     A Mission Statement is a broad statement
which defines the agency’s values, principles, and what matters
most. Goals and policies should be guided by an agency’s Mission
Statement.
Neighborhood Parks.     Neighborhood parks typically serve nearby
populations consisting of one or more neighborhoods. According to
National   Recreation    and   Parks   Association     standards,     a
neighborhood park may range in size from roughly five to ten
acres. In general, neighborhood parks are within walking distance
from the people they are primarily intended to serve, i.e. one
mile or less.       Neighborhood parks usually include passive
recreation as well as some active recreation. Typical facilities
might include children’s play equipment, a court game (such as
basketball, tennis or handball), a turf area and individual
picnic areas.
Passive Recreation. Passive recreation tends to be      more tranquil
and involve activities that are more individual         or involve a
small group. Examples of passive recreation include     such items as
a walking trail, individual picnic sites, nature        appreciation,
and birding. (See also Active Recreation).
Pocket Parks.    See Mini-Parks.
Policies. Policies are statements that guide decision-making and
imply a clear commitment. Policies are based on the information
gathered and analyzed during the preparation of this Element.
Quimby Fees. Quimby fees are collected when new residential lots
are created and can only be used to expand, acquire,
rehabilitate, or develop community-serving parks
Regional Parks.     The City of Grover Beach does not operate
regional parks. San Luis Obispo County provides regional parks,
for example, Biddle Regional Park east of Arroyo Grande serves
the South County area.
                                                                Page 31

  Appendix A
  Map of Existing and Proposed Parks and Facilities
)
                                  ~
                            o       1/1
                            ~ ~
                             '!!        ()
                              ~
                               c.         IJ\
                                ~;<        "~
                                             "ro
LEGEND:
- - Roads
c::::::::J Parce Is
Property Type
_          Civic Center
           Potential Park
           Park                                                           .    f Grover Beach
                                                                        City 0                t Update
           Natural Open Space                             Parks an d Recreation Elemen
           School
c:::!:     Pote.ntla
                    . I Park         Site        ..
           within    Futur e SubdivIsion.
                                                                      Parks an d Other Facilities
~          Existing Recreational Trail
           (Boardwalk)                              .
- - Potentia        . I Recreational Trail
                                                          North
                                                         Ocea no
                                                      El e m e n tary
       North
Appendix B
Consolidated Goals, Policies and Programs
Appendix B Consolidated Goals and Polices 1
       GOAL 1- The City will strive to create quality recreation services and facilities
       that benefit and enrich the quality of life for Grover Beach residents.
       Policy 1.1
       The Grover Beach Parks and Recreation Department is committed to providing
       or facilitating quality recreational services, including programs, classes, special
       events, and facilities to all members of the community in a courteous and efficient
       manner.
       GOAL 2- Provide park facilities with a range of recreational opportunities for all
       ages, as close as possible to where people live.
       Policy 2.1
       Continue to maximize the use of each park facility by creatively adapting the
       recreation opportunities available as community needs change and evolve.
                Program 2.1.1: Create Master Plans for each facility and periodically
                review and update the plans and estimate implementation costs to
                respond to changing needs.
                Program 2.1.2: When creating new, or updating existing, park and facility
                plans, consider the effects on surrounding neighborhoods for issues such
                as noise, light and glare, and traffic and parking in order to minimize
                impacts on neighborhood quality of life.
       Policy 2~2
      Seek to partner with the State, County, the neighboring Cities, the local school
      district and sports organizations as opportunities arise to pool resources to meet
      area-wide recreation needs.
               Program 2.2.1: Identify projects that could benefit from a partnership
               arrangement such as a community pool and new or improved sports
               fields.
               Program 2.2.2: Maintain open communication with the State, County,
               neighboring Cities and the local school district to establish mutual goals
               and timelines for achieving the goals.
      Policy 2.3
      Maintain a Park Capital Projects list that is regularly updated and prioritized with
      input from the community.
               Program 2.3.1: Pursue acquisition and development of a three to five acre
               park in the so'uthwest quadrant of the City.
Appendix B Consolidated Goals and Polices                                                2
                 Program 2.3.2: Pursue development of a Senior Center by determining
                 the program of uses and building requirements, determining if a joint use
                 facility is a viable option, and evaluating options for land acquisition.
                 Program 2.3.3: Conduct periodic surveys and / or public workshops to
                 update, prioritize and adapt the ongoing project list for park improvements
                 shown on Table 4.                                                         .
         GOAL 3-Strive to meet the recreational needs of all age groups.
         Policy 3.1
         Continue to provide a wide range of programs, classes, events and services that
         respond to the changing needs of the community.
                 Program 3.1.1: Annually track recreation program participation changes,
                 review regional trends, and evaluate user response to the recreation
                 programs and services in order to adapt and develop the City's yearly
                 recreation program offerings.
                 Program 3.1.2: Continue to maintain active cooperative relationships with
                 other recreation providers, such as the Y~CA and other Cities.
        GOAL 4 - Conserve and enhance the beach, dune and natural areas in the City
        for the use and enjoyment of the public.
)       Policy 4.1
        Maintain the beach and dune area for safe pedestrian access consistent with the
        Local Coastal Program and Open Space and Conservation Element.
        Policy 4.2
        Seek to expand appropriate recreational activities and services for residents and
        visitors at the beach that are consistent with the Local Coastal Program and
        State Parks management objectives.
                Program 4.2.1: Update the recreation goals, objectives and resource
                protection and management measures in the Local Coastal Plan to
                provide activities such as beach swings, sand volleyball courts and bike
                rentals.
                Program 4.2.2: Consider the effects of new uses and services in the
                beach and dune area on coastal resources in order to conserve and
                protect natural resources.
        Policy 4.3
        Create an urban trails plan and program in coordination with neighboring Cities.
)
  Appendix B Consolidated Goals and Polices                                                  3
                 Program 4.3.1: Explore opportunities to improve access to the EI Camino
                 Oaks Natural Area for the enjoyment of the public while preserving
                 natural resources and minimizing intrusion on adjoining neighborhoods.
                 Program 4.3.2: Explore opportunities to create an urban trail link south
                 from Grand Avenue through the dunes to Oceano in coordination with
                 State Parks, the County and the federal De Anza Trail program.
                 Program 4.3.3: Consider the effects of urban trails on neighboring land
                 uses, wildlife habitat and natural resources in order to minimize land use
                 conflicts, native vegetation loss and wetland sedimentation.
GOAL 5-Use a variety of funding sources to expand, acquire, develop, and maintain the
                 County's parks, recreation opportunities and natural areas.
       Policy 5.1
      Continue to list potential park projects in the City's Five Year Capital Improvement
      Project list.
            Program 5.1.1: Maintain and update projected costs for new park and
            recreation facilities to provide a basis of reviewing and updating development
            impact fees collected by the City to be used to fund improvements.
      Policy 5.2
     Continue to require Quimby Act park dedications at the ratio of five acres of park
      land for each 1,000 in population added by proposed subdivisions, or payment of
     park in lieu fees as required by the City Municipal Code and park development
     impact fees for a" new residential development.
            Program 5.2.1: Periodically review and evaluate the adopted park dedication
            ratio and the park development impact fee to determine if changing
            circumstances warrant a change in the ratio and / or fees.
     Policy 5.3
     Develop a funding program that balances community need with available
     revenues.
           Program 5.3.1: Explore funding· arrangements and partnerships with the
           County, neighboring cities and the local school district to pool resources and
           maximize the overall public benefit for needed park and recreation facilities.
           Program 5.3.2: Annually review the recreation program fees and costs to
           maintain an appropriate level of cost recovery through program and event
           user fees.
     GOAL 6-Provide high quality park maintenance that is cost effective and
     environmentally sensitive.
Appendix B Consolidated Goals and Polices                                                 4

        Policy 6.1
        In conjunction with accepting or developing a new park, estimate the long-term
        maintenance and operating costs associated with the proposed project
        Policy 6.2
        Ensure that the City receive a net benefit to the City park and recreation system
       when a proposed or existing park is impacted by private or quasi-public
       infrastructure and other easements.
                 Program 6.2.1: In the development review process of projects with
                 facilities proposed to meet park requirements should be reviewed by the
                 Parks Manager and Community Development Director.
       Policy 6.3
       Use methods within City Park facilities that reduce maintenance costs.
                 Program 6.3.1: Evaluate and implement as feasible the use of drought
                 tolerant landscaping, solar oriented structures, structures with natural
                 lighting during daylight hours, and stainless steel fixtures which having a
                 longer lifetime and are more resident to vandalism.
)
  Appendix B Consolidated Goals and Polices                                               5
Appendix C Projected Costs for the Potential Parks and Facilities 1
Appendix C .. Parks Standards and Projected
Implementation Costs
                                                                    )
                                                                    )
  Appendix C    Projected Costs for the Potential Parks and Facilities            2
  Appendix C- Parks Standards and Projected Implementation Costs
  The following basic park standards are adopted with the Parks and Recreation
  Element to provide a basis for determining projected costs to implement the
  Element policies and action items. The standards will establish the types of
  facilities that would normally be considered part of a- new neighborhood park and
  their costs. As discussed in the Element, the final components of each existing
  and new park would be subject to public and Parks and Recreation Commission
  input.
  The cost per acre of park development (not land cost) is higher for intensely
  developed, small parks than for a park of any size that has mostly open grass
  areas. As a result, a range in costs in 2004 dollars is presented (cost should be
  adjusted annually relative to inflation): _
            • Neighborhood Park site development cost (acquisition not included):
            $150,000 to $300,000 per acre
           • Neighborhood park components and cost for a typical 3 acre park:
           -Open grass play area- 1 to 1.5 acres
                   Cost: $3.00 Isf
           -Active grass sports field- 1 acre
                   Cost: $4.50 /sf
           -Parking 10 to 20 spaces in addition to on street frontage
                   Cost: $4.00 Isf
           -Restroom
                   Cost: $175 to $200 /sf
           -Group barbecue shaded pavilion area 1,000 to 3,000 s.f.
                   Cost: $25/sf
           -Individual picnic areas 5 to 10 tables and barbecues (on conc.pad)
                   Cost: $1 ,500 each
           ;.Childrens Play area- 3,000 to 6,000 square feet (accessible mat)
                   Cost: $30 to $50 /sf
           -Benches
                   Cost: $1 ,000 each
           -Paths and walks (concrete)
                   Cost: $4.00 /sf
           -Play Courts 2,500 to 10,000 s.f
                   Cost: $6.00 1st
           - Landscaped buffers and planters 8,000 to 12,000 s.f
                   Cost: $2.50/ sf
)

  Appendix C - Projected Costs for the Potential Parks and Facilities                3
  Projected Costs for the Potential Parks and Facilities
 The following projected costs for park and facility construction are included in the
  Parks and Recreation Element to provide a starting point for establishing a five-
 year parks capital projects list and also a basis to evaluate the level of
 development impact fee required to provide park facilities in the community.
          • Cleaver Park: 0.84 acres. Passive park costs of $150,000 per acre
 equals $126,000. Active facility such as community pool facility with associated
 parking and hardscape cost:$1.0 to $1.2 million
          • EI Camino Oaks Trail/Charles Street Park: program includes permitting,
 mitigation, trail construction at 4 to 6 foot width, surfaced, signage, parking. Cost:
 $200,000 to $300,000.
          • Sports Field Improvement Projects at Schools: Three schools with play
 field turf and irrigation renovation, backstop and bleacher improvements. Cost
 per field: $100,00 to $200,000.
         • New Sports Fields: Minimum five acre park with sports field emphasis,
 small playground area, restroom, parking for minimum 75 cars. Cost: $1,500,000.
         • Improvements to Mentone Basin: Initial renovation of fields. Cost:
$150,000. Annual maintenance renovation after storm season cost: $15,000 to
$25,000.
         • Community Pool: Depending on size and range of facilities cost would
 range from $1.0 million to $1.4 million (land cost not included).
         • Senior Center: Depending on size and site development costs (not land)
cost is $150 to $200 per square foot.
         • Charles Street Path: approximately 10,000 sf landscaped with path
surface and fencing. Cost: $15,000. '
         • 6 th and Longbranch Property: Passive park improvements. Cost: $20,000
to $50,000.
         • Carolan House re-use or removal: Depending on final determination of
use costs could range from $50,000 for renovation and adaptive use to $100,000
for removal and development of some other recreation use such as a court or
picnic area..

   Appendix D
   Needs Assessment
)
)
)
  Appendix 0 - Needs Assessment 1
 Needs Assessment Overview and Workshop Summary
 Overview
          • At the time of the 1991 Parks and Recreation Element, the City had 10.51 acres of
          parks and 28.5 acres of dedicated natural open space. Since then the City has added
          3.68 acres of parks all in the southeast quadrant of the City, fulfilling specific parks and
          neighborhood land use objectives. The City also completed the dune boardwalk.
          • One facility unforeseen in 1989 but completed in 1999 is the South County Skate Park.
          • The City's parks and recreation facilities, with few exceptions, are intensively used and
          well maintained.
          • The City offers a wide variety of recreation programs and services.
          • By most park standards the City does not have enough park land for its population. All
          of the parks are under five acres in size and would be commonly termed mini-parks, yet
          they offer a wide range of recreation opportunities and meet many needs.
          • Arroyo Grande continues to provide the majority of fields for organized sports, serving
          G rover Beach and Oceano residents. Adult and youth sports organizations anticipate
          growth over the next ten years, with more fields needed now. Oceano continues to lack
          parks and Oceano residents use Grover Beach parks.
          • Depending largely on the ultimate regional provision for affordable housing over the
          next ten years, school age children are expected to slightly decrease and senior
          populations increase over that period.
Public Workshops and User Survey
Two public workshops were held to get input from residents. There was consensus that the City
should seek to provide more sports fields and develop a community or regional pool. These
facilities would serve both youth and adults.
There was also consenSus that more recreation activities should be provided for seniors.
Examples included walking paths and a senior center.
Development of the Ramona Specific plan civic / community facil.ities was also viewed as
important. These facilities would serve all ages and include provision for public art.
A questionnaire survey was undertaken in July at several parks and recreation facilities in the
City and at the local supermarket. The initial results correspond generally to the types of
comments and ideas received in the workshops.
 Grover Beach PRE Update- Needs Assessment                                                   2

    Demographic I Needs Analysis Summary
   School Age Children
   The following is summarized from the Lucia Mar Unified School District's 2004 Enrollment
   Projection Report.
           • Over the next ten years district wide enrollment is projected to decrease by roughly
           300 students. The decrease will occur in the 5 Cities area, while Nipomo is projected to
           have an increase in students.
           • Grover Beach student population will decrease by 130 (120/0) and Oceano by 17 (20/0).
           • Underlying factors:
                          Changes in Existing housing have been toward "gentrification', i.e.
           increased costs in Grover and Oceano. This affects the introduction of young kids
           (decrease) while upper income single family type housing'is projected to increase in
          student generation by 21 0/0, mostly with older children.
                          Recent new housing projects approved 1 under construction are mostly
          single family detached with a modest student generation rate of 29/100 homes. By
          contrast, Peoples Self Help Housing in Nipomo generated 174 students per 100 homes.
          The lack of affordable housing is tending to depress student generation rates:
)                         Projected new housing is for 3,400 homes in the district, which over ten
          years is 340 units annually down from 400 / year from 1999 to 2002. The decrease is
          largely due to "build out" of large planned expansion areas in the 5 Cities area.
                          The availability of Affordable Housing over the next ten years will affect
          the numbers and ages of new children. Many projects are paying affordable housing in-
          lieu fees rather than constructing affordable units. Currently the trend for housing built
          with these funds is toward senior housing.
  Conclusion
  It is generally recognized that the region is experiencing a demographic shift towards older
  residents, however, the LMUSD enrollment projections may not take fully into account the
  direction the Grover Be'ach Visioning workshops have taken in advance of the upcoming Land
  Use Element update, which is toward intensification of certain areas with live 1 work zoning, e.g.
  apartments on second and third stories above officel commercial. School age children either
  could decrease or increase depending largely on the extent of the regional provision for
  affordable housing over the next ten years.
  In either case, the numbers of adults, and in particular seniors, will increase. These age groups
  have somewhat different recreation needs than children, but are not necessarily mutually
  exclusive from children's needs.
)
   Grover Beach PRE Update- Needs Assessment                                                3

Sports Organizations- Adult and Youth
Letters and calls were made to all the regional organized sports providers. The following
summarizes the needs of the responding major organizations.
American Youth Soccer Organization (AYSO) - 1,500 participants 5 Cities area
        • Need an additional large field
        • Lack a tournament complex
        • Participation is increasing
        • Uses all LMUSD schools for practice / play in addition to Soto Sports complex (AG)
                th
        and 16 St Park (Grover)
        • Requests that Mentone Basin field be maintained for use, this field is lighted but not
        maintained for optimal use.
        • National Soccer foundation has grant funds available for field improvement.
 Arroyo Grande Valley Little League - 375 participants, AG
        • Uses three Soto Complex fields (AG) for majors/minors game play, schools for
        practice and younger kids play.
       • Needs one more playing field.
 Five Cities Youth Football - 150 players, 40 cheerleaders, LMUSD boundary
       • Wses Pilg and Campbell fields at Soto Complex (AG). These fields are too small for
        spectators. .
       • Does not use LMUSD
       • Needs two more football size fields.
 Arroyo Grande Babe Ruth Baseball - 150 participants, LMUSD boundary
       • Uses a single field at Soto Sports Complex (AG). Needs another baseball field
 Arroyo Grande Adult Softball and Baseball- 560 Spring/ 840 summer participants
       • Along with girls softball, this league competes for fields with all the above
       organizations. Needs one more field for current demand.
 Beach Cities Little League - 220 participants. Pismo, Grover, Oceano
       • Uses two fields in .Pismo Beach complex, school fields
Five Cities Girls Softball - all cities
       • Uses Soto Sports Complex in AG, school fields
Conclusion
Organized sports will likely grow, especially in adult leagues, over ten years. Present needs for
youth leagues are for one standard baseball field and two full size soccer/football fields. Adult
league needs appear to be for at least two more softball fields.
Grover Beach PRE Update- Needs Assessment                                                4

Appendix E
Maintenance Standards
           .-\ cooperJU\'e project Ot
 [he :\menCJn PJrk and Recrc:mon      SLI(lC[\'
                      .lnll
   (he NatIonal Socletv lor P:lrk Resources.
            professIonal br.mches ot
~he l'\anonal Rt!cre:mon Jnd PJrk .':"SS0CIJUOn,
                                                 - ---
                                                                                          ..:~-:i~,;:.;'_.~
           '--...c.- --~ -                              -~_,...      ....'_              i<t'ilf;r::..~-~-
Oewlopmont of • standard maintenance dassiflcadon system has been extremely dlfflCult-becaJ. there
have been problems devising. sy1tem compnehensive enoug~ to apply to the wide vorillty of park system,
in existence. In order to be of help in setting up a standard approach at the locallevei, Iach maintenance
Mode has 14 elemenu of consideration. There may be additional segments within these ~emenu to make
up the total maintenance cost program. Even the choice atnomenclature has avoided ~ t.nn "class" so
that less intense maintenance approaches avoid ~Ie n.me stigma that might ~':.~ m!!,,~ when
 "Class 'Z' or uCIass S" is used. Mode is meant-to m.... ''1he way'  or- maintenance rangfng~ the most in-
 tensive to the least intensive. Some park systems may h4r.'l tJ8I"ks that malCh only one or~' of the definec
 modes. Some systems may have maintenance approaches that almost match the system b~ leave Of '1
 two elements out. An exact match is not neceisary. but this system is Intended to give :irWide enoug.. A-
 of options that a general _ u p can be achieved. So,,!, park dapa~ts may             everi##PIa         a part of .
 park at one mode MKI the rest of the ~rk • .,cnhlr-mode'."Costsperuniffor maimenance-can vary froIT
  locality to locality because of labor rauis. costI of materials. extent of design. length of season, moistur
  availability. transportation costs and intensity of public u. . It should ba possible. however, to establis
  a local maintenance cost standard for each mode and chart thOll unit costs year by year.-It should also b
  possible to come up with a maintenance cost forecast for new developments by assigning the proper mod
  to the new development. At higher maintenance modes it is assumed that the administering agencies wi.
  have adequate time and properly trained penonn.1 to accomplish the quality that should accompany th
   Quantity of work done.

                                                 Mode I
          State of the art maintenance applied to a high quality diverse landscape. Usually associated with
       high traffic urban areas such as public squares, malls. governmental grounds or high visitation paries..
     1. Turf care - Grass height maintained accord-          wntative; a scheduled chemical or cultunlll program
ing to species and variety of grass. Mowed at least          designed to prevent significant damage. 2.) Cor-
once every five 'NOrking days but may be as often             rective; application of chemical or mechanical
as ona every three 'NOrking days. Aeration as nt-            controls designed to eliminate obsaMld. problems.
quired. not less than four times per year. Reseed·            3.1 Integrated pest management; withhokHng any
ing or sodding as needed. Weed control should be              controls until such time as pests demonstrate
practiced so that no mora than one percent of the             damage to plant materials or become a demon·
surface has weeds present.                                    sa atttd irritant in the case of flies. ~itoes.
                                                              gnats. etc. At this maintenance lavel the con-
     2. FerTilizer - Adequate te"iiization applied            trolling obiective is tc> not h.... the publlcJ>otice
 to plant species according to their optimum re-               any problems. It is anticipated at Made, I that
 quirements. Turf ~ecies should follow the chart               problems will either be prevented or "*-* wei at
 on page 00 for recommended rates. Application                 a wry early stage and corrected immediately.
 rates and times should ensure an even suppty of
  nutrients for the entire year. Nitroqen. phosphorus              7: Snow removal - Snow removai stIltS the
 and potassium percemages should follow local                  same day as accumulations of % indl . . present.
  recommendations from your County Extension                   At no time win snow be permitted to cover trans-
  Service. Trees. <It1rubs and flowers should be               ponation or parking surfaces longer thM noon of
  fenilized accoh.l;ng to their individual require.            the day after the snow stops. Applications of snow
  ments of nutrients for optimum growth. Unusually             melting compound and/or gravel are app~riate
  long or short growing seasons may modify the                 to reduce the danger of injury due to falls.
  chart 51 igh~y.                                                                                       ._-- ..
                                                                   8. Lighting - Maintenance should preserve the
       3. '";garion - Sprinkler irrigated. Electric             original design. Damaged systems should be r~
   automatic commonly used. Some manual systems                 paired as quickly as they are discowred. Bulb
   could be considered adequate under plentiful rain·           retllacement should be done during the fim work-
   fall circumstances and adeQuate staffing. Fre-               ing day after the outage is reported.
   quency of use follows rainfall. termperature.
   seasonal length and demancs of plant matenal.                    9. Surfaces - Sweep mg. cleaning and washing
                                                                of surfaces needs to be done so that at no tIme
        4. Lirrer control - Minimum of once per day.            does an accumulation of sand. dirt and leaves
   7 days per week. Extremely high visitation may               distract from the looks or safety of the area.
    increase the freQuency. Receptacles should be                Repainting or rest31ning of structures should occur
    plentiful enough to hold ail trasn generated be-             when weather or wear deteriorate the appearance
    tween servicing without normally overflowing.                of the covering. Wood surfaces r~uirinCJ oiling
                                                                 should be done a minimum of four times per
         5. Pruning - FreQuency aictated pnmanly by              year. Sums to surfaces should be taken off within
     species and vanety of trees and shrubs. Length of           five working days. Graffiti should be washed off
    growing season and design conceat also a cantrall.           or painted over rhe next working day after
     ing ractor as are cLippeo heoges versus natural style.      applicatIon.
     Timing usually scheduled to coincide With low
     demand periods or to take advantage of special                  10. RepairS - RepaIrs to all elements of the
     growing charaCterIStics sucn as law cemand penods            design mould be aone ,mmeoiatelv upon dis·
     or to take advantage of special growmg character.            covery provided replacement parts and techmcians
      istics such as pruning after flowering.                     are avaJiable to accomclish the job. When cis·
                                                                  ruptlon to the public might oe major and tne
          6. Disease and Insect Concrol _ ContrOl pro.            repaIr not cntical. repairs may be postPoneo to a
      gram may use any of three onilosoonies: 1.) Pre.            time penod which is least dIsruPtive.

    , 1. Inspecrion - Inspections of this area snould
be done daily by a member of staff.
     12. Florai plantings - NormaliV extensive or un·
usual floral plantings are part of the design. These
may include ground level beds, planters or hanging
baskets. Often multiple plantings are scheduled.
usually at least two blooming cycles per year.
Some designs may call for a more frequent rotation
 of bloom. Maximum care of watering, fertilizing,
 disease control. disbudding and weeding is neces·
 sary. Weeding flowen and shrubs is done a mini·
 mum of once per week. The desired standard is
 essentially weed free.
      13. Rest rooms - Not always a part of the d~
  sign but where required will nonnally receiw no
  less than once per day servicing. Especially high
  traffic -areas may require multiple sel'\'icing or a
  penon assigned as attandant.
      14. Special futures - Features such as foun-
   tains. drinking fountains. sculpture. speaker
   svmms. SU'UctUral art, flag poles or parking and
   crowd control devices may be part of the imegral
   design. Maintenance requirements can vary
  :~rastically but for this mode it should be of
    tne highest possible order.

                                               Mode II
       High level maintenance-assoclstea with well developed park areas with reasonably hIgh visitation.
     1. Turf care - Grass cut once every five work·      preventative measures may be utiliZed such as
ing days. Aeration as required but not less than         systemic chemical treatments. Cultural prevention
two times per year. Reseeding or sodding when            of disease problems can reduce time spent in this
bare spats are present. Weed conuol practiced            category. Some minor problems may be tolerated
INhen weeds present visible problem or when weeds        at this 1....1.
 represent 5 percent of the turf surface. Some pre-
 emergent products may be utilized at this level.             7. Snow removal - Snow removed by noon
                                                         the day following snowfall. Gravel or snow melt
      2.. Fertilizer - Adequate fertilizer level to en-   may be utilized to reduce ice accumulation.
 sure that aU plant. materials are healthy and grow-
 ing vigorotWy. Amounts depend on species.                    a    Lighting - Replacement orrep.ir of fix-
 length of growing seaon. soils and rainfall. Rates       tures when observed or reponed as- not working.
  should correspond to the lowest recommended
  rates shown on the chart.on page 14. Dinribution             9. Sunaces - Should be cleaned. repaired.
  should ensure an even supply of nutrients for the        repainted or replaced when appearance has notice-
  entire year. Nitrogen. phosphorus and potassium         ably deteriorated.
  percentage should follow local recommendations
  from the County Extension Service. Trees, shrubs             10. Repairs - Should be done whenever safety,
  and flowen should receive fertilizer jevels to           function. or bad appearance is in question.
   ensure optimum growth.
                                                                11./nspection - Inspection by some staff
       3. '";gao'on - Some type of irrigation system        member at least once a day when regular staff is
   available. Frequency of use follows rainfall.           scheduled.                          .
   temperature. seasonal length. and demands of
   plant material.                                              12 Floral planting - Some son of floral plant·
                                                            ings present. Normally no more complex than
        4. Litter control - Minimum of once per day.        two rotations of bloom per year. Care cycle usuallv
    five day'S a week. Off-site movement of trash           at least once per week excePt watering may be
    defJendent on size of containers and use by the         more frequent. Health ana vigor dictate cvcle of
    public. High use may dictate once per day cleanmg       fenilizatlon and disease control. Beds essentlallv
    or more. Containers are serviced.                       kept weed free.
         5. Pruning - Usually done at least once per             13. Rest rooms - When present should be main-
     season unless species olanteo dictate ~ore fre-         tained at least once oer day as long as they are
     quent attentIon. Sculptured h-eoges or high growth      open to public use. High use may dictate two
     species may dictate a more frequent requirement         servicings or more per day. Servicing period should
     than most trees and shrUbS In natural growth stvle      ensure an adeQuate SUDply of oaper and that rest
     plantings.                                              rooms Jre reasonaolv Clean and free from bad
                                                              odors.
         6. Diseases and disease control - usuallv done
      Nhen disease or Insects are 'nflictlng noticeable           14. SpeCIal fearures - Should be maintained for
      d~mage, reducing vigor i)f ;:Jlant :-:1aterials or      safetY, function and high Quality appearance as
      could be considered a bother to the public. Some        per established deSign.

                                                Mode III
     MOderate level maintenance-associated wi'th locations with moderate to low levels of development
             moderate to law levels of visitation or with agencies that because of budget remictions               '
                                can't afford a higher intensity of maintenance.
    1. Turf care - Cut once every 10 won.:ing                   S. Disease and Insect Control - Done only on
days. Normallv not aerated unless turf quality               epidemic or serious complaint basis. Control mea·
indicates a need or in anticipation of an applica-           sures may be put into effect when the health or
tion of fertilizer. Reseeding or resodding done              survival of the plant material is threatened or
only wnen major bare spots appear. Weed con-                 where public's comfort is concerned.
trol measures normally used when 50 percent of
small area is weed infested or general turf quality              7. Snow removal - Snow removal done basec
low in 15 percent or more of the surface area.               on local law requirements but generally accom·
                                                             plished by the day following snowloll. Some cross-
      2. Ferrili~er - Applied only when turf vigor            walks or surfaces may not be cleared at aU.
 seems to be low. Low level application done on a                                                  ...
                                                                                                 ~ ::'+~"
 once per year basis. Rate suggested is one-hatf the             a-   Lighting -    Replacement  or    repair of fix
 level recommended 0'1 page 14 for species and                tum wnen        report filed or when noticed b"
 variety.                                                     employees.
       3. Irrigation - Dependent on climate. Rainfall            9. Surfaces - Cleaned on camplaint basis
  locations above' 25 inches a vear usuallv rely on           Repaired or replaced as budget allows. .
  natural rainfall with the possible addition of port·
  t::':.. irrigation during periods of drought. Cry               10. Repairs - Should be -done    wt .:11 ,,,,'Mr   safet
  climates below 25 inches normally have some form             or function is in question.
  of supplemental irrigation. When irrigation is
   automatic a demand schedule is programmed.                     11. Inspections - Once per week.
   Where manual servicing is required two to three                                         -.. ~-
   times per week operation 'NOuld be the norm.                   12. Floral planting - Only perennials or flowe
                                                               ing trees or shrubs.
        4. Limr control - Minimum service of two
   to three times per .....-eek. High use may dictate              13. Rest rooms - IMlen present, serviced
   higher levels during warm season.                            minimum of 5 times per week. Seldom more th~
                                                                once each day.
        5. Pruning - When required for health or
    reasonable appearance. With most tree and shrub                14. Special features         Minimum allowat
    species this would not be more frequent than once           maintenance for teatures present with functl(
    every two or three years.                                   and safety in mind.

                                             Mode IV
             Moderately low level-usuallv associated with law level of development. low visitation.
                                     undeveloped areas or remote parks.
   , . Turf care - Low frequency mowing sched·                S. Lighting - Replacement on complaint or
ule based on species. Low growing grasses may              emplovee discovery.
not be mowed. High grasses may receive periodic
mowing to aid public use or reduce fire danger.                9. Surfaces -       Replaced or l1!$)aired when
Weed control limited to legal requirements af              safety is a concern and when budget is available.
noxious weeds.
                                                               10. Repairs - Should be done when safety or
    2. Fertilizer ~ Not fertilized.                        function is in question.
    ~    Irrigation - No irrigation.                            , ,. Inspections - Once per month.
     4. Litter comrol - Once per week or less.                  12. Floral planrings - None. may have wild·
 Complaint may increase level above one servicing.          flowers. perennials. flowering trees or shrubs in
                                                            place.
     5. Pruning - No regular trimming. Safety or
 damage from Mather may dictate actual work                     13. Rest rooms,· ',·'hen present. fI.... times per
 o:I1edule.                                                 week.
      6. Dise~ and Insect Control - None except                  14. Special features -   Minimum maintenance
  where epidemic and epidemic condition threatens            to allow safe use.
  resource or public.
                                                                        ~
      7. Snow removal - None except where major
  access ways or active parking areas dictate the
  need for removal.

                                                                Mode V
        Hi~i1 visitation natUral areas-usuallv associated with large urban or reqional parKs. Size and user
frequency may dictate resident maintenance staff. Road., pathway or trail systems relatively well developea.
     Other facilities at strategic locations such as entries. trail heads, building complexes and parking lots.
     1. Turf care - Normally not mowed but                                 9. Surfaces - Cleaned on complaint. Repaired
 grassed parking lots. approaches to buildings or                       or replaced when budget will permit.
 road shoulders. may be cut to reduce fire danger.
 Weed control on noxious weeds.                                             10. Repairs - Done wnen safety or function
                                                                        impaired. Should have same year service on poor
     2. Fertilizer - None.                                              ~pearanc:e.
     3. 'n-igation - None.                                                  11.lmp«rion -        Once per day when staff is
                                                                        available.
     4. Litter -conrrol - Based on VIsitation. may
  be more than ones per day if crowds dictate that                          12 Floral planting - None introduced except
  level.                                                                 at ~eciai locations such as inteflJrwtive buadings,
                                                                         headquarters, etc. Once per ......eek service on these
      5. Pruning - Only done for safety.                                 designs. Flowering tree'5 and shrubs, wildflowers.
                                                                         present but demand no regular maintenance.
      6. Insecr and DlseGB Control - Oone only to
  ensure safety or when problem seriously discour·                           13. Rest rooms - Frequency geared' to visitor
   agt"1 ~"blic use.                                                     level. Once a day is the common ro~:-::- but for
                                                                         some locations and reasons frequency may be
       7.  Snow removal - One day service on roads                        more often.
   and parking areas.
           -.... - .... _ ...... ~-I: .. _'_ ". '-_ _ _ ----:.- _____ _
                                                                              i R Speci.' features - Repaired whenever safetv
       8. Lighting - Replaced on complaint or when                        or ~ion are a concern. Appearance alrrected
    noticed by employees.                                                 in the current budget year.

                                          Mode VI
      Minimum maIntenance level-low visitation natural area or large urban parks that are undevelopeo.
    1. Turf areas - Not mowed. Weed control only           8. Lighting         Replacement    on  complaint
if legal requiremenu demand it.                         basis.
    2. Fenilizer - Not fertilized.                         9. Surfaces -      Serviced when safety is con-
                                                        sideration.
     3. Irrigation - No irrigation.
                                                            , O. Repairs -   Should be done when safety
     4. Litter control - On demand or complaint         or function is in question.
 basis.                                                                                      -
                                                            , 1. In$pection - Once per month.
     5. Pruning -      No pruning unless safety is
 involved.                                                  12. Floral plantings - None.
      6. Disease insect control - No control except          13. Rest rooms - Service based on need.
  in epidemic: or safety situations.
                                                             14. Special features - Service based on lowest
      7. Snow rf; 'noval - Snow removal onlv on          acceptable frequency for feature. Safety a."1d
   strategic roads and parking lots. Accomplished        function interruption a concern when either seem
   within two days after snow stOps.                     significant.
Parks and Recreation Element
Appendix E cont.
             Park and Landscape/ Drainage, Facility Maintenance Standards
              Site                  Current Mode     Best Condition
              Golden west Park              3                3
              16th St Park                 2-3               2
              Mentone Park                 2-3               2
              Mentone Basin                 4                2
              Grover Heiqhts Park          2-3               2
              Ramona Park                   2                2
              Hero Park                     2                2
              Skate Park                    3                2
              Costa Bella Bas'ln Pk         3                3
              Dune Boardwalk                5                5
              Community Gardens             4                3
              Community Center              3                2
              Ramona Center                 2                2
              EI, Camino Oaks  as           5                5
                           -
Park and Recreation Element
Appendix E cont'd
                        PARK ELEMENT UPDATE· MAINTENANCE SECTION
                          Factors Relating To Maimenance Of Park Facilities
 The ability to provide and maintain parks at a quality level is determined by a wide variety of
 factors. These factors together. determine the ease and level of on-going maintenance.
 Quality park maintenance comes about by careful consideration of all the following factors:
 The Design
  Is care taken during the deSign process to include maintenance concerns? Are maintenance
  professionals ask.ed for input? Is the facility deSigned to promote a high level of maintenance.
  ease of maintenancB and low-cost in maintenance concerns?
  !cstallation of the Facility
   Were competent workers used for installation? Were the plans and specifications adhered to
   during the installation 7 Were on-site improvements made to enhance ease of maintenance 7-
   Impectjon
   Were those inspecting the facilities cognizant of maintenance concerns 7 Were they
    competent in their ability to make decisions regarding maintenance 7 During the inspection
    time were Parks and Recreation maintenance experts brought in on the final inspections of the
    site to insure improved on-going -maintenance?
     Lack of Qn·going Maintenance
     Facilities that have periodic lack or low levels of maintenance will cause on-going maintenance
     concerns. Are things not replaced when they need to be? Are mlCar repairs not made thus
     causing major difficulties in the future?

Park and Recreation Element
Appendix E cont'd
MQne~
Is there enough money available to provide for on-gomg necessary maintenance and care of
the facility 1
 Water
 Are all irrigation systems operational, efficient. (i.e., time clocle. orientedl? Is there adequate
 water ayailable to maintain the facility at an optimum level?
 Persgnnel
                      .
 Ensure the people working at the sites are capable and trained in proper maintenance
 techniques. Have enough personnel available to provide on-going maintenance. Staff need
 to be consistent enough so substantial training can take place and improvements can be made
 in maintenance. Encourage staff to be helpful and cooperative in providing the best possible
  service. Also, all safety concerns should be met.
  Vandalism
  Thj$:j:J.Alte.y factor in.1be. maintenance spectruafi. Vandalism C8uses.:sw.suc' _It problems:
   '1 it is extremely costly and time consuming to repa.it,Yandalism and 2) on-going misuse and
  vandalism is discouraging to park workers.                 ~
   Intensjty of Recreational Use
   As facilities become mOre popular. over use can cause increased maintenance concerns and
   also reduce the amount of time available for on-going maintenance.
           CITY OF GROVER BEACH
                      GENERAL PLAN
                     SAfETY EL.EMENT
                           ADOPTED BY CITY COUNCIL
                             RESOLUTION NO. 00-55
                               OCTOBER 16, 2000
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL                             PLANNING COMMISSION
     David Ekbom, Mayor                               Lawrcnce V ersaw, Chair
Richard Neufeld, Mayor Pro Tern                      Pcnnie Oakes, Vice Chair
       Ronald Arnoldsen                                    Karen Bright
          Peter Keith                                       Guyla Hall
          Dee Santos                                      Clark Foerster
                                                          Paul De Mello
                                     STAFF
                           Tom A. Odom, City Manager
        Thomas Sullivan, AICP, Fom1er Community Development Director
     Sandra M. Bierdzinski, AICP, Assistant Community Development Director
                                CONSULTANTS
                                 Fugro West, Inc.
                          Crawford Multari Clark & Mohr
                             Don Asquith, PhD, CEG
                Cal Poly, Landscape Architecture Department (GIS)
                                 THE GENERAL PLAN
Grover Beach's General Plan is composed of sections caJled "elements". Each element focuses upon
a topic as required or allowed by State law. Each elcment calTies equal weight and must be
consistent with the other elements. The following elements comprised the Gcneral Plan on
July 1, 1999:
      Element Title                                                       Adoption or Last
                                                                          Major Revision Date
      Land Use                                                                   1217192
      Housing                                                                    1014193
      Circulation                                                                1/18/88
      Open Space and Conservation                                                816173
      Parks and Recreation                                                       7115191
      Noise                                                                      6121193
      Scenic Routes                                                              1112181
      Safety                                                                     113177
      Seismic Safety                                                             912175
The City Planning Department is CllITently updating and combining the Safety and Seismic Safety
elements. Some elements may be combined in the future.
      CITY OF GROVER BEACH - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
                            City Hall - 154 South Eighth Street
                     P.O. Box 365 - Grover Beach, California - 93483
                      Telephone 805 473-4520       'fI' Fax 805 489-9657
                                                Contents
                Introduction .....•...•......•................• 1
                Emergency Preparedness ...•.•••..••.•••....•... 5
                Water Hazards •.......•..•....•.. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 8
                Fi re Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . • . .. 12
                Geologic & Seismic Hazards. . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . .. 14
                Other Hazards ..•...........•••...........••. 18
                                     Appendix A: Maps
                Map 1: Emergency Response Zones
                Map 2: 100-year Flood Plain
                Map 3: Areas with Potential for Dam Inundation
                Map 4: Fire Hazard Areas
                Map 5: Fault Hazard Areas
                Map 6: Areas of Potential Liquefaction Hazard
                Map 7: Areas of Potential Landslide Hazard
                Appendix B: Technical Background Report
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                           ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000

 Introduction
  All of us wish to avoid the loss of life, property and economic well-being as a result of disasters, and to
  accomplish a rapid recovery. This Safety Element has two basic principles:
            • be ready for disaster, and
            • manage development to reduce risk.
  The Erst part of this element addresses the Erst premise - emergency preparedness. Most natural disasters
  will require the combined efforts of our emergency service providers. The provision of emergency services
  requires trained people, good infonnation, high quality and well-maintained equipment, reliable
  communication systcms, and steadfast commitments.
  The remaining sections of the element describe the various types of disasters, focusing principally on Ere,
  flood and geologic hazards. Their purpose is to describe the physical effects of the disaster and provide
  standards for reducing the risk of exposure to the hazards. When distilled, the rules are quite simple: build
  above tbe floodwaters, where the Ere fue! is low, and on stable ground.                       .
  It is acknowledged that attempts to avoid possible disasters may occasionally conflict with individuals' rights
  in their property. Consequently, this elemcnt has been drafted to recognize and balance constitutional rights
  with risks. To this cnd, thc standards in this element have been examined to determine if they meet the test
  of proper regulation: that there is a clear and deEnable connection between the rule and the reason for having
  it. The City will continue to maintain its authority and responsibility to reduce and eliminate unrea.sonable
  risk, and do so with the appropriate respect for property rights.
  The residents of Grover Beach are subject to a variety of natural and human-caused hazards. Natural hazards
  are processes such as earthquakes, landslides, and flooding, and have been occuning for thousands, even
  millions of years. These natural processes have played an essential role in shaping the topography and
  landscape of Grover Beach, and become "hazards" when they disrupt or otherwise affect the lives and
  property of people. Human-caused hazards often occur as a result of modem activities and technologies .
. These potential hazards can include the use of hazardous materials, and buildings that may be unsafe during
  a strong earthquake.
  There is oftcn little that can be done to prevent natural hazards from occuning. Furthermore, our society has
  become so dependent on the benefits of modem technology that it may not be desirable to eliminate the
  activities that result in human-caused hazards. Both natural and human-caused hazards, however, can be
  influenced by human actions. These influences can have a positive effect by reducing the potential impact
  of the hazard, or can have a negative effect by making the consequences of the hazard more severe. An
  example of a positive effect would be making land use decisions that minimize the placement of structures
  in areas subject to flooding or severe geologic hazards. A negative influence may include actions such as
  allowing extensive development in a fire prone area that has poor fire Eghting services. The safety element
  should guide land use decisions towards minimizing loss and damage from hazards.
  CITY OF GROVER BEACH
  SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                   ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000

To minimize loss from hazards, resources must be committed. While it would be desirable for communities
to provide the maximum1cvd of safcty from all potential hazards, this is generally not feasible. Therefore,
hazard reduction efforts are often based on the concept of risk reduction. Risk that is associated with natural
and human-caused hazards can be separated into three general categories for the purposes of this element:
     Acceptable Risk. This is the level of risk below which no specific action by govel11mcnt is dccmed
     to be necessary to furthcr reduce the conscquences of a hazard.
     Unacceptable Risk. This is the level of risk above which specific action by government is deemed
     necessary to protect life and property.
     Avoidable Risk. This is a hazardous risk that can be averted while still achieving the individual or
     public objective.
The concept of acceptable risk may seem difficult to comprehend at first, but this type of risk is part of
everyday life. Almost all activities have some degree of risk and there is no such thing as a risk- or hazard-
free environment. The cost of providing protection generally increases with the severity of the hazards and
the level of risk reduction that is desired. At some point, however, the cost of providing protection becomes
prohibitive when compared to the benefits derived. Scientific expertise can determine the magnitnde of the
hazard and estimate the probahle effects, but the public ultimately determines how much risk to assume and
the acceptable level of protection. To evaluate what is considered to be "acceptable" risk, the following
factors should be considered.                                                                   .
     Severity of Potential Losses. Will the loss from a'l1 event be large or small? Potential losses
     inclnde loss oflife, injury, property and environmental damage and loss of function.
     Probability of Loss. How often is the event expected to occur? The prohahility that hazards will
     occur should be evaluated in light of their possible effect on structures or human activities.
     Capacity to Reduce Risk. What financial and human resources are available'! Risk reduction
     depends on current technology, availahle financial and human resources, and established priorities.
     Adequacy of Knowledge. How well do we nnderstand the risk? This is an important factor in
     estimating the probability that a hazard will occur.
In making land use decisions, the severity and the probahility of loss should be considered.
Relationship to. Other General Plan Elements
The Safety Element is one of several Elements that comprise the General Plan. Section 65300.5 of the
California Government Code requires the General Plan and its Elements to he "an integrated, internally
consistent and compatible statement ofpolicies ... "
The Safety Element is closely linked to the Land Use and Open Space Elements of the General Plan. The
Land Use Element designates the general distribution of land uses within the planning area, as well as
standards for population density and building intensity. To avoid unreasonable public risk, the Land Use
Element must take into account the public safety hazard identification and evaluation in the Safety Element.
By limiting development density in areas that may be subject to sil,'11ificant geologic and other safety hazards,
the risk ofloss of life and propeliy can be minimized. One of the pnrposes of the Open Space Element is
to preserve open space for public health and safety, including areas that reqnire special management and
regulation because of hazardous or special conditions (e.g., earthqnake fault zones, flood plains, unstahle soil
areas, and high fire risk areas).
CITY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                         2                            ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Limitations
The Safety Element provides a general evaluation of potential public safety hazards on a citywide basis. The
hazard identification and evalnation is based on general literature available at the time of the Element's
preparation. No site-specific evaluations were performed for this Element.
The Safety Element is intended to be used for general land usc planning purposes only, and should be used
to identify whcre dctailed site investigations would be required for new development. However it should
be an important reference guiding all land use decisions.
Legal Requirements for Preparing a Safety Element
Tbe Safety and Seismic Safety Elements first became mandatory parts of the General Plan in 1975 when the
California Legislature adopted Senate Bi11271. This legislation required cities and counties to adopt, at a
minimum, General Plan policies relating to firc safcty, flooding, and geologic hazards. In 1984 the
Legislature adopted Assembly Bill 2038 which expanded the list of mandatory issues that were to be
evaluated in the Safety Element. This legislation also combined the Safety Element and the Seismic Safety
Element into a single document. The Safety Element should provide the direction and resources to belp
reduce death, injuries, property and environmental damage, and the economic and social dislocation resulting
from natural hazards. While it is required to focus on fire, flooding, geologic, and seismic hazards,
jurisdictions may address any relevant safety issues that arc considered imporiant.
Goals - Policies - Implementation Measures
To make land use decisions that minimize the potential for loss of life, injury, and property damage from
natural and human-caused hazards, it is necessary to have an understanding of the causes and potential effects
of the hazards that may affect the City of Grover Beach.
In the following sections, several components appear regularly:
     Preparedness. The element begins with this as a separate topic. Each subsequent area has a
     preparedness component. It is essential to maintain our ability to respond to natural and man-made
     disasters.
     Education. An informed citizenry will can'y on their activities in a way that reduces the potential for
     disaster to occur or be exacerbated and will be better equipped to deal with disasters when they occur.
     Existing Environment. The built environment can be improved to reduce the threat of disaster. This
     is geared mostly towards improving structures and their surroundings.
     Land Use Planning. Future development should always be planned with careful consideration
     toward reducing the threat of property and environmental loss. While many considerations are involved
     in development, safety should be paramount.
Each section contains some or all of the following components:
     Goal. Goals are the desired end state or condition that we would like to achieve.
     Policy. Policies define the approacb to achieving goals.
     Implementation Measures. Implementation Measures arc specific actions the City or other
     interested parties should take. They take the form of standards (regulatory mechanisms) or prol,,'rams
     (other advisory actions that are not regulatory).
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                         3                         ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
     Photo 1. IJeach at end a/Orand Avenue.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                              4 ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Emergency Preparedness
r1m'I,MY-:?f'o'l5f$tltfAr'!JJvn-t-\,:;§'tm,'-'",~;~;!;""~tif~,~fPi!f!!:~i;',;;/,,:\;';-:::~;Y'\'\,~'?;2:{,;::t·J:c:;}.::~N,,",'\'!)(:&;1.2'!h~t~";;;)')r:~\i'.ti'l~';'~\0_IltNf;':f_ "iu::?"o::,;twyt;n';':£'--7Z~!;~-;.;;~~"'};;fJ::t;;;XN;:\'\':;::ll.::t:"i:_f,:ikn-~_l!j!.~1f,Z'~",\[1:!;~':-;l
GOAL 1: Attain a high level of emergency preparedness.
Emergency preparedness is necessary to avoid or minimize the loss of life and property as a result of natural
and technological disasters, to reduce the social, cultural, environmental and economic costs of disasters, and
to assist and encourage the rapid recovery from disasters. An impOltant part of preparedness is the careful
assessment of risks before an emcrgency occurs. The City of Grover Beach's Emergency Response Zones
are illustrated on Map 1 at the end of this element.
Policy 1.1 Response
The City shall support the response programs that provide
emergency and other services to the public when a disaster
occurs. The Police and Fire Departments shall respond to
emergencies as specified in the City's Emergency Response
Plan. The focus of response activities is saving lives and
preventing injury, and reducing immediate property damage.
Implementation Measures:
           Program 1.1.1 The City will continue to provide
           adequate funding for the City's Firc and Police
           Departments to ensure the readiness of response teams
           and the smooth implementation of emergency response
           plans.
           Program 1.1.2 The City will work before disasters
           occur to make sure thcre are few or no bureaucratic
           obstacles to performing emcrgency operations. This will
           include supporting efforts to ensure the City's
           compliance with the Standardized Emergency
           Management System, an emergency rcsponsc and
           coordination system used throughout California.
           Program 1.1.3 The City will establish a program to
           reduce the time and effort required to get permits to
           perform emergency repair work. To the extent that it Plxxo2. Fi,eStalUm
           can be done beforehand, the City will provide the
           Community Development Department with sufficient resources to procure permitting assistance. (For
           example, work in riparian corridors may requirc permits from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
           California Department ofFish & Game, and perhaps the Army Corps of Engineers.)
Policy 1.2 Emergency Preparedness
The City shall continue to improve preparedness prob'Tams that educate and organize people to respond
appropriately to disasters, including education and awareness programs for individuals,families, institutions,
husinesses, government agencies and other organizations.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                                                                                                                 5                                                                        ADOPTED OCTOBER 1 6, ::>000

Implementation Measures:
    Program 1.2.1 The City will support education efforts in the schools by the Fire Department, Police
    Department and other agencies that teach children how to avoid dangers and how to behave during an
    enlcrgcncy.
    Program 1.2.2 The City will snpport the efforts of organizations that provide emergency outreach
    and education programs to the region. The City will work with these organizations to develop an
    information release program to educate residents about the potential for natural disasters in the City.
    Focus on preparedness for particularly susceptible groups, including youth organizations, senior care
    facilities, and agencies involved with handicapped persons will be a priority
    Program 1.2.3 The City will support the Red Cross and its programs that train volunteers to assist
    police, fire, and civil defense personnel during and after a major disaster.
Policy 1.3 Coordination
Coordination shall be improved among City, County and State programs, and among others working to
reduce the risks of disasters. This should also include improved coordination with the news media. This will
result in more effective preparedness, response and recovery from disasters.
Implementation Measure::
    Program 1.3.1 The City will designate and train a Public Information Officer.
    Program 1.3.2 The City will continue to improve information transfer to the media during
    emergencies. Official liaisons should meet with the City's Public Information Officer on a regular basis
    to improve coordination.
    Program 1.3.3 The Public Works Division of the Community Development Department will work
    with Caltrans to review its facilities and roadways to determine the potential impact of earthquake and
    flood emergencies. The City will develop revised evacuation routes as necessary.
Policy 1.4 Information Systems and Research
The City shall expand and keep current the database of safety related information. Knowledge about
disasters and the area we live in is growing. New information must be made available to the public and
decision-makers. The City's GIS data shall be regularly updated as new information becomes available.
Implementation Measures:
    Program 1.4.1 The Community Development Department will maintain the City's Geographic
    Information System (GIS) including the data layers of this Safety Element. The Community
    Development Department will continue to build the City's GIS with additional data as it becomes
    available.
    Program 1.4.2 The City will work with other government, academic and private organizations,
    including the County of San Luis Obispo, to obtain new data that can be used for emergency
    preparedness and response. The City will endeavor to share infornlation with other nearby jurisdictions,
    and with private and public organizations.
    Program 1.4.3 The Police and Fire Departments wiIl revise the Emergency Plan, required by the
    Califomia Emergency Services Act, according to the policies and projections in the General Plan. Local
    emergency service agencies should review their responsibilities and capabilities in light of this revision,
    and consider the potential for over-reliance on mutual-aid agreements during disasters.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                         6                         ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Policy 1.5 Risk Assessment
The City shall continue investigations and pro!,'rams that reduce or eliminate long term risks. New
development in the City shall be designed to withstand natural and manmade hazards to acceptable levels
of risk. Risk assessment activities, effectively carried ont, can improve the efficiency and reduce the cost
of rcsponsc and recovery ii·om disasters.
Implementation Measures:
     Program 1.5.1 The City will support additional training for Building Division personncl to keep up
     with current knowledge.
     Program 1.5.2 The Community Development Department will revise the City's building regulations
     to incorporate all safcty requirements called out in the General Plan. All new construction, including
     public facilities, in the City should be built according to the most recent Building and Firc Codes.
     Program 1.5.3 The Community Development Department will revise/amend the City's Land Use
     Element to consider, and wbere necessary restrict dcvelopment in, the natural and manmade hazard arcas
     identified in the Safety Element such as near the railroad tracks and in flood prone areas.
     Program 1.5.4 The Building Divisions of the City's Community Development Department will
     identify structures not confornling with earthquake, fire or flood standards, and require conformance with
     acceptable levels of risk through programs such as structural rehahilitation, occupancy reduction, and
     demolition and reconstruction.
Critical Facilities
These are structures and services that provide emergency assistance after a major disaster. They include
police and fire stations, schools, hospitals and roadways that are designated evacuation fOutes.
Policy 1.6 Critical Facilities, Recovery & Reconstruction
After a major disaster, the City shall assist public
and private efforts that must be made for short-term
and long-tcrm rebuilding, the provision of housing
for those displaced, resumption of services, and
resumption of business and government [unctions.
In order to make this effort effective, critical
facilities must be maintained and upgraded as
technology and population demands increase.
Implementation Measures:
     Program 1.6.1            The City will provide
     comprehensive assistance to all agencies and ~··~~.·.·~~;~{i
     organizations    involved
     thl'ough planning,          in disaster
                            engineering  and recovery
                                              funding.  rii~~iii~1!~ti~'ifi1i~~~~~
     Critical facilities shall be maintained for
     responsivcness to disasters.                                               .~~·~i~.ij·
     Program 1.6.2 The City will advocate the
     expansion of State and Federal relocation PJlOtO 3. City HaD.
     assistance funds and programs to aid persons
     and businesses displaced from hazardous
     buildings.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                          7                            ADOPTED OCTOBER 16,2000

 Water Hazards
GOAL 2: Reduce damage to structures and the danger to life caused by
                 flooding, dam inundation, and tsullamis.
Exposure of the public to water-related hazards can result from flooding, dam failure, and beach erosion.
Flooding and its effects are issues of concel11 throughout the City, especially in the South Grover Beach and
Wcst Grover Beach Neighborhoods where stOlm drainage basin capacity and drainage structures are
deficient.
Dam inundation would rcsult from the sudden failure of a dam and the release of the impounded water.
Although it is very unlikely that a large modern dam would suddenly fail, the effccts of this hazard could be
catastrophic. Therefore, this hazard is evaluatcd in this chapter.
Beach erosion results in the loss of sand from coastal areas. This hazard can accelerate the rate of erosion
of coastal bluffs, and can also contribute to increased wave-related damage to coastal structures.
Flood Hazards
Flooding generally occurs in response to hcavy rainfall events when streams, rivers, and drainage channels
overtop their banks. Flooding may also occur in low-lying areas that have poor drainage, even during
moderately sized storms. Many factors can increase the severity of floods, including fires in watershed areas,
the placement of structures or fill matcrial in flood-prone
areas and areas of tidal influence, and increascd runoff that
results from the developmcnt of impervious surfaces such as
roadways and rooftops. For planning purposes, the flood
event most often used to delineate areas subject to flooding
is the 100-year flood. This is an event that statistically has
a one pcrcent chance of occurring in any given year. Areas
within the 100-year flood plain in Grover Beach are
indicated in Map 2 at the end of this element.
Policy 2.1 Flood Hazards
The City will strictly enforce flood hazard regulations (Flood
Plain Ordinance, Flood Plain Combining District, etc.), both
current and revised.         FEMA regulations and other
requirements for the placement of structures in flood plains
shall be followed. The City will maintain standards for ~~~~
development in flood-pronc and poorly drained areas.           C'
                                                               Phow 4. Florxi prorK! arm.
CITY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                         8                                 ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Implementation Measures:
    Standard 2.1.1 Consistent with flood hazard regulations, the City will discourage development,
    particularly of critical facilities, in areas of high flood hazard potential, The City will not allow
    development within areas designated as the 1DO-year flood plain that would obstruct flood flow or be
    snbject to flood damage. The City will not allow development that will create or worsen known flood
    and drainage problems.
    Standard 2.1.2 The City will discourage single road access into arcas that could be closed during
    floods. Additional access ways should be planned.
    Standard 2.1.3 The Public Works Division of the Community Dcvelopment Department will review
    development plans for construction of structures inlow-lying areas, or any area which may pose a serious
    drainage or flooding condition. Susceptibility to damage from flooding should bc dctermined based on
    the IOO-ycar flood.
Policy 2.2 Reduce Flood Damage
Reduce flood damage in areas of the City known to be prone to flooding.
Implementation Measures:
    Program 2.2.1 The Public Works Division of the Community Development Department wi]]
    inventory and reevaluate where appropriate known local flood prone areas in the City. With this
    information they will develop a prioritized list of proposed capital improvement projects for low-lying,
    flood prone areas.
    Program 2.2.2 The City will seek funding to implement capital improvement projects for low-lying,
    flood prone arcas.
    Program 2.2.3 When reviewing proposals for potential development of water reservoirs, retention
    ponds, or drainage channels, the Public Works Division ofthe Community Development Department will
    require an evaluation of potential inundation areas and design proven to withstand potential seismic
    activity.
Tsunami
A tsunami is a wave caused by a displacement of the ocean floor, usually by movement along a fault. As the
wave approaches shore, it increases in size and can cause extensive damage to coastal structures. Several
small tsunami events have been recorded in San Luis Obispo County, however, prcvious studies have
predicted a maximum tsunami wave "runup" of approximately 9.5 feet above sea level for a I DO-year event.
Waverunup could be increased snbstantially if a tsunami occurred during a major storm. Areas of tsunami
hazard potential include portions of the community at elevatioIls near sea level, and along the mouth of
Meadow Creek.
Policy 2.3 Tsunami
Access information to increase the understanding and response to tsunamis.
Implementation Measures:
    Program 2.3.1 The Public Works Division of the Community Devclopment Department will work
    with statc and federal agencies to better understand the hazard of tsunamis, and potential preparedness
    l11easures.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                         9                         ADOPTED OCTOBER 16,2000
      Program 2.3.2 The Public Works Division of the Community Development Department will work
      with the County OES to improve the region's ability to respond to tsunami warnings provided by
      NOAA's Alaska Tsunami Waming Center.
Dam Inundation
Dam inundation is the flooding of lands due to release of impounded water resulting from the failure or
overtopping of a dam. Although the probability of this type of hazard occurring is highly unlikely, it
warrants consideration in the Safety Element because there are several dams and reservoirs in San Luis
Obispo County. Those areas with potential for dam inundation are indicated in Map 3 at the end of this
element but generally include low lying areas south of Grand Avenue and west of Highway l.
Potential Causes of Dam Failures
Dam failures ean result from a number of natural or human causes. Emihquakes, improper siting, fast rising
flood waters, erosion of the dam face or foundation, and struetural!construction flaws can all contribute to
a dam breach and ensuing release of impounded water. Other reservoir-related flooding events have resulted
jj'ommassive, fast-moving landslides that have displaced large volumes of water contained in a reservoir.
Such a rapid displacement of watcr can cause large quantities of water to travel over the dam, resulting in
downstream flooding.
Major Dam near Grover Beach
San Luis Obispo County Flood Control District (Zone 3)
owns and operates Lopez Dam, which has a 51,000 acre-
foot capacity. This dam is under the jurisdiction of the
State of Califol11ia Division of Safety of Dams. The
division conducts periodic reviews to evaluate dam
safety. Lopez Dam is slated it)r seismic improvements.
It is being maintained at 83 percent of capacity until the
retrofit is complete.
Effects of Dam Inundation
The severity of downstream effects resulting from a dam Photo 5. Lopez Dam.
failure will be directly related to the manner in which the
dam fails. The failure of a dam conld cause flooding,
injury, loss of life, and property damage dne to
inundation, erosion, dehris and sediment deposition.
Other effects include damage to community infrastructure
and intcITuption of public services. Health hazards from
the release of sewage may also result.
Complete failure of Lopez Dam would result in water
flowing in a westerly direction, following Anoyo Grande
Creek, and flooding an area extending approximately
3,000 feet in each direction of the centerline of the Photo 6. Lopez Lake.
channel. Substantial impacts to life and property would
likely result.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                         10                      ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Policy 2.4 Dam Failure
Minimize the risk of, and those associated with, dam failure.
Implementation Measures:
    Program 2.4.1 The Public Works Division ofthe Community Development Department will work
    with appropriate agencies at the state and federal levels to assist with the inspcction and maintenance
    of dams to minimize the risk of failure.
    Program 2.4.2 The Police and Fire Depmiments will maintain a dam failure evacuation plan with
    guidancc for public officials on cmergency notifieation and evacuation instructions, ineluding use ofthc
    emergency alert system to notify the public.
                                                                                                              /
                                                                                                             i
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                       11                          ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000

     Program 3.2.4 The City will consider reorganization and consolidation with other fire agencies in
    the Five Cities and/or San Luis Obispo County to improve overall fire protection. Consolidation could
    include all or specific services.
Policy 3.3 Readiness and Response
Maintain and improve the Grover Beach Fire Department's ability to respond and suppress fires throughout
the City.
Implementation Measures:
    Standard 3.3.1 The City will work to achieve the response time goal. This response time will be
    based upon density of development, and the value at risk contrasted with an acceptable level of risk.
    Standard 3.3.2 The City will train fire fighters to a level appropriate to their position and
    responsibilities; provide emergency medical care training and job-required specialized training; train fire
    fighters to conduct prevention education for property owners and the public; maintain and enhance
    training materials and instruction techniques; and provide educational incentives for all personnel.
    Program 3.3.3 The City will work to continually improvc information resources about the location
    of firc hazard areas and the structural rcsources and other valucs at risk within them.
Policy 3.4 Loss Prevention
Improve structures and other values at risk to reduce the impact of fire. Regulations should be developed
to improve the defensible area surrounding habitation.
Implementation Measures:
    Program 3.4.1 The City will inform homeowners of the dangers and appropriate responses to fire
    and wi'ys to prevent loss.
    Program 3.4.2 The City will require a "defensible space" around structures and values at risk, able
    to provide fire fighters with enough room to defend structures and maneuver. Review of development
    plans by fire safety personnel will assure adequacy of access for equipment, water supplies, c()nstruction
    standards, and vegetation clearance.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                        13                         ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000

Policy 4.2 Fault Rupture Hazards                                                                                (
New development shall be located away from active and potentially active faults to reduce damage ii'om fault
rupture. Enforce applicable regulations of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act pertaining to [ault
zones to avoid development on active faults.                      .
Implementation Measures:
     Standard 4.2.1 Should an active or potentially active fault be identified in or ncar Grover Beach,
     the City will require geologic studies to be performed based on the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
     Zoning Act, so that habitable structures and essential facilities will be sited away from such faults.
Groundshaking Hazards
Groundshaking refers to the motion that occurs in response to local and regional earthquakes, and can
endanger life and safety due to damage or collapse of structures or lifeline facilities. Unifonn Building Code
requirements, adopted by the City in 1999, set forth the minimum design and construction standards for
structures to resist seismic forces. These building codes are typically updatcd frequently to reflect a
progressive review of the performance of structures and lifelines (pipelines, roads, etc.) that have been
subject to or damaged by earthquakes in the p a s t . " ,
The City of Grover Beach is proximal to a number of active and potentially active faults capable of
producing strong ground motion, including Wilmar Avenue, Blind Thrust Point San Luis, Los Osos, Pecho,
Casmalia-Orcutt-Little Pine, Hosgri, Rinconada, Los Alamos-Baseline, and San Andreas. Tables 4-4, 4-5
and 4-6 in the Technical Background Report list the active and potentially active faults in the vicinity of
Grover Beach.
                                                                                                                (
Policy 4.3 Reduce Seismic Hazards
Enforce applicable building codes relating to the seismic design of structures to reduce the potential for loss
of life and reduce the amonnt of property damage.
Implementation Measures:
     Standard 4.3.1 The City will prohibit the construction of development directly astride known active
     or potentially active fault zones.
     Standard 4.3.2 The Building Division of the Community Development Department will enforce
     applicable building code regulations pertaining to the design o[structures and grading relative to seismic
     hazards.
     Program 4.3.3 The Building Division of the Community Development Depmtment will review,
     amend, and adopt new Uniform Building Code requirements, when necessary, to promote the usc of
     updated design standards.
     Program 4.3.4 The City will encourage investigations to improve the existing characterizations of
     faults in areas of existing or proposed development, and their potential to generate damaging
     earthquakes, for the purpose of assisting in the design of structures to resist seismic loads. Implement
     appropriate design standards and building codes that address local seismic conditions.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                        15                            ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Liquefaction and Seismic Settlement
Liquefaction is the sudden loss of soil strength due to a rapid increase in soil pore water pressures resulting
from ground shaking during an earthquake. Seismic settlement is the reduction of volume within a saturated
or unsaturated soil mass due to ground shaking during a seismic event. Seismic settlement may occur
simultaneously or independent ofliquefaction. Liquefaction potential, and its potential to present a hazard,
can only bc assessed through site-specific studies and subsurface exploration. Map 6 at the end of this
Element identifies areas in Grover Beach having liquefaction potential. The currently adopted Uniform
Building Code requires that the potential for liquefaction be assessed for the design of all struclures.
The arcas most likely to be vulnerable to liquefaction arc underlain by younger alluvium where groundwater
and granular sediments arc present. Areas potentially underlain by liquefiable alluvium arc low lying lands
adjacent to rivers, creeks, beaches, and estuaries.
The evaluation of liquefaction potential is bascd on subsurface exploration consisting of drilled test holes
and engineering analysis of the soil conditions. When analysis indicates that there is a potential for
liquefaction, the hazard should be avoided. If that is not possible, then the condition can typically be
mitigated by supporting structures on deep foundations, modifying the ground to densify granular soils,
designing structures to withstand estimated settlements associated with liquefaction, or siting structures away
from potentially liquefiable soils.
Policy 4.4 Liquefaction and Seismic SeHlement
Require design professionals to evaluate the potential for liquefaction or seismic settlement to impact
structures in accordance with the currently adopted Uniform Building Code.
Implementation Measures:
    Standard 4.4.1 The Building Division of the Community Development Department will enforce
    current building code requirements that require the potential for liquefaction to be addressed in the
    design of structures. The City wiJ] prohibit the construction of critical facilities in areas of potential
    liquefaction.
    Standard 4.4.2 The Building Division of the Community Development Department wiJ] require
    geotechnical studies to be performed for habitable or important structures (as defined by the building
    code) sited in areas having a medium to high potential. The geotechnical study should evaluate the
    potential for liquefaction andlor seismic related settlement to impact the development, and mitigation
    to reducc these potential impacts, if needed.
Slope Instability and Landslides
Landslides and slope instability can occur as a result of wet weather, weak soils, improper grading, impropcr
drainage, steep slopes, adverse geologic structure, earthquakes, or a combination of these factors. Slope
instability can occur in the form of creep, slumps, large progressive translation or rotational failures, rockfall,
debris flows, or erosion. Areas ofpotcntiallandsJide hazards in Grover Beach are indicated on Map 7 at the
end of this element.
Landslides can result in damage to property and cause buildings to become unsafe either due to distress or
collapse during sudden or ,,'Tadual slope movemen1. Structures constructed in steep terrain, possibly on stable
b'Tound, may also experience landslide hazards ifthey are sited in the path of potential mud flows or rockfall
hazards.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                          16                          ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Grover Beach is characterized by fairly gently inclined slopes with gradients ofless (han 50 percent on slopes
consisting of older alluvium and late Pleistocene dune sands. The potcntia1 for slope stability concems are
low. Applying minimum Uniform Building Code requirements can mostly mitigate the potential for slope
instability in the sloping terrain.
Policy 4.5 Slope Instability
Continue to encourage that developments on sloping ground usc design and construction :teehniques
appropriate for those areas. The City acknowledges that areas of known landslide activity are generally not
suitable for residential development.
Implementation Measures:
     Standard 4.5.1 The City will not permit neW development in areas of known landslide activity
     unless development plans indicate that the hazard can he reduced to a less than significant level prior to
     beginning development. Do not permit expansion to existing structures or developments in areas of
     known landslide activity except when it will reduce the potential for loss of life and property.
     Standard 4.5.2 The City will require development proposals to mitigate the impacts that their
     projects contribute to landslides and slope instability hazards on neighboring property, and appurtenant
     structures, utilities, and roads.
     Standard 4.5.3 The Community Development Department will require proposals for hillside
     development to conduct thorough geologie/geotechnical studies by qualified geotechnical engineers, and
     to confirm preliminary findings during construction.
     Standard 4.5.4 The Community Development Department will require ccrtification ofthc proposed
     building site stability in relation to the adverse effects of rain and earthquakes prior to the issuance of
     building permits.
 CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
 SAFETY ELEMENT                                         17                          ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Other Hazards
GOAL 5:           Reduce the potential for harm to individuals and damage to the
                  environment ft'om radiation hazards, hazardous materials,
                  electromagnetic fields, radon, and hazardous trees,
Radiation Hazards
The PG&E Diablo Canyon Power Plant is the primary radiation hazard risk in the region. An uncontrolled
release of radioactive material would have the potential to result in significant health and safety impacts.
To prepare for potcntia1 emergency situations that might develop at the power plant, extensive warning,
reporting, and response plans have been developed. Updated information regarding the Emergency Response
Plan is distributed to the public each year. Additional potential radiation hazards include low-level
radioactive waste from medical facilities and elsewhere. The hauling, handling and disposal of these
materials are governed by comprehensive regulations.
Policy 5.1 Radiation Hazards
Maintain a high level of emergency preparedness and information to the public about radiation hazards.
Implementation Measure:
    Program 5.1.1 The City will work with PG&E to review and update information about emergency
    preparedness and evacuations.
     Program 5.1.2 The City wiU review it's Emergency Plan in anticipation of emergency services
    which may be required under mutual aid agreements in the event of a radiological accident at the Diablo
    Canyon Power Plant. Attention will be given to potential radiological spills during the transportation
    of radioactive fuel to and from the Diablo Canyon Plant. The City will maintain an effectivereiationship
    with the County's Emergency Operations Center to address these concerns.
Hazardous Materials
Due to the quantity and frequency with which
hazardous materials are shipped through the
region, transportation-related accidents pose the
most significant hazardous material risk (0 City
residents. Major modes of hazardous material
transportation include the use of U.S. Highway
101, various state highways, the Union Pacific
Railroad tracks, and numerous underground
pipelines. In addition to the potential for
transportation-related releases of hazardous
materials, potential exposure of the publie to
hazardous materials can result from their usc by
industry, agriculture, commercial, and service p.~'hot;;o,J8l. ''7{,~i;~d~:;;''
establishments. Household use of hazardous
materials also has the potential to result in their
release into the environment.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                       18                         ADOPTED OCTOBER 1 6,   2000
  Policy 5.2 Hazardous Materials
  Reduce the potential for exposure to humans and the environment by hazardous substances.                        I
  Implementation Measures:
       Program 5.2.1 The City's Fire Department will review commercial and industrial uses whieh use,
       store, or transport hazardous materials to ensure necessary measures are taken to protect public health
       and safety,
       Standard 5.2.2 The City will work with CaltTans to require all transport of hazardous materials to
       follow Caltrans approved routes, with all necessary safety precautions taken to prevent hazardous
       materials spills,
       Program 5.2.3 Tbe City will inform residents along approved baul routes of the potential for hazard
       release, Develop and distribute altemate evacuation routes, in case of hazardous materials spills,
       Program 5.2.4 The City will develop and distribute an educational flyer to the public discussing the
       safety issues of illegally disposed hazardous wastes and City household hazardous waste dump sites and
       events.
  Electromagnetic Fields [EMF]
  The transmission of electricity and the use of electrical appliances results in the creation of electromagnetic
  fields, At this time, the evidence of potential health hazards from the delivery and usage of electric power
  is incomplete and inconclusive, Until the necessary information is available to make informed decisions
  about possible health effects resulting from the long-term exposure to electromagnetic fields, individuals and
. local jurisdictions may wish to consider adopting an avoidance strategy which keeps residences and
  workplaces away from high tension lines, Such a strategy would include adopting measures to avoid
  electromagnetic fleld exposures when it is reasonable, practical, relatively inexpensive, and simple to do so,
  Policy 5.3 EMF
  Reduce the potential for health hazards from electromagnetic fields,
  Implementation Measures:
       Program 5.3.1 The City will maintain a prudent avoidance strategy relative to high voltage
       transmission lines, EMF standards established by the CalifomiaEnergy Commission and Public Utilities
       Commission (if any) should be applied,
       Program 5.3.2 The City wiJ] continue to monitor the information available regarding EMF hazards,
       Program 5.3.3 The City will keep higher density development away from large transmission lines,
  Radon
  Radon is a naturally occurring gas produced by the breakdown of uranium in soil, rock, and water.
  Accumulations of this gas inside structures can become a significant health hazard because radon is known
  to cause lung canceL The threat of radon is very low in a well-ventilated structure, Bascments, which are
  rare in Grover Beach, are common problem areas,
  Policy 5.4 Radon
  Reduce the potential for health hazards from radon through education,
   CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
  SAFETY ELEMENT                                         19                          ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Implementation Measure:
     Program 5.4.1 The City will inform its citizens should any high radon risk areas be discovered and
    how to prevent future radon problems.
Hazardous Trees
Large eucalyptus trees exist in the City, especially ncar
Highway 1. Several spccies of eucalyptus tend to be brittlc
wooded with shallow roots and pose a threat to loose large
limbs during periods of high wind.
Pine pitch canker is threatening the health of pine trees
throughout the region. This disease can result in the death of
a pinc trce in a relatively short pcriod of time. If an infccted
trce is not properly removed, it can spread the disease. The
tree may also become a safety hazard if it becomes uprooted
and falls during a storm. Other trees become hazards because
of their age, loose sandy soils, or from high winds prevalent
during storms.
Policy 5.5 Hazardous Trees
Reduce the danger to people and property from trees that are
weakened and susceptible to falling or limb loss during storms.
Implementation Measures:
     Program 5.5.1 The City will identify and maintain or
    remove trees within the City that pose potential hazards,
    paying particular attention to trecs in roadways and
     pedestrian/bicycle paths.                                    Photo 9. E IICllI)p,,~ Tms.
Hazards from Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
In a strong earthquake, any type of structure may experience some level of damage resulting from ground
shaking. Some types of construction materials generally perform better in earthquakes than others, and
almost any material can be designed in such a manner so as to be safe during an earthquake. For example,
modcrn structures made with wooden and steel frames, orreinforced concrete blocks, will typically withstand
moderate to strong earthquake groundshaking with little threat of building failure or major damage.
Buildings madcofunreinforecdmasonry, however, typically provide little earthquake rcsistance. To address
public safety risks posed by unreinforced masonry buildings, the California Legislature passed Senate Bill
547 in 1987. This bill required local jurisdictions to identifyunreinforeed masonry buildings, and to develop
a program to mitigatc potentially bazardous structures.
Policy 5.6 Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
Reduce the danger to people and property from unreinforced masonry buildings.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                          20                                ADOPTED OCTOBER 16, 2000
Implementation Measure:
     Program 5.6.1 The Building Division of the Community Development Department will continue to
     identify local unreinforced masonry buildings and require reinforcement through enforcement of
     applicable design standards. The Building Division will maintain the list of unreinforced masonry
     buildings. The Building Division will investigate funding sources to bring structures into compliance
     with applicable design standards.
Oil Pipelines
Two crude oil pipelines (12-inch sunm1it line and 8-inch Orcutt line) are located within the City limits. The
francbise agreement for these pipelines is due to expire in December 2008. The City is eUITently (1999)
reviewing a request to replace the existing franchise a),'I"eement with a new agreement that would have a
25-year effective period with an option to extend an additional 25 years. The information provided by the
pipeline owner, however, indicates that almost all ofthe pipelines are sitting idle. Historically, the lines were
used to move Santa Maria Crude, which is very thick, from the tank farm in Avila Beach to the refinery on
the Nipomo Mesa to have dilutant added. The crude that had been thinned with dilutant would then flo'Y
back to the tank farm on the hill above Avila Beach for ultimate transport to the refinery in the San Francisco
Bay area, via pipeline, to be refined into gasoline. Considering the environmental devastation that has
happened at both ends of these pipelines, they may sit idle for a long time. The tank fa!Tl1 that was on the
hill above Avila Beach has been demolished. There are no plans to reconstruct it. The potential hazards to
the community from having oil transmission lines running under the City's streets are very significant.
Policy 5.7 Oil Pipelines
Reduce damage to people and property from idle or abandoned pipelines within the City.
Implementation Measure:
     Program 5.7.1 The Public Works Department will work with pipeline owners to ensure proper
     maintenance and management of idle or abandoned pipelines within the City consistent with State policy.
CiTY OF GROVER BEACH
SAFETY ELEMENT                                        21                           ADOPTED OCTOBER      16, 2000


       SAFETY ELEMENT
   SAN    LUIS   OBISPO   COUNTY     GENERAL     PLAN    I
SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND BUILDING
                       December 1999
COUNTY OF SAN LUIS OBISPO
                            Board of Supervisors
                            r-Lury Ovitt, District 1
                            Shirley Bianchi, District 2
                            Peg Pinara, District 3
                            Kacho l\chadjian, DiRtrict 4
                            Michael Ryan, District 5
                            Planning Commission
                            Clifford J. Smith, DiRtrict 1
                            Doreen Liberto-Bbnck, Dbtrict 2
                            Pat V ccsart, District 3
                            Diane I-lull, DiRtrict 4
                           Wayne Cooper, District 5
                            Department of Planning and Building
                           Victor Holanda,AIC1\ Director
                            Bryce Tingle, 1\ICP, A"istant Director __ " ,
                                                                                              :C,~' _c.     ,,": -
                            Warren Hoag, AICl', Principal Planner,N;;)ect ivr,;,,;tger   '."            ",'
                           John NaIl, Principal Ei,icitCilm;cntalSr)eciltlist' -
                           John Kelly, Supervising IVlapping/Graphks Technician
                            Dan Lambert, lviapping/Graphies Technician                                                                (
                          , Technical Advisory Commflfee
                            County of San Luis Obispo:
                            Ron Alsop, County Office of Enlcrgcncy Services
                            Susan Litteral, Engineering ",.!-,~""
                            Tony Boyd, Engineering                   ,      I,.' ,'.."     ',"
                                                                       .,j-            C         ;,
                                                                                                             "
                            Ben SteMm, CDI'/County Fire
                            Ben Parker, CDF/County Fire
                            Robert Lewin, CDF/COtUlty Fire
                            City Representatives:
                            Helen Elder, l\rroyo Grande
                            Steve DcC£\mp/(~ary Kaiser, Atascadero
                            Thomas Sullivan/Sandra Bicrdzinski, Grover Beach
                            Shauna Nauman, Morro Bay
                            !VIar), Oicn, PaRD Robles
                            Glen l\'lancson. San Luis Obispo
                            Consultant Team
                            Fugro West, Inc.
                            Crawford l\lultari Clark & ]\-lohr
                            Don A'quith, PhD, CEG
                            Cal Pol)" Landscape Architecture Departtnent (CIS)
Technical Background Report                                                                  COtlJJ/y and Cities of San Luis Obi,.,po

                                       List of Tables
1. Emergency Response & Planning
None.
2. Wafer Hazards
Table 2-1: Major Dams and Reservoirs in San Luis Obispo O:mnty .............................................................. 17
3. Fire Hazards
Table 3-1: Likely Fire Haz.·11'd Severity Rated by Fuel Conditions Only ....................................................... 28
Table 3-2: Major Wildfires in San Luis Obispo County Since 1931 ............................................................... 30
Table 3-3: Urban/Wildland Interface Areas of San Luis Obispo County ..................................................... 33
Table 3-4: Fire Stations in the UnincOlporated Areas of San Luis Obispo County .................................... 38
4. Geology & Seismicity
Table 4-1: Geologic Time Scale """,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, ""'''''''' ........................ ,..................... ,..... "'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''' 47
Table 4-2: Seismotectonic Domains in San Luis Obispo County ..........................................:.................. ,..... 51.
Table 4-3: Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale .................................................. :..... :.. :....................................... ,.. 54
Table 4-4: Faults Listed in Current CDMG Database ...................................................................................... 55
Table 4-5: Other Faults in and near San Luis Obispo County ........................................................................ 56
Table 4-6: Thrust Faults Interpreted by Nalmon & Davis (1990) ................................................................. 57
Table 4-7: Selected Historical Earthquakes with M~.O in Coastal Central CalifOlrua
                from 1830 through 1989 ......... " ... "" .. "........................ "........ ,............................................ ".............. 67
Table 4-8: Fault Rupture Hazard ...................... """""",,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, .............................. """'" ".............. 70
Table 4-9: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vi~inity of Arroyo Grande ................................................... 80
Table 4-10: Sources of Ground Shaking in th~ Vicinity of Atascadero ............ :............................................. 81
Table 4-11: Sources of Grou~d Shaking in the Viclluty of'GI'over Beach ......... ~: .. :.... :.................................. 82
Table 4-12: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Viclllity of Morro Bay .................... "............... ;..................... 82
Table 4-13: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of Paso Robles ........................................................ 83
Table 4-14: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of San Luis Obispo ................................................ 84
Table 4-15: Vulnerability to Liquefaction ............................................................................................... ,.".".""". 85
Table 4-16: Historical Tsunamis .............................................................................................................. ,.............. 88
Table 4-17: Landslide Hazard and Slope Instability Potential ........................................................................... 92
5. Other Hazards
Table 5-1: Diablo (,..anyon Power Plant Protective Action Zones (PAZ) and
                Public Education Zones (PE Z) .......................... ............................ ........................ ............ ............ 107
Table 5-2: Examples of Magnetic Fields at Distances from Appliance Surfaces ..................................... 111
6. References
None.
Technical Background Report                                                                                    COI1JJ1y   amI CWes of San Luis Obispo

   Jr;
   F."
               Contents
1. Emergency Response & Planning .......................................................................................                                                                      0 .... 1
      San Luis Obispo County Office of Emergency Services ...................................................... ,, ......................... 1
      Disaster Response and Planning ................................................................................................;, ......................... 2
      Incident Command System .........................................................................................................: .......................... 2
      Multi-Agency Coordination ................................................................................................................................... 3
      Mutual Aid Agreements ......................................................................................................................................... 3
       Operational Areas ................................................................................................................................................... 3
       Operational Area Satellite Information System (OASIS) ................................................................................ 3
      Emergency Response Corridors and Evacuation Routes ............................... ~ ................................................. 3
2. Water Hazards .. "....................................................................................................................".. "............ 5
      Flooding .................................................................................................................................................................... 5
      Dam Inundation ..................................................................................................................................................... 17
       Coastal Erosion ...................................................................................................................................................... 22
3. Fire Hazards ...........................................................                                 0 ...........................................................                          27
      Wildfires .................................................................................................................................... :............................. 27
      Urban Fire Hazards ............................................................ ,.....:.,'., ........................ ,.......... ,.... ,... ,........................... 35 .
4. Geology & Seismicity ............................ ,.;;;;~;. ..................... ;. ......~.;,:.-.....-......... .;. .. ~ ..... ~ .................. 47
       Geologic Time Scale ................................................................................ ;........... ,................................................ 47
      Regional Geology .................................................................................................................................................. 48
      Stratigraphy ............................................................................................................................................................. 50
      Seismicity ................................................................................................................................................................ 51
      Fault Activity ......................................................................................................................................................... 51
      Measurement of Earthquakes ............................................................................................................................. 53
      Faults in San Luis Obispo County .......................................................................................... ,........................... 53
      Fault Rupture ....................................................................... ,................................................................................. 69
      Unincorporated San Luis Obispo County .. ;........................................................................ :............................. 71
       Groundshaking .............................................................................................................................. :.. :: .................... 75
      Liquefaction ................................................................................................................. ;.......................................... 84
      Tsunami and Seiches ............................................................................................................................................. 87
      Slope Stability............................................................................................................................................................................ 90
      Subsidence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 98
5. Other Hazards .................. ~~ ................................................................................... 101
      Hazardous Materials ................................................................................... ,.................................................... ;. 101
      Radiation H~zards .................. ,........................................................................................................................... 106
      Electromagnetic Fields ...................................................................................................................................... 112
      Stmctural Hazards ............................................................................................................................................. 115
      Airport Hazards .................................................................................................................................................. 118
      Hazardous Trees ................................................................................................................................................. 119
      Radon Hazards .................................................................................................................................................... 120
6.      References ............................. ~~ ..... ~~ .................................................................................... 123
Technical Background Report                                                                                                                   County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
               Emergency Response & Planning
Most emergencies that occur in San Luis Obispo Cowny can be managed by law
enforcement, fire, rescue, and emergency medical services that are available within the
cities and unincOlpomted areas. During a disaster or other large scale emergency, however,
these agencies may be overwhelmed and may not have sufficient resources to respond to
aU caUs for assistance. Additionally, disasters often create emergency situations that are
not conunonlyfaced on a day to day basis. To effectively respond to emergencysituations,
San Luis Obispo County has developed and adopted a number of emergency
preparedness plans and programs. Provided below is an overview of disaster response
and plalming progmms that have been inlplemented in the County, and the organizations
that are responsible for developing and implementing the plans.
San Luis Obispo County Office of Emergency Services
'TI,e primary responsibilities of the ColwtyOffice of EmergencyServices (OES) include
the following:
•    Planning for response to disasters and unusual emergencies throughout the
     unincorporated area of the CoW1ty.
•    Coordinate disaster response efforts of various agencies, cities, and districts throughout
     the CoW1ty.                                                .     .                    .
•    Provide public information to the cities and unincorporated areas of the CoW1ty .
     during a large emergency.
•     Disseminate infol1nation such as stonn wamings to the public.
o    Provide emergency planning assistance to any jurisdiction in the CoWltY.
•    Coordinate multiple jurisclictional disastertraining drills.
•    Provide information to the public on matters related to emergency preparedness
     and threats that the CoW1ty faces.
•     Maintain mutual aid procedures for public works agencies.
•     Provide nuclear power plant emergency respollse \pining to the CoW1ty, cities, and
         .          .
      vanous agencIes.                                        .                              .
•     Interact with the Fedeml Emergency Management Agelicy (FEMA), the State Office
     of Emergency Services, local govemments, and utility companies, to ensure that
      adequate emergency response procedures are maintained.
In the event of a disaster or other emergency, the role of OES is to assist in coordinating
emergency response activities throughout the CoW1tY. If necessary, the CoW1ty Emergency
Operations o,nter (EOC) would be activated to help coordinate disaster response actions.
EOC would be staffed with representatives from the County OEe, Fire Department,
Sheriff, California Highway Patrol, County Health Department, State Office of
Emergency Services, the Red voss, public utilities, and other Countydepartniems. One
of the prinlary responsibilities of EOC is to prioritize the deployment of resources such
as fire trucks and law enforcement units. EOC establishes response priorities from
infonnation and reports that may be received from a variety of sources, including the
Sheriff Department's Aero Squadron which can perfornl aerial damage assessments,
law enforcement and fire departments, cities, and service districts that are located
throughout the County. Mutual aid requests to the State Office of Emergency Services
are also be nlade through EOC
Tt!cJmicai Background Report                                                              CouIIty and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                          1

                                  OES is responsible for the operation of the Emergency Alen System which is a network
                                  of radio and television stations that can be used to disseminate infortl1<ltion to the public
                                  regarding an emergency situation. To enhance existing conununication systems that may
                                  be disrupted after a major disaster, the services of the Amatenr Radio Services (ARES)
                                  organization are available to the County. ARES is made up of a group of ham radio
                                  operators who can provide radio conmmnication services to locations and entities
                                  thronghout the county and state.
                                  Another role of the CountyOES is to assist in emergeneyand disaster recovery operations.
                                  This Can include coordinating the provision of shelter for victims, follow-up building
                                  inspections, clean-up and repair acti\~ties, and starting the extensive financial! cost recovelY
                                  process when the emergency situation is over. Recovery operations that are facilitated by
                                  OES would be coordinated with agencies such as FEMA, the State Office of Emergency
                                  Services, the Red Cxoss, and other local agencies.
                                  Disaster Response and Planning
                                  Another major function of the C.Dunty OES is the preparation and muntenance· of the
                                  EmergencyOperations Plan (EOP). TIlis plan provides guidance, procedures, and County
                                  policies pertaining to emergency planning and response. It is not the intent of EOP to
                                  supersede the response procedures or emergency response plans that have been prepared
                                  by other agencies, such as the Cllifomia Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
                                  (CDF) or city fire departments. EOP provides support for the agencies that have the
                                  primary responsibility for responding.):o ,Ojn emergency incident.;EOP .is prim,rily
                                  comprised of five enJergency pl",l;: 1)' the EarthquakeRe;pons~ P\;ln;2) Hazardous
                                  Materials Emergency Response Plan; 3) Dam Failure Evacuation Plan; and 4) Nuclear
                                  Power Plant Emergency Response Plan; 5) Storm Emergency Plan.                                     (
                                                                                                                                    ,
                                  Another important component of the County's emergencyrcsponse planning and response
                                  progrJmis the Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS). SEMS was created
                                  as a result of the 1991 East Bay Hills Fire in Oaldand, Califomia, with ,the passage of
                                  Senate Bill 1841 (Govemment Code section 8607). This legislation went.into effect in
                                  September 1994, and is intengeg,\,\, inlProve the coordinationof state and local enJergency
                                  response in Califomia. In response t(), $EMS legislation, and \,ther copperative efforts
                                  between emergency response agencies that are located in San.Luis. Obispo CoWll)\
                                  enJergencyresponse plans that have been adopted by the County and each of tbe county's
                                  seven cities arc similar in content and fOI111at. In Grover Beach, Morro Bay, and the
                                  Gty of San Luis Obispo, the Fire Department is responsible for maintaining local
                                  emergency response plans. In Paso Robles, the Department of Emergency Services is
                                  responsible for maintaining local emergency response plans. In Arroyo Grande, and
                                  Atascadero, the Police Department is responsible for maintaining local enJergencyresponse
                                  p1ms.
                                  TIle irnplenJentation of SEMS is based on five basic functions. 'Inese functions are briefly
                                  described below.
                                  Incident Command System
                                  The Incident Command System (rCS) is an emergency management system that is used
                                  primarily at the location of an emergency or at multiple emergency response sites. Through
                                  ICS, a personnel resource and management structure is established to coordinate emergency
                                  response efforts.
County (lI1(J Cities of SaIJ Luis Obispo                                                               Technical Background Rt!purt
2

Multi-Agency Coordination
11,is function coordinates efforts of numerous agencies and organizations to facilitate
decisions for overall emergency response activities. Multi-agency coordination generally
takes place among agencies within a jurisdiction, such as between police, fire, and public;:
works depaltments. Inter-agency coordination generally takes place between different
jurisdictions or between agencies at different levels, such as between cities, and between
cities and the county.
Mutual Aid Agreements
In C1lifomia, a Mastcr Mutual Aid Agreement waS originally signed in 1950. Under this
agreement, cities, cowlties, and the state joined togetherto provide a progrJIl). of volWltarily
providing services, resources, and facilities to jurisdictions when local emergency response
resources arc inadequate. To implement the Master Mutual Aid Agreement, the state has
been divided in six regions. San Luis Obispo Q)lmty is located in Region 1, along with
Santa Barbara, Ventura, Los Angeles, and Orange Counties. Requests for mutual aid
services are processed through the County and State OES.
Many agencies within San Lnis Obispo also palticipate in a number of additional mutual
aid programs. TI,e most conU11on types of mutual aid programs are for law enforcement
and fire protection services. Mutual aid programs have also been established for services
such as public works, regional disaster medical/health coordination, mental health, and
building officials.
Operational Areas                                                                     <,,-'-',
An operational area consists of a connty, and all political subdivisions within that county.
The purpose of the operational area is to coordinate resources and infonnation between
the member agencies. The operational area also serves as a link in the system of
conmmIDcations between the state's emergency operation centers and the operation centers
of local jurisdictions. In San Luis Obispo Co,mty, the Disaster Planning Advisory
Co'11l1-llltee (DPAC) is the organization that coordinates operational area issues. DPAC is
comprised of representatives from the county, each city, special districts, County Office
of Education, and other local agencies.
Operational Area Satellite Information System (OASIS)
 OASIS is a satcllite based commUl-llcations system with a high frequency radio' backup.
111C purpose of this system is to ensure that communications with the State Office of
Emergency Services and other impoltant state and federal agencies is maintained during
an emergency.
Emergency Response Corridors and Evacuation Routes
Response con1dors and evacuation routes are roadways that would typically be used by
response vehicles or the general public in an emergency situation. These ro~dways ~re
generallyanerials and other major roadways that offer sufficient width for emergency
response vehicles. Roads that are used as response corridors/evacuation routes usually
follow the most direct path to or from various pans of a C0111l11l1Ility. These roadwa)~,
however, are also gcncrallyused fortraffic circulation within the connnunityand maybe
subject to congestion which may delay emergency response times.
TIle C',.ounty OES no longer designates celtain roadways as response or evacuation routes
for most potential emergency situations. TIle practice of designating specific roadways
was discontinued because an emergency situation could easily cause a dcsignated roadway
Tee/mica} Background Report                                                                    County and Cities of San Luis ObiSpo
                                                                                                                              3
                               to be impassable or dangerous to use. "n,is was demonstrated during the Highway 41
                               fire that occulTed in 1994 when us. 101 was closed and could no longer be used as an
                               evacuation route. Roadways that would be used in emergency situations wonld be the
                               most suitable roadways that are still functioning in a safe condition.
                               TI,e only official evacuation routes that are still designated by OES arc roadways that
                               shonld be used in the event that an evacuation of the areas sUlTounding the Diablo
                               Cmyon nuclear power plant is required. The evacuation routes that have been designated
                               include Highways 1,41 and 101 to the nOl1h, and :Highways 1, 101, and 227 to the south.
                               Arroyo Grande
                               Emergency Response Corriclors ancl Evacuation Routes
                               Major roadways in Arroyo Grande that would likely be used by emergency response
                               vehicles and for evacuation pmposes include US. 101, Grand Avenue/West Branch S1rCet/
                               Cupenter and Corbett CUlyon Road (Highway227), Traffic Way, Oal, Park Road,Valley
                               Road, and O:telTY Avenue! Branch Mill Road.
                               Atascadero ".
                               Emergency Response Corriclors ancl Evacuation Routes
                               Major roadways in Atascadero that would likely be used by emergency response vehicles
                               and for evacuation pmposes include US. 101, Highway 41 , Traffic Way, Gubaril Avenue,
                               Atascadero Road, Lewis Avenue, West Front Street, and El C1mino Real.
                               Grover Beach                                                     ..
                               Emergency Response Corriclors ancl Evacuation Routes
                               Major roadways in Grover Beach that wonld likely be used by emergency response
                               vehicles and for evacuatiOll purposes include US. 101, Highway 1, Grand Avenue, NOM
                               4th Street, Atlantic Oty Avenue, FalToll Road, and Oak Park Boulevard.
                               Morro Bay
                               Emergency Response Corriclors ancl Evacuation Routes
                               Major roadways in MOlTO Bay that would likely bc used by emergency response vehicles
                               and for evacuation purposes inchlde Highways 1 and 41, Morro Bay Boulevard, Harbor
                               Street, Main Street, Kem Avenue, Atascadero Road, and South Bay Boulevard.                  .
                               Paso Robles
                               Emergency Response Corrlclors ancl Evacuation Routes
                               Major roadways in Paso Robles that wonld likely be used by emergency response vehicles
                               and for evacuation purposes include US. 101, Highway46, Vine Street, Rivetside Avenue,
                               13,h Street, 24'h Street, South River/Niblick Road, and Q·eston Road.
                               City of San Luis Obispo
                               Emergency Response Corriclors ancl Evacuation Routes
                               Major roadways in the city of San Luis Obispo that would likely be used by emergency
                               response vehicles and for evacuation pUlposes include US. 101, Highways 1 and 227,
                               Foothill Boulevard, alOlTO Street, Higuera Street, Marsh Street, Santa Rosa Street, Johnson
                               Avenue, Broad Street, Santa Barbara Avenue, Los Osos Valley Road, L,urcl Lane, Pismo
                               Street, Monterey Street, M,donna Road, ,U1d Califomia Bonlevard.
County and Citit~S of San Luis Obi.~po                                                           Tcc/micai Background Report
4

Exposure of the public to water-related hazards may result from several types of events
and processes. In the Q:"Ultyof San Luis Obispo and its cities, water hazards can result
from flooding, dam failure, and coastal erosion in coastal areas.
Flooding and its effects are issues of concern throughout San Luis Obispo Q:,unty, as a
number of water courses present a potential flood hazard during periods of heavy rain.
Tlus section will describe potential flooding hazards as well as locations throughout the
Q:,untywhere these conditions may occur.
Dam inundation would result from the sudden failure of a dam and the release of the
water that it was impowlding. Although it is very unlikely that,a modem dam,would
suddenly fail, the effects of this hazard could be catastrophic. TI,erefore, tIus hazard is
evaluated in this chapter.
Q:,astal erosion results in the loss of soil from coastal areas. TIlls hazard can acceier,lte
the rate of erosion of coastal bluffs, and can also contribute to increased wave-related
damage to coastal structures.
Flooding
Hazard Description                                                                     "
A flood may be defined as a temporary increase' in, water flow that results,in the
overtopping of the banks of a river, stream, or dr.linage clJalmel, resulting in the inwldation
of areas adjacent to the channel that are not nOffilallycovered by water. The "floodplain"
is the relatively flat or 1000vland area adjoining a stream that is subject to periodic inundation
by floodwater. The term "f1oodway" is used to describe the channel of a river or stream
and the adjacent area that must be reserved to discharge 100-year flood water.
Flood events may occur in response to the amoWlt, distribution, and intensity of
precipitation. Most stomlS are relatively small and do ,not seriously disrupt people and
the land on willch they live. Occasionally, however, a storm of great magnitude ,will .
occur, causing serious damage and disruption to the landscape and its inhabitants. TI,e
reiatioIlShip between great storms and their rates of occurrence is known as the magnitude'
freqnency concept. The magnitude of an event refers to its size, and the frequency refers
to the nwnber of times a given event occurs during a specified period of timc. Fortunately,
magnitude and frequency are inversely related,
meaning that events of great magnitude and force
occur infrequently, and smaller events occur more
often.
In addition to flooding that can result from water
ovenopping the banks of a river, stream or
drainage channel, localized flooding may occur
in low spots or where staml 'VJ<1ter infrastntcturc
is unable to accommodate peak flows during a
storm event. In most cases, localized flooding is
a shon-term problem that dissipates quickly after
intense rainfall episodes cease. However, ponded
water that can result from inadequate drainage
can result in substantial propeny damage.
Technical Background Report                                                                  County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                            5
                              Measl,lring Flood Events
                              Floods arc generally described in terms of their frequency of occurrence. For example,
                              the lOO-year flood is an event that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded
                                                                                                                                 '.
                              in any given year. 'There is a certain element of risk associated in using this type of
                              designation, as the prediction of a flood of a particular magnitude is based on probability
                              and an element of chance is involved. According to statistical averages, a 25-year flood
                              should occur on the average once every 25 years, but two 25-year floods could conceivably
                              OCcur in anyone year. For planning purposes, the flood frequency mostdften used to
                              delineate floodplain bOlUldaries is the lOO-year flood, The magnitude of a flood cm be
                              measured in terms of its peak discharge, which is the maxinmm volume of water (in
                              cubic feet per second) passing a point along the cllalUlel during given tin,e interval. The
                              depth of water present at any given point along the channel is dependent upon the peak
                              discharge and the cross-sectional area of the channel at the point in question.
                              Influences on Flooding Impacts                       . ", .. '
                              A number of natural and artificial facron; can adven;cly influence the magnitude and
                              frequency of flooding along streams and drainage channels. Some of the more common
                              facton; are described below.
                              Natural facton; can include the excessive growth of brush and trees wiihin drainage
                              channels, which may obstmct mnoff water flows and cause an increase lh floodwater
                              heights. Fires within waten;hed areas can also cause increased flooding, resulting from the
                              removal of vegetation that helps to control the amount and rate of stonn water runoff.
                              Without protective vegetation, soil ei6sicinisalso increased and the'llllditit:>!\~1 sediment'", "
                              can accumnlate in drainagechaImels, decreasing their capacity.                   '. "
                              The encroachment of urban development is perhaps the most serious artificially-indnced             (
                              ChaIlge in drainage basin aIld floodplain characteristics that can increase the magnitude
                              and frequency of flooding. Urbanization results in increased impervious growld surface
                              area (pavement, rooftops, etc) which decreases the aI!lOWlt of runoff that will infiltrate
                              into the ground and the lag time between rainfall hitting the ground and when it collects
                              in drainage channels. 'TI,e combined effect of increased runoff aIld decreased concentration
                              time will cause more frequenl' and ,severe floods. Urban development can also result in,
                              the placement of stmctures and fill material in floodplain areas. TIlis:reducesthe, space'
                              available for holding floodwaten;, causing the water level and rate of flow to increase.
                              Bridges and other stmctures placed in stream chaImels C,ill obstmct water flow, particularly
                              if flood debris collects around the stmcture. The damruing effect of water against a
                              bridge can cause sufficient pressure to result in damage or failure of the bridge.
                              To protect urban development from the impacts of flooding, stream channels are often
                              "channelized" (straightened and/or lined with concrete or other material) to move the
                              water through the channel more efficiently. However, as runoff water emerges from the
                              channelized section of the stream, it is often delivered to an lillchannelized down-stream
                              section at rates aIld velocities that the natural section of the stream is not capable of
                              adequately carrying. TI,is can result in increased flooding inlpacts downstream from the
                              channelized pOltlOn of the creek
                              Effects of Flooding
                              TI,e extent of damage caused by any flood depends on a variety of facton;, such as
                              topography, the depth and duration of flooding, velocity of flow, sediment load canled
                              by, and deposited by, the flood, the extent of development located in the flooded area,
                              and the effectiveness of weatherforecasting, flood wamings, and emergency operations.
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                             Technical Background Report
6
 In general, a flood depth of three feet and a velocity of three feet per second has the
 potential to resnIt in a significant threat to hUllliUl safety.
 While there are some benefits associated with flooding, such as the replenishment of
 beach sand, and nutrients to agricultural lands, it is generally considered a hazard to
 development in floodplains. Direct inlpacts of flooding can include injuries and loss of
 life, damage to structures and property, damage to roads, eonllllwlleation facilities and
 other infrastructure, damage to vegetation and crops, and health hazards from ruptured
 sewage lines and damaged septic systems. Secondary impacts include the cost and
 conul1iul1ent of resources for flood fighting selvices, clean-up operations, and the repair
 or replacement of damaged structures.
 Flood Hazard Abatement
 In San Luis Obispo Connt)\ the Cotmty Flood Control and Water ConservationDistrict,
 through the County Engineering Department, is responsible for protecting life .apd
 property from flood hazards. TI,e District has the authority to maintain ,md construct
 flood control in1provements on major drainage facilities located tln'oughout the County.
 Historic Flooding
 San Luis Obispo Cotmty has experienced severe flooding events that have resulted in
 extensive property damage. Flooding hazards are most likely to exist along major river
 and stre;U1l courses including the Salinas River, San Luis Obispo Creek, Santa Rosa Creek,
 Arroyo Grande Creek, Morro Creek and Huerhuero Creek Areas that have been recently
 affected by flooding inlpacts are the areas most to be likely to be affected, byfuture
 events. Therefore, a historical perspective of the effects, of ,recent flood events ,can provide
 useful insight in land usc planning and reduction of future flood hazard risks.
January-February, 1969. In January of 1969, a series of stomE delivered rainfall totals
 that ranged from approximately 12 inches in Paso Robles, to 21 inches in San Luis
 Obispo over an eight-day period. In Febmary, another series of stol1l1S delivered over 5
 inches of rain in Paso Robles and 9.5 inches in San Luis Obispo. In a report prepared by
 the U.S. AmlyCorps of Engineers, the following account of storm-related damage was
 provided:
  "Tbe II/OJ/.rcpCt? rlo/J/t{!{U /0 IItVa!!jJ'vjJC!/}' OCC!II7e't1 illioc C~1y 'q;-:J~;/L;I;:; Obipo; JI-;;je,p'~/b~'jafi
 Lllir (JbI.[jJo Cir:ck Cbatlllc/oeCtl/He clogged l/llfO dcbf7f t1!Jt/.jlO}P /i; loe coalillt! oPe/topped lo(rC/iaIJ!1tl
 b/ltJ.K:s (uttl II/oved dOJ/.!11 toe lIN/Ii; .rlreels tilI/;i' C~iy. A1a.r.rlik'lllooiittatio// :tfolif dtl!7i;g tlmitffter tbe
jdlllfdlyjlood b)' loc Cil)' gf.J~lfllJlir Obicpo rEl/tllOe Cops 0/ EIif:,ilfC!YpmlJlllltd"dmiiolllliddllldgCS
 10 III-b,,?!pmpc,.!}' milt/if: !Oe Febl7ld!y./1ood Jewl,
 rkl///({t;t'j JJletr: .rtffle/liICd      /:y sill!(!I.r:, O{i.:OJPq)!Jj tlilt!
 IItfoiie.' 10/vI(I{oolll toe COllllly Toe IlJfltC!'flt/'P/J
 {),.rk/"/)' q/ Clllllblia JPtlf tkllllt{f;ed til tbejloodr ("lilt!
 /t.t{f{epal'if qf fIJe I(}}PII !PClt: !nioo/II eltdtia?)'J' lC'.ritit11ls
 1Ft'll! amI/milo tini;*:            (m!;' pOlleriJPd/er beed/t.rt' q///Je
po.,,;/Jili!;' tA;! toc local }!'dle,. .flt/'pl),                  /11{~01       be
 COII/t//l/litdlcd      T/Jc dc.rlJ71c110!! (lilt!,kl/l/({!{C o/S{t}PC/1tilf!..f
 flI/t! j'('!Pf{ge~/retllllle!l/plrllll:r ill/lid!!)' !o{,d/iO/I.rjJ(ued
 d 1/J/"C<lllo loe hilf!..r tlllt! ocallb OJ/IM//)'                 rr.(ir/t.'fl/J.
  To(! .rCJ/lt;gt'~/tr!t/t!llell</,klfll.r 11/ AlorttJ lJr:l)~ AlJiit,
 BCdC0 IIlldPir/l/o Bl'tltiJ !Pel'f.' lillllidatt'dgl bolojloodr.
 j)ebri.r a!Jd IWP .r(!/Jltlgt'pi!ed Itp OfJ I/;e Pea{'ot'.r alIt!
 carlied lilloe .(//"{:/111/..(po,rcdsenol!.r II.mwl:r 10 oeflitb
 11111i/ f.'/IIf.{!jtJ1!J' jt!tlfltljJ OPClf1lif}f/.( J/l(:l'f' cO/II/Jlcled     )J
 Technical Background Report                                                                                             County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                                        7
                              January, 1973. Much like the floods of 1969, the 1973 storm produced a ten·hout
                              period of unusually heavy rainfalL San Luis Obispo Cxeek, and its tributary, Stenner
                              Creek, overtopped their banks and inundated a wide area of downtown San Luis Obispo.
                              January and March, 1995. Serious flooding occutred in all coastal and many inland
                              streams. San Luis Obispo Creek caused damage in the Gtyof San Luis Obispo, and
                              especially near the ocean, where the San Luis Bay Golf Course and other properties
                              received extensive damage. umbria was completely inundated, with water as deep as
                              six feet on Main Street.
                              San Luis Obispo County
                              Flood Hazard Potential
                              Ine National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), which is administered by the Federal
                              Insurance Admiuistration (a component of the Federal Emergency Management AgencJ1,
                              requires communities to adopt land use restrictions}or, the ,loa· year floodplain. in .orden.·
                              to qualify for Federally·subsidized flood insurance. TI,e program requires that within
                              areas designated as a lOa· year floodplain, building floor elevations must be a minimum
                              of 12 inches above flood water levels. Areas within the designated floodway must be
                              reserved to discharge the 100· year flood without cumulatively increasing the'water surface
                              elevation more than one foot. Generally, buildings and structures that would obstruct
                              flood flow or be subject to flood damage are prohibited within the floodway.
                              To implelllCnt the NFIP, areas throughout San Luis Obispo Cowltythatare subject to
                              inundation from the lOa· year and 500· year floods are depicted.on Flood InsU!anoe Rate,,··
                              Maps. The most recent Floodlnsurance Rate M'psfor San LuisObispoG:>untywere·.
                              prepared in 1982 and 1985.
                                                                     The unincorporated areas of San Luis Obispo
                                                                     County that may be subject to U1Wldation. from a
                                                                     100· year stoml event are generally depicted on Mop
                                                                     5. TIlls map shows areas subject to inundation from
                                                                     a 100·year storm, and does not necessarily depict
                                                                     areas that may be affected by local drainage
                                                                     problems. Due to. the scale and generalized nature
                                                                     of tills map, official Flood' Insurance"Rate Maps
                                                                     should be consulted when assessing potential flood
                                                                     hazards at a particular property.
                                                                     A Flood Insur.mce Study (FIS) conducted by FEMA
                                                                     for San Luis Obispo CoWlty noted that runoff in
                                                                     the streams of the CoWlty is small, with appreciable
                              flows occunlng only during and immediately after precipitation. However, during large
                              stonns, streamflow increases rapidly, and flood waters can contain high amounts· of
                              debris, causing major flood damage. For many of the water courses that are located in
                              the County, areas that may be inundated in response to 100· year storm events are located
                              adjacent to or near the stream or river channeL SUlce many"f the County's watercourses
                              are located in mountainous or remote areas with little or no development, flooding
                              events along these rivers and streams generally result in minimal impacts. Other
                              watercourses that are located in the County, however, have floodplains that extend well
                              beyond the defined stream or river channeL When a flood occurs along one of these
                              watercow~es, and it is located in or near an area that is urbanized, damage to property
                              and infrastructure can be widespread.
County find CiUcs of San Luis Obispo                                                            TccJmicaJ Background Report
8

In the southem portion of the County, Arroyo Grande Creek, San Luis Obispo Creek,
and their respective tributaries, are watercourses that pass through urbanized areas and
that have caused major floods. The north coast area of the Coumyalso contains a number
of short, steep-gradient creeks that can experience rapid increases in water flows in
response to storm events in Gmbria. Santa Rosa Creek is such a watercourse that has
caused siglllficant flooding events. The largest water course in the inland pottion of the
U,Wlt y is the Salinas River, which is located adjacent to numerous incolporated and
unincotpoldted communities. Although the floodplain of d,e Salinas River can be extensive,
it is generally contained within the river channel. Other major inhmd water courses include
the Estrella River and San Juan Creek Due to the genelally remote locations of these
watercourses, flooding impacts are generally not significant.
Major unincOlporated commmuties of San Luis Obispo County that have been mapped
by FEMA as being located within the 100- year floodplain are described below. The 100-
year floodplain is generally used to define areas that are vulnerable to flooding hazards.
South Bay
'TI,e South Bay area of me C.ounty (including the communities of Baywood Park, Los
Osos,and Glesta-by-the Sea) has not been identified as being located widun a lOa-year
stonl1floodplain by the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FEMA, 1985). Flooding
in response to a lOa-year stOlID is generally confined to shoreline areas surrolUlding
Morro Bay. TI,ere are locations in this area, however, that are subject to chronic localized
flooding. After a significant rain, localized flooding occurs throughout the Los Osos
area. Nwnerous intersections within the community experience flooding during·stotiii
events, including 8'" Street at El Morro Avenue, 17,hStreet at Paso Robles Avenue; Lose
Olivos Avenue at Fairchild Way, Ferrell Street, Don Avenue at Mitchell Drive, Los Osos
Valley Road at Palisades Avenue, and Ramona Avenue at 11'" Street. A study of Los
Osos drainage problems has been completed.
 Cambria
Santa Rosa Creek has a history of flooding which
has caused severe erosion of the creek banks as
well as damage to phone and gas Jines, water wells
and bridges. Major bank erosion in the past has
caused complete intcrmptioll of the town's water
supply. The lOa-year floodplain for Santa Rosa
Creek is generally confined to the creek chalIDe!
and surrounding areas south of Main Street.
However, the West Village business area along Main
Street has been subjected to severe flooding as a
res nit of recent flood levels that overtopped the
banks of Santa Rosa Creek (FEMA, 1985).
 Cayucos
 lOa-year flood areas near the community of Gl}'ICOS are predominately confined to
areas adjacent to Gyucos G-eek, Little Gyucos Creek, and Willow Creek Several limited
areas of the community along these areas have been designated as being in a lOa-year
floodplain. These areas include a portion of "B" Street near Ocean Boulevard, between
C.ayucos Creek and "E" Street, and an area near Willow Creek and Ocean Boulevard
(FEMA, 1985).
Technical Background Report                                                           County and Cities of San Luis Ohispo
                                                                                                                     9

                              Nipomo
                              Flooding in the COlllillUlUty of Nipomo occurs primarily along Nipomo Creek and its
                              tributaries, such as Deleissiques Creek and Tefft Road Q'eek TI,e 100-year floodplain
                              along these creeks encompasses areas adjacent to the watercourses, along with extensive
                              areas located east of u.s. Highway 101 between Mehlschau Road to the west and Price
                              Street to the east (FEMA, 1985).
                              Oceano                                                                        :"
                              Flooding in Oceano results from flows in Arroyo Grande Creek and Me;,dow Creek
                              TI,e most significant immdation area is nearthe creeks' confluences with the ocean. Areas
                              subject to flooding as a result of a 100-year stonn generally extend south of Highway 1
                              and west of Pismo Road. Flooding would occur at the Oceano County Airport and
                              sunoUlldil1g properties, along with extensive areas located to the south of the community
                              (FEMA, 1985).
                              San Simeon
                              Flooding in and near the conmmnity of San Sinleon Acres could result from flows in
                              Pico Creek and Arroyo Del Padre Juan. Pico Creek is located to the north of the
                              conll11Ulllty, wIllie Arroyo Del Padre Juan is located in the southem porti()n. TI,e 100-
                              year floodplains of these creeks generally follow the creek channel, but,due to their
                              location near urbanized areas, they have the potential to result in flooding impacts to
                              developed areas (FEMA, 1985).
                              Templeton
                              Watercourses located in and near the t6ffiniunityof Templeton-include the Salin'as:River;- .'
                              willch is located to the east of- the town and Toad Creek, wlllch is located nimh of Old
                              County Road near. the center of the commlmity. TI,e 100-year floodplain of the Salinas
                              River near Templeton is confined to the river charlllel and does not significantly affect the
                              commlmit y. The floodplain for Toad Creek is not extensive, however, due to its location
                              relative to downtown Templeton, a 100-year flood along this watercourse would have
                              the potential to affect adjacent properties (FEMA, 1982).
                              SanMiguel                                                                     .. ,
                              TIle community of San Miguel is located west of the Salinas River, and north of the
                              confluence of the Estrella River vyith the Salinas :River. The100-year floodplain ,of the
                              Salinas River near San Miguel is confined to the river channel and does not significantly
                              affect populated areas of the commUlllty (FEMA, 1982).
                              Creston
                              The C01l11l1Urnty of Creston is located bet ween the west and middle branches of
                              Huerhuero Creek The 100-year floodplains of these creek> are located adjacent to the
                              westem and eastem edges of the C01l11llUlllty arld could have the potential to affect
                              adjacent developed properties (FEMA, 1982).
                              Shandon
                              TI,e COnlinurnty of Shandon is located southwest of the confluence of San Juan Creek
                              with the Estrella River. TI,e 100-year floodplains of these watercourses are not located
                              within the town of Shandon, but are located adjacent to developed areas. TIlese w,lter
                              courses a1<o cross State Routes 41 and 46 near the town. Flooding along these watercourses
                              could have the potential to adversely effect access to and from the conllnUllity (FEMA,
                              1982).
                              RuralAreas
                              Many areas are isolated or forced into excessively long detours during and after floods
                              due to flood impacts on roads. These access in1pacts are a significant "flood hazard."
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                           Technical Background Report
10
 Ordinances and Regulations
'1'he . f/II/I.1{ir O/;irpo COIIII!/ J.////(/ Uri' Orr/il/tl//a' (I/Jd {:oll.rkl/ ZOIIC 1.Llllri [/.r(:' O/rili/(/I/{(.' (Titles
22 and 23 of the Count)' Code), provides standards for rhe preparation Hnd subtuittal
of draimlgc plans fot" new dcvclop1l1cnt. These regulations specify ·when dtainageplans
arc required, the contents of an ~\(.lc(luate drainage plnn, drainage standards, and the plan
review and approval process. The Land ·Use Ordinances also contain the County's
Floodplain Ordinance, which spccifit:s devclopll1Cnt standards for areas that have a Flood
Hazard (FH) cornbining land usc (ksignarion. The dcvdoplncnt standards contained in
the Floodplain Ordinance pertain to land usc pcnnir processing and consrruction standards
for new development located in areas that have the potential t.o be inundated by a 100-
year flood.
Arroyo Grande
Flood Hazard Potential
·rhe National Flood Insurance Program (Nl-i'lP),
which is aurninistered by rhe Federal Insurance
 Administration (a c0111poncnt of the Federal
EnlcrgCllc), Ivlanage111ent Agency), rC(luircs
communities to adopt land use restrictions for the
100-year floodplain in order to 'lnalify for
1:edcrally-subsidizcd flood insurance. The program
rC(Iuires that within arcas designat.ed as a "100-ycm·
floodplain, building floor elevations 11lUSt be a
minilTIUm of 12 inches above flood water levels.
Areas within the designated floodplain nlust be
reselTcd to discharge the lOO-year flood without
ctunulativdy increasing the \.vater sLUfacc elevation 1110re than one foot. Generally, buildi.ngs
and struct.ures that would obstruct flood £low or be subject to flood dmnage ate prohibited
withi11 the floodway.
To implctl1ent the NFIP, areas throughout .l\rro)'o Grande that afe subject to inundation
 from a lOO-year and 500-year floods are dcpicted on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FEI'vlA,
 1984). The arcas of Arroyo Grande that may bc subject to inundation from the 100-year
storm event arc generally depicted on l\'lap 5. Due to generalized depiction of potential
flooding areas provided by this Safety Element, official Flood lnsurance Rate J\{aps
 should be consulted when assessing potential flood hazards at a particular property.
Areas of potential flooding in response to a 1 nO-year storm are located adjacent to
Canyon/l\fcadow Creek on the west side of the City, adjacent to Corbett Canyon and
Arroyo Grande Creeks in rJ1C eastern porriofl of rJ1e City, and a lituired area along Los
Benos Creek in the southeastern portion of the City. j\reas that would be inundated in
 rcsponse to a lOO-year Hood along these cteeks arc gencrally located :.1long stream channels;
 however, in isolated an::as) adjacent properties could be adversely affected. Near thc
confluence of Corbert Canyon and Arroyo Gmndc Creek, the lOO-year floodplain widens,
 rc::.ulting in impacts to properties between Crown Terracc and ~-1ason Stl"ect. The floodplain
 ~Ilong j\rroyo Grande Creek also widens slightly on the nort-h and south sides of U.S.
 101. Although areas subject to tlooding from a lUO-year Hood are limited, floodwater
could cause roadwa),s such as Bridge Street, Traffic Way and U.S. lOl to become impassable,
fhereby hindering trayc! and response cffons.
lvlap 5 depicts areas subject to inundation from a 1OO-year storm, and docs not necessarily
depier areas rhat may be affected by local draimlge problcn1s. The City has worked ro
alleviat.e drainage problclns in areas such as the North Hills area, the Oro and Stagecoach
 Technical Background Report                                                                                              County and Citil'S of !3al1 Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                                             11

                            area, Brisco Road areal Sunrisc Terrace, Strother Park, the Town and Counrry Shopping
                            Center, and the Soto Sports Cornplcx,
                            Ordinances and Regulations
                            Ordinance Number 366 C.S. of Thc An~ro Gi?J/Ir!{, illlllliclfd Codr: establishes the "Flood
                            Hazard" (F-H) zoning district. The pU1:po'~e of tl1e ordinance is to prOll1ote the public
                            hC~llth) safety, and general welfare, and to 111inilnize public and private losGs due to flood
                            conditions.
                           Atascadero
                            Flood Hazard Potential
                           The National Flood Insurance Prognlll1 (NFIP)) which is administered by the rocderal
                            Insurance Adminisu·ation (a cOlnponcnt of the J-i'cderal Elncrgency l\lamlgcl11cnt Agency»)
                            requires cOlllmunities to adopt land usc restrictions for the 100-year floodplain in order
                            to qualify for FedexaUy-subsidized flood il1sur~n<;.<-::.,~Thc program nXluires, that, \vithin
                            areas designated as a 100-year floodplain, building floor elevations must be a minimmD
                            of 12 inches above flood water· levels. Arcas within the designated floodway Inust,bc
                            reserved to discharge the lOO-year flood withollt cumulatively increasing the water surface
                            elevation 1l10re than one foot. Generally! buildings_and strllcnlres that would obstruct
                            flood flow or be subject to flood darnage are prohibited within the Ooodway.
                           To 11uplclnent the NFlP, areas throughout Atascadero that arc subject to inundation
                            from a 100-year and 500-year Hood are depicted on Flood 1115urance Rate l\hps (FEMA,
                            1982). The areas of .Atascadero that m'lY' be subject to im!ndatilH1fror.)l ..alOO-ycar Sform
'~;'l"I'                   event are generally depicted oll)\;fap,s. Due to generalized depictiofu)fpotential fiqoding
                            areas provided by this Safety Element, official Flood Insurance Rate Maps should be
                            consulted when assessing pot.ential flood hazard:; at a particuhlx propeny.                                (
                           The Salinas River 1S located in the northeastern and eastern areas of the City. 'I11e floodplain
                            of the river is generally rCll10vcd frorD the dn:cloped ~UC'.l::', however, properties 011 the
                            cast side of Hidalgo Avcnue~ Sycmnore Road., and Capistrano l\venue cquld be affected
                            by Hooding during a 1OO-year stor111, The lOO-year floodplain of the. Salina~ River extends
                            across it 5egl11cnt of Ctu'bar~l.Ay,l;l)\lC. The crossing of Hakon Road over the Salinas.
                            River is frequently washed-out in .~tortn       events and \.\:~mld
                                                                      -.'-',,,".             .
                                                                                                be,".-"
                                                                                                     washed-out.
                                                                                                        ... ,.- ."-
                                                                                                                    during     a.1.QO-
                                                                                                                     .,'".. , - .
                            year storm event.
                            Atascadero Creek extends through the central portion of the Cit)', but has a limited
                            potcnt-ial fOJ: flooding ill1pacrs as the 1DO-year fl~)()dplain is generally confined to the
                            channel and adjacent propcnics, \X!hefe Atascadero Creek crosses U,S. 101 and Stat.e
                            Route 41, a 100-year flood could cause inundation of the portions of the highways. 'flus
                            would have the potcntial TO result in significant local and regional tnlnsportation impacts.
                            Although the SOO-year floodplain is not genemlly used for planning purpo}\es! it should
                            he noted tha t the ,lrea designated as being located "\vithi1'i' the. 500-year' floodplain of the
                            Salinas River and Atascadero Creek cnC0111pa}\SCS approximately '1.5 Sl}Uare miles of 11K
                            central pordon of .Atascadero.
                            In the }\outhca}\tern ponion of .t\tasGH.iero, flooding hazards could result frotn 100-ye.ar
                            flows in several branches of Palolna Creek. 1dentified inundation areas arc pritnarily
                            located adjacent TO the creek channels, although S0111e more extensive areas could also be
                            affected. 1n the west.ern portion of the City, flooding along C;ravcs Creek \.vould primarily
                            be re~)trictcd to the stream channeL
County and eWes of San LuiS Obispo                                                                    Trc/micai Background Report
12

Map 5 depicts areas subject to inundation from a lOO-year stom1, and does not necessarily
depict areas that may he affected by local drainage problems. Atascadero has historically
e""perienced dminage and related flooding problems in an area known as the Amapoa/
TeeOllda Basin, which is located to the east of Atascadero Creek and Morro Road, and
south of   u.s.  Highway 101. TIus area has been subjeet to building momtoriums and fee
progr"l11S to pay for drainage improvements. In recogIution of this drainage problen1,
the lower portion of the basin has a Flood ELlZard (FH) overlay zoning designation.
The Amapoa/Tecorida drainage basin has been prone to flooding for a variety of reasons.
The primary cause of flooding in this area results from stOim events which cause water
flows in Atascadero Creek greatenhat the 17-year design storm to overtop the Ataseadero
Lake spillway chatmel banks and flow into the AmapoaiTecorida basin. Other factors
that have contributed to inadequate dminage in this area include flat topogmphy and low
water velocities increasing rim-off volumes due to urban development, undersized
drainage culverts and channels, partieularly at Highway 101, and the lack.of a-formal
method to Inaintain existing dminage facilities on private property (Draft Amapoa/
Tecorida Master Dl<linage Study, 1995).
A valletl' of control strategies for correcting the drainage deficiencies of Ihe Amapoa! -
TecOllda area have been proposed. These measures include improvements to the
Atascadero Lake spillway, constmction of a new SlOun dmin along Highway 41, requiring
drainage analysis for projects located within the basin that increase building density, and
provision of a mechanism to facilitate the maintenance of dminage facilities on priva~e
property. Cbnstmction of the storm drain along Highway 41 has already begun. :' . ,-
Ordinances and Regulations
TIle Otyof Atascadero's ZOlling Ordinance, 9-3.600, FH (Flood Hazard) OverlayZone,
identifies areas where terrain would present new developments and their users with
potential flood hazards. In addition, Ordinance No. 193, All OIl/;ik1!lCcAdd;i{~ CA¢lcr5/o
Atliclt 7 if jOt C~i:)' 171J4Id,(CiN/cm A1/111iciplll Code RtWlliltg to Flood[Jo///<{Rf.' PrctJt:!ltioll, provides
fnrther guidance to reduce flood damage. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote
the public health, safety, and geneml welfare, atld to minimize public and pIlvate loses
due to flood conditions. Also, Ordinance No. 304 amended Title 6, a,apter 13 of the
Atascadero MtUucipal Cbde to provide a mechanism to allow the Fire Ollefto-order
the removal of weeds, mbbish, and similar material that has the potential to become a
flooding hazard.
Grover Beach
Flooding Hazard Potential
The National Flood Insurance Progl<lm (NFIP), wluch is administered by the Federal
Insurance Adlninistration (a component of the Federal Emergency Management AgencY,),
requires commwuties to adopt land use restrictions for the 100-year floodplain in order
to qualify for Federally-subsidized flood insurance. The program reqnires that within
areas designated as a lOO-year floodplain, building floor elevations must be a minimum
of 12 inches above flood water levels. Areas within the designated floodway must be
reserved to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot. GeneI~illy, buildings and stmctures that would obstmct
flood flow or be subject to flood damage are prohibited ,,~thin the flood way.
To implement the NFIP, areaS throughout Grover Beach that are subject to inundation
from the 100-year and 500-year floods are depicted on Flood Insurance R,1te Maps
(FEMA, 1984). The areas of Grover Beach that may be subject to inundation from a
Technical Background Report                                                                                  County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                            13

                                100-year storm event are generally depicted on Map 5. Due to generalized depiction of
                                potential flooding areas provided by tIus Safety Element, official Flood Insurance Rate
                               Maps should be consulted when assessing potential flood hazards at a particular property.
                               Isolated areas of potential flooding in response to a 100-year stom1 are located in the
                               northern and western portions of the City that are adjacent to Meadow Creek Flood
                               haz.ard areas in the northern ponion of the City arc restricted to an area-south of US.
                                101 and north of Nacinnento Avenue. A mobile home subdivision is located in tlus area.
                               In the western pan of the City, flooding could affect areas located wesCof the Union
                               Pacific Railroad track
                               Map 5 depicts areas subject to inundation from a 100-yearstoan, and does not necessarily
                               depict areas that may be affected by local drainage probleJ11S. Local flooding conditions
                               currently exist in two isolated areas within the City where properties are located below
                               street level. One parcel is located at South 5,h Street,and Manhattan Avenue .. TIus.parcel is
                               subject to flooding from 50-year stom1 event if sandbags are not used or if cars are
                               parked on the street. 11,e second parcel is located at south 6,h Street and Mentone Avenue.
                               A 75-100 year stoml event will flood this propeny, however, an asphalt belm has been
                               constructed wInch alleviates flooding under stoans of lesser magnitude (City of Grover
                               Beach, Written Correspondence, 1996).
                                Ordinances and Regulations
                               Sections 7300-7361, Cliapkl'3 . Ploorl D'I/l/rfgr Pm'fllliOll R,gll/dlioIC.f, of tge Grover Beach
                               Municipal Code addresses flood hazards relative to p~blic health, safety and general .
                               welfare. The purpose of these regulations is to mllUnllze public and private loses due to
                               flood conditious.
                               Morro Bay
                               Flooding Hazard Potential
                               'The National Flood Insur.mce Program (NFIP), which is adnlinistered by the Federal
                               Insur.mce Administration (a component of the Federal Emergency Management Agency),
                               requires commlullties to adopt land use restrictions for the 100-year floodphtin in order
                               to qualify for Federally-sl\bsidiz.,dflood insurance. The program requires that witltin
                               areas designated as a 100-year floodpl~,in,. bl!ilding fl()or eleva:io.nsnlus\~~ ". !llinu~l1m
                               of 12 inches above flood water levels. Areas witllin the designated floodway must be
                               reserved to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
                               elevation more than one foot. Generally, buildings and structures that would obstruct
                               flood flow or be subject to flood damage are prolubited 'widlin the floodway.
                               To inlplement the NFIP, areas throughout MOIYO Bay that are subject to inundation
                               from the 100-year and 500-year floods are depicted on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
                               (FEMA, 1985). TI,e areas of Morro Bay that may be subject to inundation from a 100-
                               year storn1 event are generally depicted on MaP. 5. Due.tO generalized depietionof
                               potential flooding areas provided by this Safety Element, official Flood Insurance Rate
                               Maps should be consulted when assessing potential flood hazards at a particular propeny.
                               Floodulg in the City of Mono Bay could occur as a result of flows in Mono Creek,
                               Little Morro Creek, Chorro Creek and the several smaller creeks located in the northem
                               portion of the City. Flooding from Morro Creek and Little Morro Creek in response to
                               a 100-year stann would inundate areas between Little Morro Creek Road and I:-Iighway
                               41 on the east side of Main Street, and an extensive area nonh of Embarcadero Road on
                               the west side of Main Street. Flooding from these creeks could potentially render State
                               I:-Iighway 1 bridges over these waterways unusable during a major Stonn During the
Cmlllty and Cities of San Luis ObL~po                                                                  TcchnicallJackgrouI1d Report
14
  rains of 1995 Highway 1 waS closed through Morro Bay due to flooding. Flooding
  from Chorro Creek would affect the eastem portion of the Oty, prllnrily areas cast of
  South Bay Boulevard and Morro Bay State Park In 1995, flooding from alOrrO Creek
  inundated Twin Blldges (now Chorro Creek Bridge) for several days, forcing travelers
  from Los Osos to detour through San Luis Obispo in order to reach Morro Bay. The
  neWalOrrO Creek Bridge, completed in 1996, was constmcted at a higher elevation than
  Twin Bridges to avoid fUBtre closures due to flooding. 11,e creeks located in the northem
  portion of the Oty traverse areas that have been extensively developed with residential
. uses. In 1995, houses located along Alva Paul Creek, and other houses in north Morro
  Bay, were flooded. Also, the area between Highway 41 and Radcliffe Street flooded in
  1995 causing much property damage to both residences and businesses. In the isolated
  areas where the creek floodplains extend beyond the stream channels, flooding impacts
  could also be significant.
  Ordinances and Regulations
  Local flood regulations for the Oty of Morro Bay are provided in sections 14.72.010-
  14.72.060 of elM/ler 14.72- FloodDdllkW P,rvct!lliJllcontained in the Morro Bay Municipal
  Code. 111e intent of these regulation are to reduce public and private loses due to flood
  damage.
  Paso Robles
  Flooding Hazard Potential
  The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), which is administered by the Federal
  Insurance Administration (a component of the Federal Emergency ManagementAgenc)Q;
  requires communities to adopt land use restrictions forthe 100-year floodplain in orderto
  qualify for Federally-subsiclizcd flood insurance. 11,e program requires that within areas
  designated as a 100-year floodplain, building floor elevations must be a minimum of 12
  inches above flood water levels. Areas within the designated floodway must be reserved to
  discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
  more than one foot. Genemlly, buildings and structures that would obstruct flood flow or
  be subject to flood damage are prohibited within the floodway.
  To implement the NFIP, areas throughout Paso Robles that are subject to inundation from
  the 100-year and 500-year floods are depicted on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FEMA,
   1981). Flood mapping for the Oty of Paso Robles and the analysis of Hueruero Creek
  was not complete at the time this report was produced. 11,e areas of Paso Robles that may
  be subject to inundation from a 100-year stoml event are generally depicted on Map 5.
  Due to generalized depiction of potential flooding areas provided by this Safety Element,
  official Flood Insurance Rate Maps should be consulted when assessing potential flood
  hazards at a particular property.
  Several watercourses are located within Paso Robles Ulat have the potential to cause flooding
  impactS. The Salinas River is the major watercourse located in Paso Robles, and runs through .
  Ule center of the Gty. Flows in ule Salinas River that could result from a 100-year storm are
  pt1n1arilycontained in the river channel. On ule west side of ule Oty, flooding from Mountain
  Springs Creek could affect isolated residential areas located along 21", 22"d, and 23'" Streets.
  'TI,e area located adjacent to and west of U.S. 101 and south of 24'" Street could also be
  inundated by runoff from a 100-year storm. In the southwestem portion of the Oty, 100-
  year flooding events could result in the inundation of areas along Pacific Avenue, 4'" Street
  and Paso Robles Boulevard. In the eastem portion of Ule Oty, several unnamed creeks
  have 100-year floodplains that would primarily affect the creek channel and adjacent
  properties. In the northern portion of the Oty, Huerhuero G-eek could cause isolated areas
  of flooding along the road that leads to the Paso Robles Municipal Allport.
   Tee/mica) 13ac/WTOU1Jd Report                                                           County and Cities of Sail Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                           15
                              Ordinances and Regulations
                              'TI,e atyof Paso Robles Municipal C'J)de, Ck;P!er21.14Ploodj)(ftlkWPtrPC!lliOll li{l[fII'(t/iotJ.f
                              specify methods of reducing flood losses. A variety of standards relative to construction,
                              utilities, and manufactured homes are provided to rnininuze public and private losses
                              due to flood conditions.
                              City of San Luis Obispo
                              Flooding Hazard Potential
                              The National Flood Insurance Program (NFlp), which is administered by the Federal
                              Insurance Administnltion (a component of the Federal Emergency Management Agency),
                              requires communities to adopt land usc restrictions for the 100-year floodplain in order
                              to qualify for fedemlly-subsidized flood insurance. 111e program requires that within
                              areas designated as a 100-year floodplain, building floor elevations must be a minil11um
                              of 12 inches above flood water levels. Areas within the designated floodway must be
                              reserved to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulativelyincreasing.the water. surface·
                              elevation more than one foot. Generally, buildings and structnres that would obstruct
                              flood flow or be snbject to flood damage are prohibited within the floodway..·
                              To implement the NFlI', areas throughout the atyof San Luis Obispo that are subject
                              to inundation from the 100-year and 500-year floods are depicted on Flood Insurance
                              Rate M1PS (FEMA, 1981).111e areas of San Luis Obispo that maybe subject to inundation
                              from a 100-year storm are generally depicted on Map 5.a. Due to generalized depiction
                              of potential flooding areas provided by this Safety Element, official Flood Insurance
                              Rate Maps should be consulted when ·assessing potential flood .hazards·iat:a'Particular'
                              property.               . , . """ ,
                              The atyof San Luis Obispo is traversed by several creeb, including San Luis Obispo
                              Oeek and its major tributaries, SteImer Oeek, Brizziolari Q-eek and Prefumo Oeek
                              The 100-year floodplains for these creeks encompass extensive areas of the aty OIl the
                              east ,md west sides of  u.s.       101, including the downtown area. Historic flooding on San
                              Luis Obispo Oeek, sueh as the floods of 1969,1973, and 1995, have resulted in substantial
                              property damage.
                                                       ··.:.Y",'-q,.~ ,
                              Map 5 depicts areas subject to inundation fromalOO-year st()l111, and.~oes.norIlecessarily .
                              depict areas that may be affected by lo'c'l dminage problems in respollse to storms that
                              are of a magnitude less than a 100-year storm_ Several areas in the downtown of.San
County and Cities of San Lois Obispo                                                               Tl!cilllicaJ Background Report
16

Luis Obispo arc subject to localized flooding. Areas that may experience drainage
problems during moderately sized stomJS include the vicinity of Santa Rosa Street, Broad
Street, Prado Road, and Laguna Lake.
Orclinances ancl Regulations
Sections 17.84.010-17.84.170 within COdjJt!1' 17.114, Flood j)(///kwi'mlCtJtlotJ R(RJI/atiOJl.r of
the San Luis Obispo Mmncipal Olde set fonh means to reduce losses from floods.
These st'mdards focus on areas located within or near the 100-year floodplain. Section
8.12.010-8.12.010 of the Municipal Olde provides a mechanism for the City to require
the removal of dangerous obstructions in streambeds that have the potential to obstruct
water flow.
Dam Inunclation
Hazard Description
Dam inlmdation is the flooding of lands due to the release of impounded water resulting
from the failure or ovenopping of a dam Although tins occurrence is Ingbly unlikely, it
wan'ants consideration inlhe Safcty Elementbeeause S,m Luis Obispo Olunty has several
dams and reservoirs.
Potential Causes of Dam Failures
Dam failures can result from a number of natural or man-made causes. Earthquakes,
improper siting, fast rising flood waters, erosion of the dam face or foundation, and
structuraV construction flaws can all contribute to a dam breach and ensuing release of
impounded water. Other reservoir-related flooding eventS have'resulted from massive,
fast-moving hmdslides, that have di,placed large voluhJes of water contained in a reservoir.
Such a rapid displacement of water can cause large quantities of water to travel over the
dant, resulting in downstream flooding.
Major Dams In San Luis Obispo County
San Luis Obispo Olunty has several large publicly owned dams, as well as a number of
smaller privately owned dams. Table 2-1 summarizes the dams and reservoirs in the
County as well as their capacity and type of construction.
Effects of Dam Inundation
The severity of downstream effects resulting from a dam failure will be directly related
to tbe manner in wInch the dam fails. A failure resulting from the erosion of a breach in
                           Table 2-1: Major Dams and Reservoirs in San Luis Obispo County
                                                                                            Capacity         Type of
              Name                       Owner                         Location
                                                                                           (acre-feet)        Facility
              Lopez          S,LO. County Flood Control       East of Arroyo Grande           51,000           Earth
                           nnd \Y./ater Conservation District
          Nacimiento               Monterey County               Northwest of Paso           350,000           Earth
                               \Xlater Resources A,l,J('l1cy             Rohles
             Righetti                    Private                Southeast of S.L.O.             591            Earth
              Salinas             Corps of En,glnecrs              S~ln la Mnn>}lri hl        23,000         C.Dncrctc
            'rerminlll       S.L.O. County Flood Control      E~ast of Arroyo Grande            844            Earth
                          And \Vlllcr ConscnTMlon District
            'fwilchdl           Bureau of Reclamation             l:~ast of Nipomo           240,000           Earth
          \X1wle Rock          \X/hale Rock Commission                  Cayucos               40,000           Earth
       Atascadero Lake             City of At:lscBclero               Atascadero                250            r~~Hth
      Source: San I.uis Obispo C.ounty Office of Emergency Services (1992).
Tech11ical Background Report                                                              COllnty and Cit ies of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                           17
                              an ea!thfill dam would likely result in a flood wave that builds gradually to a peak, then
                              declines wltil the reservoir is empty. If a dam were to fail rapidly, however, a flood wave
                              would be fomled quicldyand then be followed by a gradual decline in flood water.
                              The failure of a dam could cause flooding, injury, loss of life, and propeny damage due
                              to erosion, debris and sediment deposition. Other effects include damage to community
                              infrastructure and intemlption of public services. Health hazards from the release of
                              sewage may ,uso result. To oversee planning for such potentials, the Cilifornia Office
                              of EmergencySelvices (OES) maintains a dam failure inlmdation mapping' and emergency
                              procedure program TIus program encompasses inundation mapping, inW1dation map
                              waivers and enlcrgency procedures.
                              Owners of dams are required to submit inW1dation maps to state OES for review and
                              approval in accordance with guidelines issued by that office. InW1dation maps represent
                              the best estimate of where water would flow if .adam failed.completely and .suddenly ..
                              with a full reservoir. However, later downstream changes, such as major land contour
                              alterations, may affect the actual inW1dation pathway. TI,ere is no known requirement for
                              planning if a waterway, such as a stream, below a dam is dry, low flmving or full and
                              flowing, when developing inundation maps. Inundation maps are an approximation of
                              where the water would flow.                                                    'Y
                              San Luis Obispo County
                              Dam Failure Hazard Potenlial
                              In response to the disastrous failure of .the Saint Francis,p~l:n i11..1"os Angeles CoWltY, the
                              State of Cilifornia has been responsible for inspecting dams since. 1929. In recognition
                              of potential safety impacts that cmud be associated with a dam failure, section 8589.5 of
                              the Cilifomia Govemment Code requires that inW1dation maps for all dam~, except
                              those dams meeting the waiver conditions specified by the Cilifornia OESs, be prepared
                              by dam owners and he submitted to the Clluornia OES. Damintmdationmaps. are
                              prepared plimarily for emergency preparedness plans for the affected jurisdictions. Dam
                              inwldation, as depicted by the hazard maps, is not considered a probable occurr<:nce, .
                              because the identified hazard areas are based on a severe instantaneous dam failure due
                              to a catastropluc event having a Telatively low probability of occurrence. In addition, the
                              State Division of Safety of Dam~ periodically inspects dams for safety, including seismic; .
                              stability. When necessary, existing dams are upgraded as new technology becomes available.
                              In the event of dam failure emergency, the San Luis Obispo CowltyOffice of Emergency
                              Services would inlplement the County's Dam Failure Evacuation Plan.TI,is plan includes
                              alening affected populations using the Emergency Alert System and mobilizing emergency
                              response persOlll1el. Public safety vehicles and public address systems can be used to
                              notify the public. For the Lopez, Terminal and Whale Rock dams, the Early Wamiug
                              Siren System could be used to alen the public.
                              San Luis Obispo County
                              Dam Inundation Hazarcl Potenlial
                              The NacinUento Dam is located within San Luis Obispo CoW1tY, however, it is owned
                              and operated by the County of Monterey. Due to the proximity of the NacinUento
                              Dam to Monterey County, the primary inlpacts in the event of a dam failure would be
                              to Cimp Robens and Monterey CoW1ty. A; a result, Monterey County maintains an
                              Emergency Action Plan for the Nacinliento Dam A dam that is located in Monterey
                              CoW11Y, the San Antonio Lake Dam would effect very few homes in San Luis Obispo
                              Colmty in the event of a complete dam failure. Other major dams that are located in San
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                              Technical Background !-?cport
18
Luis Obispo County with the potential to result in
significant life, safety, and property damage impacts
in the event of a catastrophic failure, are identified
below. Each of the inundation areas described below
assumes that each reservoir would be filled to capacity
at the time of a dam failure.
Lopez Dam. Lopez Dam is located approximately
three nilles nOltheast of the intersection of Orcntt
Road and Lopez Drive in San Luis Obispo County.
In the event of a complete dam failure when Lopez
Lake reservoir would be at full capacity, w,lter from
the dam would flow in a westerly direction, following
Arroyo Grande Creek, and flood an area extending
approximately 3,000 feet in each direction of the
centerline of the chrume!. Water flows would pass
through Arroyo Grande, Grover Beach, and portions
of Oceano, before entering the Pacific Ocean (San
Luis Obispo CountyOES, 1992). Substantial impacts
to life and property in these communities would likely
result. Lopez Dam was under study for possible
seismic retro.fitting during the update of this
Element. Until this issue is resolved, Lopez Dam is
being maintained at 83 percent capacity.
Failure of the Lopez Dam would have the potential
to affect a large ntul1ber of people and public facilities.
                                                                                                                Lopez Dam
These could include: Anoyo Grande Conul1unity Hospital, Arroyo Grande High School,
Biddle Park, Pismo State Beach/Oceano C1mpground, Oceano Airport, Oceano
Elementary School, South County Water Pollution Control Plant, and the Union Pacific
Railroad (San Luis Obispo C'..ounty OES, 1992).
Righetti Dam. Righetti Dam is located approximately 1.lnilles east of Islay Hill in San
Luis Obispo County. A failure of the Righetti dam would result·in the release of.water
into West Corral de Piedra Q-eek Assuming the reservoir was full at the tin1e of failure,
it is estimated that the water released from the dam would inundate an area extending
between 200 and 1,000 feet on either side of the centerline of the creek The flow of
water from the reservoir would likely dissipate by the time it reached Highway 227. TIle
afea that would be affected by a sudden release of water is sparsely populated, and no
critical facilities would be affected (Srul Luis Obispo O)lU1tyOES, 1992).
Salinas/Santa Margarita Reservoir Dam. Salinas Dam is located approximately 1.4
nilles northeast of the intersection of Pozo and Santa Margarita Lake Roads in Srul Luis
Obispo County. A sudden failure of the Salinas Dam would result in the release of water
from Santa Margarita Lake in a northem direction into the Salinas River. AmU1llng Srulla
Margarita Lake was at capacity at the tin1e of the failure, it is estimated that the water
released from the dam would i11lmdate an area extending between 300 and 500 feet on
either side of the centerline of the river, ruld isolated low· lying areas up to the Atascadero
area. At Atascadero, the flood area would widen to approxi.mately 1,000 feet on both sides
of ule river centerline, and would continue past Templeton and Paso Robles to the Wellsona
railroad siding. At Wells ana, the intmdation area would widen to approximately 2,000 feet
and continue to San Miguel, where the inundation area would nrurow somewhat until the
Technical Background Repon                                                                County and CWes of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                        19

                               water enters Monterey Q)llllty. Most of the water that could be released from Santa
                               Margarita Lake would be confined to the Salinas River channel. 'Therefore, the potential for
                               damage to stmctures is minimal, although isolated residences wonld likely be affected.
                               Numerous !l1ajor roadways conld also be affected, including Highways 41, 46, and 58 (San
                               Luis Obispo County OES, 1992). At the time this report was produced, the atyof San
                               Luis Obispo was proposing to expand the capacity of the reservoir by installing a gate in
                               the spillway of the existing dam. In the event that the lake capacity is expanded, the limits
                               of the dam failure inwldation area would need to be revised.
                               Terminal Dam. Temlinal Dam is located approxlllately 0.7 miles southwest of the
                               intersection of Orcutt Road and Lopez Drive in San Luis Obispo CoWltY. In the event
                               of a complete failure of the Tenl1inal Dam, water would be released in a sonthem
                               direction into Arroyo Grande G-eel" and would flow between 300 and 1,000 feet along
                               the centerfule of the chaIlIlel for apprOxlllately 2.5 miles. Several residences could be
                               affected by this water flow, however, potential risks to-life andpropeltyis.considereJ.to
                               be relatively low (San Luis Obispo County OES, 1992).
                               Twitchell Dam. Twitchell Dam is located approximately 6 nilles east of the intersection
                               of Highway 101 and State Route 166-East, near the County line. In the event of a
                               complete dam and levee failure, w,tter from Twitchell Reservoir wouJd,' primalily flow
                               into Santa Barbara County. Isolated areas around the Oso Flaco area of San Luis Obispo
                               County could be affected; however, potential inundation impacts are 'not expected to
                               result in a siguificant risk to life or propeny.M'jor transportation routes that could be
                               affected bya sudden failure of the Twitchell Reservoir Dam include Highway 1 and U.S,'
                               Highway 101 nearthe CoUiltyLine and Union Pacific Railroad (San Luis Obispo County
                               OES, 1992).
                                                                                                                              (
                               Whale Rock Dam. Whale Rock Dam is located approximately 1.4 miles east of the
                               intersection of Highway 1 and Cayucos G-eek Road in San Luis Obispo County. In the
                               event of a complete dam failure, water from Whale Rock Reservoir would flow southward
                               along Old G-eek AsSUIWng the reservoir was full at the time of failure', it is estinlated
                               that the water released from the dam would inImdate an area extending approxinlately
                               1,000 feet on each side of·the centerline of the creek The released water· would then
                               flow across Highway 1 and into the community of Cayucos·at,13d~.street and·.Ocean.
                               Boulevard. West of Ocean Boulevard, the area of flooding could widen to include 3m
                               Street to the nonh and Willow G'eele to the south, until the flow dissipates into the Pacific
                               Ocean. Significant impacts to life and propeny to approxinlately one-third of the
                               commuuityof Cayucos could result from a catastrophic failure of the Whale Rock dam
                               when the reservoir is full (San Luis Obispo ComIty OES, 1992).
                               Atascadero Lake Dam. According to the Atascadero Police Depaltment (1993);
                               "Atascadero Lake Dam is located about one nille west of U.S. Highway 101, on State
                               Highway 41. In the event of complete dam failure, V\~th the lake at full capacity, water'
                               is expected to flow in a northerly direction, in an irregular fan-shaped area, covering
                               the Morro flats/Tecorida arca, into the Atascadero G-eek. The depth of water at any
                               point is not expected to exceed two feet. The water would then nm east, dissipating
                               into the Salinas River. The total population affected by this dam failure should not
                               exceed 100."
COUJJty and Cities OrSa!l Luis Obi.~po                                                          TccfllJicaJ Background Report
20

   Arroyo Grande
   Dam Inundation Hazard Potential
   Lopez Dam. In the event of a complete dam failure when Lopez reservoir was at full
   capacity, water would flow in a westerly direction, following Arroyo Grande G-eek,
   approximately 3,000 feet in each direction of the centerline of the channel. Water flows
   would pass through Arroyo Grande, Grover Beach, and portions of Oceano, before
   entering the Pacific Ocean. Substantial impacts to life and property in these communities
   would likely result.
   The County Office of Emergency Services estimated that failure of the Lopez Dam
   would have the potential to affect a large nunlber of people and public facilities. These
   could include: residential and business occupants, Anoyo Grande Commtmity Hospital,
   AlToyo Grande High School, and Harloe Elementary School (San Luis Obispo County
   OES, 1992).
   Atascadero
   Dam Inundation Hazard Potential
   Salinas/Santa Margarita Reservoir Dam. Asudden failure of the Salinas Dam would
   result in the release of water in a northem direction into the Salinas River. Areas between
   300 and 500 feet of the centerline of the River, along with isolated low-lying areas could
   be inundated up to the Atascadero area. At Atascadero, the flood area would widen to
   approx:im.'tely 1,000 feet on both sides of the river centerline, and would continue past
   Templeton and Paso Robles to Wcllsona. At Wellsona, the inundation area would'widen
   to approximately 2,000 feet on each side of the river ccnterliri,,.  i¥ to Sin Miguel; wh~te"   '.
'. the inwldation area would narrow somewhatwltilthewater enters Monterey C:OWlty.
   Most of the water that could be released from the Santa M1rgarita Reservoir would be
   confined to the Salinas River channel. 11,erefore, the potential for damage to structures is
   minimal, although isolated residences would likely be affected. Numerous major roadways
   could also be inundated, including State Routes 41, 46, and 58 (San Luis Obispo Colmty
   OES, 1992). At the time this report was produce, the Gtyof San Luis Obispo was
   proposing to expand the capacity of the reservoir by installing a gate in the spillway of
   the existing dam. In the event that the lake capacity is expandedd, the limits of the dam
   failure inundation area would need to be revised, ".'" ..... .
   Atascadero Lake Dam. According to the Atascadero Police Department (1993); "In
   the event of complete dam failure, with the lake at full capacity, water is expected to flow
   in a northerly direction, in an irregular fan-shaped area, covering the MalTa flats/Tecorida
   area, into the Atascadero G-eek The depth of water at any point is not expected to
   exceed two feet. The water would then run east, dissipating into the Salinas River. The
   total population affected by this dam failure should not exceed 100."
   Grover Beach
   Dam Inundation Hazard Potential
   Lopez Dam. In the event of a complete dam failure when Lopez reservoir was at full
   capacit)\ water would flow in a westerly direction, following Arroyo Grande O'eek,
   approxinJately 3,000 feet in each direction of the centerline of the channel. Water flows
   would pass through Arroyo Grande, Grover Beach, and portions of Oceano, before
   enteting the Pacific Ocean. Substantial impacts to life and property in these cOlmnllnities
   would likely result.
   Failure of the Lopez dam would have the potential to affect a large number of people
   and public facilities. These could include but are not limited to: Grover Heights School,
   Gty Hall, and the Union Pacific Railroad (San Luis Obispo County OES, 1992).
   TccJmical Background Report                                                             CouWy and CWes of San L/lis Obispo
                                                                                                                        21

                               Morro Bay
                               Dam Inundation Hazard Potential
                               'nle Gty of Morro Bay has not been identified as being in a location that would be               (
                               affected by the failure of a large dam.                                                          '
                               Paso Robles
                               Dam Inundation Hazard Potential
                               Salinas/Santa Margarita Reservoir Dam. A sudden failure of the Salinas Dam would
                               result in the release of water in a nonhem direction into the Salinas River. Areas between
                               300 and 500 feet of the centerline of the River, along with isolated low-lying areas could
                               be inundated up to the Atascadero arca. At Atascadero, the flood area would widen to
                              approximately 1,000 feet on both sides of the river centerline, and would continue past
                              Templeton and Paso Robles to Wellsona. At Wellsona, the inundation area would widen
                              to approximately 2,000 feet on each side of the river centerline up to San Miguel, where
                              the inwlClation area would narrow somewhat until the water enters Monterey County.
                              Most of the water that could be released from the Santa Margarita Reservoir would he
                              confined to the Salinas River ch,umel. 'Therefore, the potential for damage to structures is
                              mininlal, although isolated residences would likely be affected. NWllCroUS major roadways
                              could also be inWldated, including State Routes 41, east bound 46, and 58 (San Luis
                              Obispo Colmty OES, 1992).
                              San Luis Obispo
                              Dam Inundation Hazard Potential                                                 ,
                              The Gtyof San Luis Obispo has not been identified as h~ingina locatio.n thatw,ould b,e "
                              affected by the failure of a large.dam                       ','
                               Coastal Erosion
                              Hazard Description
                              'The coastline is in a constant state of change, adjusting to the forces of waves, currents,
                              tides, and sediment deposition. TIlese forces create a flow of sand along the coastline
                              known as littoral drift. Littoral drift generally flows southward along the C'llifomia coast.
                              TIle amount of sand present at a beach remains in equilibrium only when the amown of
                              sand deposited is equal to the amOlmt of sand washed away. Since the forces controlling
                              the deposition and removal of sand rarely balance each other exactly, the coastline, is
                              ahnost always in a d)""amic state of either recession or advancement; " '
                              Sandy beaches are fOl1l1ed largely by the weathering of inland rocks and the transpon '
                              of sedinlent to the sea by rivers and streams. TIle amount of sand on the beach aIso
                              varies with the seasonal changes in wave action, For example, during winter months
                              when wave activity is increased, waves striking the beach strip away accumulated sand
                              and leave the beach with a rocky appearance. CDnversely, in sunnner months which have
                              low to moderate wave activity, sand tends to accumulate, resulting in a wider sandy
                              beach. Long·term advancement or erosion of beaches is affected by long-terrn weather
                              pattems as well as changes in sediment transport caused by human intervention. Man-
                              made shore protection devices (SPD) can also affect shoreline changes.
                              Influences on Coastal Erosion Impacts
                              Humans have the ability to alter the configuration of the shoreline by influencing long-
                              and shon-tenn erosion rates. One of the major causes of beach erosion is tile construction
                              of daIm and other structures along creeks and rivers that trap sedinlent and prevent it
                              from reaching the ocean. TIus deprives the shoreline of the material that would replenish
                              beach sand supplies. Coastal structures such as groins, jetties, seawalls, and breakwaters
County and Cities of San LuiS Obispo                                                             TccJll1icaJ 13ackground Report
22

can also alter littoml drift. Beach groins and breakw,ltel~, for example, can tmp littoral
sand and build beaches over a limited area but by doing so, they reduce the amount of
sand that flows to down-cun-ent beaches. TIlls can result in a rapid loss of beach sand in
downcun-ent beaches. Seawalls are often used to protect seacliffs from erosional effects
of wave aclion. However, these structures can reflect wave energy to strip protective
beach sand at an accelerated rate. This may ultimately result in increased seacliff erosion
rates, particularly at sections of coastline adjacent to the seawall.
Effects of Coastal Erosion
Erosion of beach sand removes the natural banier which protects landforms and structures
from the potentially deStluctive wave action. The end result can be the direct destruction
of roads, homes, and other structures by waves whose force is no longer dissipated by
wide beaches. As beaches are eroded away, the amount of recreational beach available to
the public is greatly reduced. Also, changes in beach geometry can alter the wave
characteristics of a particular site. For example, as sand is canied out to sea during winter
months, an offshore sand bar is likely to develop and cause waves to break further
o{{shore. If the supply of sand is intemtpted by human intervention and an offshore
sand bar is unable to develop, waves may strike much closer to the shoreline and accelerate
coastal erosion. M1rine life is also affected by shoreline changes although specific impacts
are difficult to predict.
Historical Rates of Coastal Erosion in San Luis Obispo County
The process of coastal erosion is highly complex and depends on a number of factors
such as geologic formation, groundwater seepage, and exposUre'towave energy. TIle
coastline along the CDuntyof San Luis Obispo is variable in tenns of geologic composition
and exposure to wave energy. Sections of the coast range from rocky coastline to sandy
beaches backed by cliffs, to sandy beaches backed by sand dunes. Due to these variances
along the shoreline, erosion characteristics also vary significantly.
It is in1ponant to note that coastal erosion occurs episodically, mainly during periods of
intense wave action that coincides wid, high tides. Although erosion occurs episodically, it
is typical to report rates of coastal erosion as a yearly average. 11us is the method employed
to quantify the rate of seacliff erosion. Typically, armual rates of coastal erosion range
from about three inches a year to more than one foot 'a year. However, it does not
necessarily mean that erosion will behave this way each year. Due to difficulties ill obtaining
accurate erosion data, reported rates of erosion presented ill the following sections must
only be considered as approximations in characterizing coastal erosion rates and
vuh1erability.
Cambria
Coastal Erosion Hazard Potential
Cambria is primarily characterized by narrow beaches backed by low cliffs approxinrately
20 feet-Iugh. TIus section of coastline is subject to moderate to heavy wave action mosdy
from northerly swells. The coast in the area is comprised of a rock unit ~alledthe C1mbrian
slab wluch is a local, colloquiaillame for the Oetaceous-age sandstones that form the
resistant rock headlands in the arca. Since sandstone is fairly resistant to erosion, cliff
retreat rates in C1mbia arc relatively low when considering the wave energy imposed on
this area. However, according to Griggs and Savoy (1985), present developments along
Wl1ldsor Avenue arc considered to be in danger from wave action and are cun-cntly
experiencing rates that average seacliff retreat of two to three inches per year.
Tee/mica] Background Rcport                                                              Cuunty and Cities of San LI)I.'} ObL~po
                                                                                                                            23
                               Cayucos
                               Coastal Erosion Potential Hazara
                               Shorelines in Cayucos are similar to those found in Cambria; however, there are several
                               imponant differences that effect the erosion potential. Cayucos is also backed by low
                               cliffs (about 20 feet-high) but has wider beaches than those fOlmd in Cambria. In the
                               winter months, however, the sandy beaches vinually disappear and waves strike directly
                               against the hluffs. The Cayucos shoreline faces south; therefore, its beaches are panially
                               protected from nonherly swells. However, wave action in this area is significant. The
                               seacliffs are comprised of Franciscan melanges, characterized hy blocks 'of rocks often
                               surrOlmded by small zones of sheared or crushed rock tllat tend to erode easily. Some
                               zones contain more erosion resistant rock blocks that have been exposed as the weaker
                               blocks have eroded aw.t}'.
                               For example, the bluffs along Pacific Avenue and Studio Drive in Cayucos contain extensive
                               blocks of sheared setpentine that act like seawalls and slow erosion. However, duri.ngthe
                               intense storm waves of 1983, even these seemingly resistant blocks were breached at
                               some spots. As a result, the bluff receded as much as 20 feet. Rates of erosion are highly
                               variable along this coastline, and range from 6 to 10 inches per year according to Griggs
                               and Savoy (1985). In response to the stolID waves of 1983, emergency rip-rap and
                               nunrefOUS seawalls v.rere constnlcted. Even with this protection, rapid erosion.r.ltcs can
                               be expected to continue in the future.
                               Downtown Cayucos is another area of concern. Built upon the unconsolidated sediment
                               deposited from the Cayucos creek, this area is susceptible to shoreline erosion." Upcoas!
                               from the downtown area along 'Lucerne Avenue and extending noM to the undeveloped
                               bluffs, the shoreline is comprised of Franciscan melange containing erodable rocks with
                               high silt contents. Also, ,mconsolidated clays form approximately the upper 10 feet of
                               these bluffs and contribute to rates of cliff retreat through a landslide-type mechanism
                               During rainy months when the growld becomes wet, the low pernleability of the clays
                               tends to perch or elevate the ground water table. Consequently, tI,ese saturated soils cause
                               increased soil loss due to slope instability and slumping of the sea cliff face.
                               Morro Bay                 ...... ,.. .
                               Coastal Erosion Potential Hazar"
                               From Atascadero State Beach and continuing south through much of Montana de Oro
                               State Park, ti,e Morro Bay coast is fronted by large sand dunes that provide protection
                                                        for developments located on terrace materials behind the sand
                                                        dunes. Due to the construction of the Morro Bay Harbor
                                                        Breakwater and the presence of M0!1"O Rock, the littoral drift
                                                        nonh of Morro Bay has been interrupted and the coast has
                                                        accreted, or extended, seaward. In about 50 years, the beach has
                                                        widened about 250 feet near San Jacinto Avenue and almost 500
                                                        feet in front of Morro Bay High School according to Griggs and
                                                        Savoy (1985). This tombolo, or sandbar, provides protection for
                                                        developments in tins region. South of Morro Rock, the bay is
                                                        protected by the sandspit which provides a barrierto wave attack
                                                        that would otherwise impact the developed areas along the
                                                        Embarcadero.
Coullty and Cities of San Luis ()hj~po                                                           Tcc/mica] Background Report
24
Los Osos
Coastal Erosion Potential Hazard
From the Ivlorro Rock extending into I'dolltana de Oro State Park, large sand dunes
protect the c0l11mullity of Los OS()S -from potential wave hazards. Coastal dcvcloptl1cnt
in the area from I'vlo11tana de Oro State Park through Port San Luis is unlikely due to the
current land uscs. Erosion rates for shorelines of gcoio!:,'}' silnilar to this area range fr0111
appro:xil11arcly 4 to 6 inches per year according to Griggs and Savoy (985).
Port San Luis
Coastal Erosion Potential Hazard
Port San Luis and the coastline sU1Tounding San Luis
Bay is well protected frOID the predominant
northwesterly swells by the 2,300 foot long PorI San
Luis breakwater. However, little protection is offered
fr0111 southerly swells. The Pon San Luis area is hacked
by 100 foot-high cliff, which descend eastward into
approximately 30 fnol--high cliffs, Proceeding
easTward from Port San Luis toward J\vila Beach,
protective rip-rap has been placed adjacent to Avila
Beach Drive in to prOTect the roadway from storm
waves. Just cast of the 1110urh of the San Luis Obispo
Creck and extending eastward to Fossil Point, the
        j
comn1tl11ity of Avila Beach is fronted hy a 300 foot-wide beach which provides little
protection [rom storm wayes. According to Griggs an-d Sa\!oy (1985), winter ~tiJril1'
waves of 1983 datnagcd the concrete seawall \\~hkh run-s paraUel to l:':"rOllt Street,
I -iomdng developments in this area experienced landslide activity as well as cracking of
foundal'ions and roads. The recreational pier at .Avila Beach \vas also severely damaged.
Historic storms have 5ho\vn rhat both Port San Luis and Avila Beach afC susceptible to
coastal damage resulting from stOt111 waves, especially those generated from southerly
swell!'>. Griggs and Savoy (1985) classify this region with a "Inoderate risk" with respect
to possihle coastal datnagc incurred by stonn waves.
Pirates Cove
Coastal Erosion Potential Hazard                                                              •. '. -,.
1'rom Fossil Point proceeding eastward to Shell Beach, the cbastJine is characterized b)'
offshore rocb and sea stacks backed by high (30-100 fcct) eroding cliffs ..According
fO the Department of N~\vigation and Ocean Devdopn1ellt (1977), oil storage tanks
formerly located just east of Fossil Point wete "endangered by cliff erosion." Griggs
and Savoy (1985) suggest ratcs of scacliff retreat ranging from 4 to 7 inches pcr year
for the Shell Beach coastline. Furrhcf1llorc, they indicate that "catastrophic rockfall 1:-;
an it-nportant agent of erosion" in this area. Although many h(H11cS located vcry ncar
the coastlinc of Shell Beach arc protected by seawalls, bulkheads, sandbags, and rip-
rap, Griggs and Savoy (1985) characterize this stretch of coastline as a "high risk" with
respect to pos~iblc coastal darnage incurred by stonn waves.
Grover Beach
Coastal Erosion Potential Hazard
Grover Ikach is fronted by sandy beaches backed by low active dunes covered whh
dense vcgctmion, a golf course, and a 1110bilc home park. The sandy beaches provide
structures wifh 1110dcratc protection froJ11 storm waves. However, during the winter
storms of 1983, tjmber beach access nunps were da~naged. According to Griggs and
Tee/mica} Background Report                                                               Counly ilnd   Cil if'S of San Luis ObiSpo
                                                                                                                               25

                                                      Savoy (1985) the Grover Beach shoreline is classified as a
                                                       «moderate risk" with respect to possible coastal damage incurred
                                                      by storn} waves.
                                                                                                                                I.
                                                      Oceano
                                                       Coastal Erosion POtential Hazard
                                                      Oceano i, generally fronted by wide ,andy beaches backed by
                                                      low active dunes. These dunes provide protection for st1'nctures
                                                      located ncar thetn, how eyer they arc subject to erosion during
                                                      srOIn1 surge:i at exttT1l1C high tides. j\ccording to Griggs and Savoy
                                                       (1985) continuous vehicle traffic on the beach and dunes is
                                hindering dune protection with respect-to crosion. _Although these sand dunes offer
                                dwellings protection from storm waves, the winter storms of 1983 damaged structures
                                and destroyed thnber ral11ps which provided vehicular beach access, Therefore.
                                according to Griggs and Sa,'oy (1985), this region. is -characterizccL with a -.'·'n1ockrate-
                                risk" and a "high risk" region adjacent to the Arroyo Grande Creek 1110Uth with respect
                                to coastal erosion.
                                South County
                                 Coastal Erosion POtential Hazard
                                l:"f(uU Oceano southward to the San l,uis Obispo/Santa Barbara County li;~e, the coastline
                                is described by the Department of Navigation and Ocean Devclopmen((1977) as "sandy
                                beaches backed by active dunes with sparse vegetative covcr, higl~ intef111cdiate.old dunes
                                with vegetative cover, lnarshes, and lakes," Although tl:c dune fa~e is'wave :-cut and
                                experiences frequent slides, Gri&~s and Savoy (1985) classify this region with a "tuodcratc
                                risk" with respect to coast.al erosion.
Count)' and Citirs of SiJn Luis Ubispo                                                              Technical Background Report
26

               Fire Hazards
TI,e public is exposed to fire-related hazards from two potential sources: wildland fires
and fires that occur in urban settings. Tlus section will describe general conditions under
which both types of fires may occur, factors that may contribute to increased fire hazards,
and conditions witllin the (Dunty of San Luis Obispo and its cities that have the potential
to increase fire- related i n l p a c t s . ·                                           .
Wildfires
TIle term "wildfire" refers to fires that usually result
from the ignition of dry grass, brush or timber.
Wildfires commonly occur in areas that are
characterized by steep, heavily vegetated hillsides,
which makes suppression of the fire difficult.
Wudfires play an important role in the ecology of
many natural habitats; however, as urban
development moves into areas susceptible to
wildfire hazards, risks to hwnan safety and property
ll1creasc.
To describe an area where urban development has
been located in proxinuty to open space, or
"wildland" areas, the term "urbani wildland
interface" is commonly used. 111e most common type of urbani wildland jutedace
results when urban development occurs on the fringe of existing urban areas, adjacent to
wildland vegetation. Other intedace conditions can be created when urban development
is intermixed with wildland vegetation, or when pockets of wildland vegetation occur
inside developed areas. The communities of Cambria and Nipomo arc examples of
intermixed urbani wildland interface areas. Fires that occur in urbani wildland interface
areas affect both natural resources and developed an,as, and have been described as: "a
fire moving from a wildland environment, consunung vegetation for fuel, toan
environment where structures and buildings are fueling the fire" (Califonlia Resources
Agency, 1996).
Hazard Description
Influences on Wilclfire Impctt:ls
The fire hazard severity assigned to state responsibility areas for fire protection
area dependent upon the historie climate, fuel conditions (vegetation), and
topography. Based on these parameters, the fire hazard severity is detemlined
to be either very high, high, or moderate. Currently, population density or
the number of structures in a given region have no influence in the
determination of the fire hazard severity for a particular region. Human
actions influence tl,e potential for wildfires. These four factors (histOllC climate,
fuel conditions, topography, and human actions) arc briefly desCllbecl below.
Historic Climate
The climate in San Luis Obispo County is generally referred to as
"Mediterranean" with warm dry summers and relatively cool, moderately
wet winters. Rainfall throughout the (Dunty occurs primarily between
November and April, and ranges between 20-25 inches per year in the coastal
Technical Background Report                                                           Coonty ilnd CiU{.'s of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                        27

                               areas, to less than 10 inches per year in inland areas. aimatic conditions throughout the
                               CDunty range from the cool, damp coastal areas, to hot and city inland areas .. Because
                               summers are gener,illy warm and dry, the risk of wildfires is highest in late summer and
                               early fall. Fog and cool weather that are common in the coastal regions help to maintain
                               moisture levels in vegetation along the coast, which helps to mininlize fire risk. The hot
                               and dry conditions of the Santa Lucia Mountains and the inland plains and valleys of the
                               Cowlty, however, can quicldy desiccate vegetation resulting in an increased fire risk
                               Other weather-reL1ted elements can have complex and important effects on wildfire intensity
                               and behavior. Willd is of prime inlportance becanse as wind velocity increases, the rate of
                               fire spread also increases. Gnstyand emuic wind conditions can cause a fire to spread
                               irregularly, making it difficult to predict its path and effectively deploy fire suppression
                               forces. Relative humidity is also an importantfire-related weatherfactor . As humidity levels
                               drop, rile ruyaireanses vegetation moisture levels to decrease, rl1erebyincreasing the likelihood
                               that plant material will ignite and bwn.
                               Fuel Cone/itions
                               A large portion of the CoW1ty is covered by natural vegetation. This vegetation can be
                               grouped into approximately 14 regimes, each of which contributes varying degrees to fire
                               hazard severity. Table 3-1 depicts general vegetation communities that are fbwld rlrroughout
                               rile County, and their likely relative fire hazard severity rated by fuel conditions only. l1le
                               likely fire hazard severity depicted in Table 3-1 can be influenced by many factors, including
                               the age of vegetation, accumulation of dead plant material, vegetation management progl>lmS
                               that may have been implemented, period of tinle since a stand of vegetation was last
                               bwned, historic climate, and topography of ilie region. o,apartal plant coJl1l11unities present
                               the most significant fire hazard severity, as this type of vegctation bwns with intense heat
                               and the amount of fuel available to bwn can be very high if the area is not properly
                               managed or has not been recently bumed. O:Jlltrolled bW11ing is one method iliat can
                               greatly reduce the fire hazard severity for a given area. In developed areas, some omaJl1Cntal
                               plantings can provide hazardous fuel loading. A significant increase in dead material as the
                               result of insect or disease infestations can lead to a much higher fire hazard. The pitch
                               canker infestation in Cambria is ,ill example of tlns problem
                               Topography
                               Steep termin plays a key role in rile rate at wInch wildfires spread, as fires will normally bwn
                               much faster uphill. Gener,illy, when ri,e gradient·ofa slope doubles, the rate of spread of
                               a fire will also double. Steep topogmphy also channels air flow, rllereby creating emtic
                               wind pattems. Fire suppression in steep areas is also complicated by limited accessibility,
                               and rile effectiveness of firefighters aIld equipment are hampered by lack of access roads.
                                    Table 3-1 : Likely Fire Hazard Severity Rated by Fuel Conditions Only
                                       Source: San Lui-; Obizpo Cc,unty, 1976.
County and Cities uf Sail Luis ObiSpo                                                                Tech/lien} Backgrol11Jd Report
28

   Human Actions
   Most wildfires are ignited by human action, and Illay result from direct acts of arson,
   carelessness, or accidents. Many fires originate adjacent to roads and highways, often as a
   result of the careless disposal of cigarettes or other burning objects from passing
   automobiles. Recreation areas that are located in high fire hazard areas, such as within the
   Los Padres National Forest, also result in increased human activity that can increase the
   potential for wildfires to occur.
.' Effects of Wildfires
   WJdfires have sever,ll types of impacts on the natural environment. Some ecosystems
   are dependent upon recurrent fire to survive, and have adapted to reestablish themselves
   after a fire. These types of adaptations are common in the chapamll phmt community,
   which typically has a very high wildfire risk Mter a wildfire stops buming, the bumed
   land is laid bare of its protective vegetation cover and is susceptible to excessive lUll-off
   and erosion from winter stom1S. The intense heat from the fire can also cause a chemical
   reaction in the soil that makes it less porous, and the fire ell destroy the root systems of
   shrubs and grasses that aid in stabilizing slope material. When the winter rains come, the
   possibility of severe landslides and debris/mud flows is greatly increased.
   In addition to daillage to natural envirolIDlents, wildfires result in a bigh risk for personal
   injury, loss of life to iullabitants of the fire area and firefighters, and losses of structures
   and personal property. Public utilities ate often strained byule impacts of wildfire, including
   depletion of water reserves, downed power lines, disrupted telephone service and blocked
   roads. Furthermore, flood control facilities may be inadequate to handle an increase in
   stoml nmoff, sediment, and debris that is likely to be generated from barren, bumed-
   over hillsides. 'TI,e iu1pacts of wildfires on developed areas is being used by COF to
   reevaluate fire hazard on certain sites. Cambria, with its extensive development in a
   declining native forest, will likely increase from moderate to high fire hazard in the
   reevaluation process.
                                        Fire
                                                                                               CDI'     OES
                                                                                                  USFS
                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                     A
   Technical Background Report                                                                County and CHil:s of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                              29
                        Table 3-2: Major Wildfires in San Luis Obispo County Since 1931
                           ~;,:!                                        ,",(";,'                         "!,,:},::  ,>'
                       1931                       Pot1ola Road (I\tascadero)                     28 000
                       1933                            Rinconada area                            15 000
                      1937                               Hearst Ranch                            10000
                       '1939                               Cerro Allo                            15,000",
                                                      American Carwon                            30 000
                      1947                             Cuyama Hi ql',way                         10000
                                                                                                                      ,
                      1950                           Pine Ridge Huasna                           17,000
                                                                Pililas                          33,000
                                                        Hillman Ranch                            10000 "
                      Hl53                             Buckhorn Rancll                           13500
                      1960                                 Wefferlinq                            50000
                      1970                                  Buckeye                              44,000
                                                          811ell Creek                           20,000
                                                         Alfalfa RanCll                          20000
                      1985                                 Las Pililas                           75000
                      1989                             Santa Margar~a                           10,000 '
                                                         Chiwa Road
                      1994                                Hiahway 41                             48500
                      1996                                Hlqlll'>lay 58                        107 000
                      1997                        Hiqrrwav 166 (Loqan Fire)                      50 000
     Source: San Luis Obispo Courdy, 1976; Ctty of San Luis ObiQio, '1996,
                                                           -;",-~,,; ,
                              Historic Wildfires in San luis Obispo County
                              Significant wildfires have occurred throughout San Luis Obispo County. Most recently,
                              the Logan fire that occurred in 1997 burned 50,000 acres and cost $6 million to put ouL
                              No structures were lost in the Logan fire, Also, the Highway 41 and Highway 58 fires
                              that occurred in 1994 and 1996 caused widespread and substantial damage, 11,e Highway
                              41 fire resulted in the destruction of 42 homes, 61 other stmclUres, and 91 vehicles. A
                              total of 48,531 aeres were bunled and an estimated $7,000,000 in property loss damages
                              occurred, -n,e Highway 58'fire burned 106,668 acres and resulted in the loss of homes
                              and 14 struculres.
                              A summary of major wildfires that have occurred in S,m Lnis Obispo Countyis provided
                              on Table 3-2, This table, however, does not list the numerous smaller fires that have
                              occun'ed tlu'oughout the County. Several areas of the County that have been subject to a
                              high number of smaller fires include tl,e Santa Margarita area, which has experienced
                              numerous fires 50-500 acres in size, and areas west of Nipomo that have experienced
                              numerous fires 50-300 acres in size, Still another location with a high occurrence of
                              wildfires is neanhe Nacimiento Reservoir, loeated in the northwest portion of the County,
                              Fire Prevention and Response
                              An extensive amount of literature exists pertaining to steps that can be taken to reduce
                              the potential for wildfires, Additionally, a number of legislative and advisory standards
                              have been developed. Although these measures calmot eliminate the risk of wildfire-
                              related damages, they can help to substantially reduce the associated risk WIldfire hazard
                              reduction measures generally include implementation of the folio-wing precautions,
                              Usc fire resistant building materials and construction methods, Many standards
                              have been adopted to reduce the use of combustible building materials in high fire
                              hazard areas, Standards for fire resistive building materiah and constmction methods are
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                           Tee/micai Background Report
30
provided by the Unifo1l11Building Code and the c:aJifonua Building
Code, the Unifo1l11Fire Code, and specific sections of the c.1lifonua
Health and Safety Code. Additionally, AB 3819, which was adopted
after the disastrous Oakland/Berkeley Hills fire of 1991, and the
major wildfires that occlUTed in southem Cwonua in 1993, requires
the c:aJifomia State Fire Marshall to establish building standards for
areas that have been designated with a high wildfire severity rdting
by the Cllifomia Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.
Provide defensible space around structures. Tills broad measure
includes a number of specific actions that can be taken to minimize
wildfire risks. Providing a defensible space area around a sl1ucture
serves a dual function of limiting fuel for the fire to approach the structure, as well as
providing a position from which fire fighter" can combat the bla7.e. Wildfire risk reduction
and management practices can include the removal or thinning of highly combustible
vegetation, the use and maintenance of fire resistant plantings, providing clealings arounci
structures alld other combustible materials, and the inlplcmentation of a variety of othlr
fuel reduction and fire prevention! suppression measures. Specific measures that should be
implemented depend upon the type of stmctures to be protected and their proposed use,
expected fire characteristics, and infrastructure that would be available in Ule event of a
fire.
Provide adequate water supply. Water that is used for fire suppression purposes, and
the pressure under which it is delivered, is referred to as "fireflow." The fireflow·that
would be required for a specific development is dependent upon a variety of facton;,
including the type of cOllStmction, the use or occupancy of Ule stmcture, and Ule location
of surrounding stmctures. For residential development, adequate fircflows may range
from 1,000 to 2,000 gallons per minute at 30 psi, for a period of up to three hours.
Several standards can be used to calculate the actual fireflow requirements for a specific
project.
Provide adequate access. Adequate access to structures includes providing roadways
that are passable by large fire-fighting equipment. 'Ibis requires roadways to have adequate
widths, as well as gradients, bridges, and tum-around areas th.at acconilllOdate fire trucks.
Responsibilities for the prevention and suppression of wildfires in San Luis Obispo County
belong to the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) in areas contained witllin the Los Padres National
Forest, to the califom.ia Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CDF) in wildland
areas outside of ti,e Forest boundaries, alld ti,e Bureau of Land Management (BLM), for
areas under their jtrrisdiction and to individual cities within their incorporated areas ..
The CDF is responsible for providing fire suppression services on approximately 1.4
million acres of San Luis Obispo O}unty. As ti,e majorfire fighting force in Ule County, ti,e
CDF fully or cooperatively maintains 18 fire stations Ulat are located ummghout the Colmty.
Fire stations that are managed by the CDF are located in the following areas: North of Ule
City of Sail Luis Obispo and the San Luis Obispo Airport, cayucos, C1mbria, Nipomo
and Nipomo Mesa, Morro TOTO (I-lighway 41 between Atascadero and MOITO Bal?, Oak
Shores (L'lkc Nacinuento), Heritage Ranch (Lake Nacimiento), Avila Valley, Santa Margarita,
Paso Robles, Simmler, Meridian (Highway 46 east of Paso Robles), (}eston, Shandon, La
Pal1Za, and Las Tablas (Lake Nacinuento). TI,e CDF maintains all extensive collection of
fire fighting equipment in San Luis Obispo Count); including engines, aircraft, bulldozers,
water tenders, and heavy rescue vehicles.
Technical Background Report                                                                 County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                           31

                               The USPS maintains fire stations in the areas of Pozo, and Pine Canyon (Highway 166),
                               along with a helicopter base near Lopez Lake ..TIle USPS fire stations are also equipped
                               with specialized wildfire fighting equipment and personnel. TI,e BLM maintains a fire                   (
                               station in the Carrizo Plain area of the GlWlty.
                               The COP, USPS, and BLM have entered into a mutual aid agreement f()r the purpose of
                               wildfire protection in San Luis Obispo Glwaty. Mutual aid agreements are reciprocal
                               arr.1l1gements in which fire protection agencies share personnel and ~quipment during
                               emergency situations. Gties and fire protection districts are also panicipants in various
                               mutual aid and autO aid agreements, including the State Master Mutual Aid agreement.
                                                   Hazard Analysis
                                                   San Luis Obispo County
                                                   Local WllcIf/re Hazards
                                                  San Luis Obispo GlWlty is exposed to a variety of wildfire' hazard'·,
                                                   conditions ranging from very low levels of risk along the coastal portions
                                                   of the Glwaty, to extreme hazards in the inland OOld chaparral co¥ered
                                                                                                                                   ».,
                                                   hillsides of the Santa Lucia Mowltains. 11,e COP has Wldenaken a              ,:-"
                                                   program to map areas of potential wildfire risk, and to describe the
                                                   potential for wildfires to occur in a given area, severalllsk classifiCations
                                                   have been used. Currently, fire hazard severity is a fWlction of fuel
                                                  conditions, historic climate, and topography. Population density or the
                                                   number of structures in a panicular region are not currently used' to
                               determine the fire hazard severity for "particular region. Aieas throtlghout the Glwaty
                               have been designated as having-', "Very High Severity fIazard," "High fIazard,"or
                               "Moderate Hazard." In San Luis Obispo Gllillty, most of the area that has been designated
                               as having a "Very High Severity H1zard" is located in the Santa Lucia Mowatains, which                  (
                               extend from Monterey Glwatyto the nonh, to Santa Barbara Glunty to the saum. These
                               areas exhibit the combination of vegetative fuel, topography, and human proximity that
                               contribute to an extreme fire hazard potential. TI,e fact that an area is in a Moderate
                               fIazard designation does not mean it coomot experience a damaging fire. It only mems
                               that the probability is reduced, generally because the number of days a year that the area
                               has "fire weather" is less. Wrldfrre risk designations for San Luis Obispo Glwny, as
                               identified by the COP are depicted on'1VIap 7.'              .    ..,.           .. "         .
                               The COP is planning to reevaluate the fire hazard severity mapping for the Q,waty to
                               give greater weight to population density and concentrations of structures in promuity
                               to higher risk areas. Tlus reevaluation process is expected to begin in the year 2000 and
                               will likely result in more areas being included in the high md very lugh fire hazard zones,
                               especially urboov wildland interface areas like Cambria and Nipomo.
                               Uuincolporated cOlllil1lUlities within the GlWlly that are subject to increased wildfire
                               risks are generally those conuntlluties like Cambria and Nipomo where developmemhas
                               resulted in the creation of an urban/wildland interface zone. Table 3-3 identifies
                               conmlwlities that are located in or near wildland areas md that have an increased risk of
                               wildfire-related hazards.
                               When residential development occurs within or adjacent to an area that has a high wildfire
                               hazard severity, the ability of fire fighting forces to combat a fire may also be impaired.
                               When residences are located in the vicinity of wildfire, typical fire fighting techniques,
                               such as the use of backfires, may not be feasible. Additionally, fire fighting equipment
                               ,md persoJ1J1el may be used for structure protection, instead of being used to fight the
Counfy and Cities of SaJJ Luis Obi.~]Jo                                                              Technical Background Report
32

                          Table 3-3: UrbanlWildland Interface Areas of San Luis Obispo County
           1',',':\;',/(                '\,"';;';,5: ;,;";;,;;',;;:,,,";,X;';'C,                                                                          ;:;",";',',':,';;];';
                         Cambria                       Thi;: area contains     lJ:~den; hie stands 01 oaks, laurel. madrone and 1\11(11)terey Pine. The IO(:.IItiotl of
                                                       l(l$ideMeS intermc>::ed within thr; vegetation ifle/eaas the potential wildfire hazard. [Pitch canker and
                                                       olher Pf!st complexes have significanUy Inoreas<:!d til", dead vIJ:ge1.iltion in the pine 10rest and the
                                                       resultant fire hazard.)
                        Los OSO$                       R",sidenlial development that has occurlBd In the to;>(Jthili Mea;; around Los Os os and Montana De Oro
                                                       State P.:uk are interm~ed with natiVe vegetation.
              Avila Valley and I/ish HilI:;            Development in the areas around Indi.m Knob, Squire Canyon, See Canyon, and Plefumo Canyon.ille
                          area                         intermb<ed with exlens we stan<B- of native vlJ:get.stion.
              Arroyo G Idnd<: dnd Pismo                D~v!'!lopment to th", north dnd !}ast o1the City (If Arroyo Gr and!'! Is .intf:rmkt:'!d with dens!) vegeblion and
                      8e<lcl1 <11';;<15               many iWl<l$ have limit",d access. The Pismo H eight Area has residences built above vel]etated steep
                                                      slopes.
               Nil'Qmo Mes a and U ppel               Res idenlial development in the NipClm(l Mesa, La::: BerrQ.$, and Uppel Los Bel/OS areas al\! subject to
                    Los Berlos Area                   wildfire risks from exterGive sta!)ds of eucalyptus: tr<le$, As development OOOUlS, however. the removal
                                                       01 eucalyptus if.::es reduc\"!S pot!}m\al tile risks. The Upper Lo:; Berros Area has limited aCOoE:Ss, t;
                                                       Is o!ated and has dense vegetation <lml an incre<lslng !)umber (If re; Idences.
                      Suey Canyo!)                     Thil: ';;fU is located in th!'! south!orn portion of ttl!'! County, north 01 Highway 100, Dewlopmerrt in this
                                                       area is fairly is olated and lemoved 110m fire suppressions elvlces.
                         Huasna                        Developm<:nt in this area Is rel.;;tively i:>ol.3ted .3nd r<:mov<:d 1rom tire suppression services.
                       Lopez Lake                      D<:velopmem .3round the l.4<e is intermt><:ed with native veg<:tation and often has access difficult for fire
                                                      suppressio!) vehicles.
                 SifnUJ Margaritil area                Development areas near Santa Margiflita, Pozo, La Panza, and HUehuero, are intermi>;ed ll\lilh native
                                                      veg(!1ation, and often have SiHP slopes and difficult accesS conditions,
                    Atascadli"ro area                 Development a/ound1h ... City 01 Atascadero is intermb<ed 1/I,Iilh la/oe s1ands ot native vegetation
                   Paso Robles are.3                  Development west and !!ast of P1l$O Robles includes residences to.3t '.are intermixed with nalive
                         Creston                      vegciation.
                Lake Nacimiento .3rea                 Developments in the Heri1age Ranch. Oak Shores, Bee R ocl<. York MOIJ~tain, Santa Rita, Adelaide. and
                                                      Running Deel Ranch include residences tha1 are intermked wHh native vegeta1ion.
                     Diablo  Ca~ron                   A nuclear pow!!;r plant and its oritical pWl.'er 91id sit in a den:; ely vegetated oanyon with a long response
                                                      tOI  wildl"nd 1il" suppr"ss Ion.
                San Luis Obispo Area                  The Cityoi San Luis Obispo and the sUHour,ding area interfaci!s with ine wildlands on allsides.
             Source. CDF PreFlre Management Plan, 1999.                                                .'
             Note: Not in priority order.
fire. TIus results in the need for <,dditional equipment to effectively minimize structural
losses and to control the fire.
Some unincorporated communities located within the CowItyare not confronted with a
high wildfire risk These commwuues include much of the South Bay area, Cayucos, and
Oceano.1his low wildfire risk results primarily from the type of vegetation that is dominant
throughout these areas. The low-growing native grasses and shrubs fowld in these
conununities presents a minimal vegetative fuel source and a corresponding lo.w wildfire
risk Additionally, in the coastal communities, cool marine influenced temperatures and
relatively high humidity levels help to muumize potential wildfire risks.
Arroyo Grande
Local Wildfire Hazards
Ihe majority of Arroyo Grande is located in a gener<lllyflat valley that has been developed
with urban and agricultural uses. The northern and eastern portions of the Oty, however,
are hilly and contain parcels that are within or contiguous to grassland and forested areas.
Fire protection for the residences located within these urbani wildland ultedace zones
may be constrained by heavy fuel loads, steep slopes, limited access, and in some areas,
!inuted water supplies. Specific areas of the Oty that have been identified as havulg
potential fire suppression deficiencies are listed below.
•    Rarrho Padrwav/CJ.11litto M:eITldo!Jarue5 Way                                                  •      Sta~c:oach Road
•    A\~rla ~        Diamatl1£l                                                                     •      We:;];..v S~etJMethoJ.ist C:unp
     Eql..X":stUatl Wlav/J:U:l¥!S W/avto N (1'/'3 Road                                              •      Millit He4!}u:;
•    El Catnino Real                                                                                •      South T:t:affi:: WJ.I,1/HuebnerRoad
•    Wildwood funch                                                                                 •      Suruise TeUJ.ce Mobile Hon~           Pm
•    RoJ.,o/Em&.Jd Bav                                                                              •      La Cuu.da/I'Aatthew Wav
•    CallVOll WavJRi<k!e"l1iew W;r.J                                                                •      E.asv St:t:eet (offPruttZ Rd)
SOl,ce: ArrDYD Gr",de Fire Dept 1996
Technical Backgrvund Report                                                                                                           County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                                                                33

                               Atascadero
                               local Wildfire Hazards
                               Wildfire and urban fire hazards are closely related in Atascadero as a result of extensive
                               residential development that has occurred in the hillyponions of the Otywhere flal11!11able
                               grassland, chaparral and oak woodland habitat is located. Much of the at y can be
                               described as being wildland/urban interface area. Several areas in Atascadero qualify as
                               Bates-rated areas, indicating a velY high hazard potential for wildfire auhe urban edge.
                               Ponions of the Oty that have been identified as having an elevated risk for potential
                               wildfire inlpacts are listed below.
                              •     3F Meadows                         •    Atascadero Highlands            •    SummIT Hills
                              •     Oakwood Estates                    •    Asuncion Ranch                  •    Chandler Ranch
                              •     Long Valley Ranches                •    Old Morro Road                  •    Las Encina s I-II
                               Source:: Draft Fire Department Master Plan, City (jf Atascadero, 1990:
                              Factor.; that contribute to an elevated fire risk in these areas are described below.
                              Microclimate. Localized afternoon w.inds from the nonhwest are comm6n in the wcstem
                                                                                                                                   '" ~'
                              ponion of the Oty. These w.inds are associated with inland valley heating and cooler air
                              currents flowing from the ocean. These gustyw.inds can canse a grass fire to spread and
                              shift direction in an rapid and unpredictable n1almer.
                              Topography. Much of the residential development within the Otyhas occurred in areas
                              with moderate to steep topography. Areas that exceed 30 percent slope are subject to
                              rapid flame spread, and often have poor access for fire suppression equipment.
                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                         l
                              Vegetation. Areas of the Otywith dense stands of chaparral vegetation face an elevated
                              risk of wildfire. In areas where chaparral vegetation has not been bumed in more than 20
                              year.;, fuel loading (the amount of vegetation that is available to be bumed) averages
                              from 7 to 10 tons per acre. Drainages with oak woodlands have fuel loading that can
                              exceed 15 tons per acre. Olaparral vegetation contains a variety of compounds, such as
                              waxes, turpentines, and resins. that cause this type of vegetation to bum intensely and at
                              eA1:remelyhigh temperatures. Airtemperatures in chaparral fires can exceed 1,500 degrees.·
                              TIle intensityof the fire that results from chaparral vegetation makes it difficulno extingui,h.
                              Grover Beach
                              local Wilclfire Hazards
                              Grover Beach is not confronted with a significant wildfire hazard because of its location
                              on the coast away from vegetated hillsides. High humidity levels and cool ocean-influenced
                              temperatures also limit the potential for wildfires to occur. Open areas containing annual
                              grasses are present in areas throughout the Oty, bnt do not represent a major wildfire
                              risk.
                              Morro Bay
                              local Wilclfire Hazards
                              Morro Bay is not confronted with a significant wildfire rid" primarily due to the type of
                              vegetation that is found throughout the Oty. Vegetation in the area is mostly limited to
                              low-growing grasses and scattered shrubs, characteristic of disturbed Nonh coastal
                              Grasslands habitat. High humidity levels and cool ocean- influenced temperatures also
                              limit the potential for wildfires to occur.
Counly and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                                  Technical Background Report
34

Areas of the Gty near MalTa Bay State Park contain some native vegetation that present
a moder.lte wildland! urban inteIface fire hazard. However, because these areas are not
contiguous to other high fire hazard areas, they do not present a significant wildfire risk
Paso Robles
Local Wilellire Hazards
Paso Robles is located in the Salinas River Valley, adjacent to the foothills of the Santa
Lucia Mountains. Extensive oak woodlands, grasslands, and chaparral conununities occur
in the vicinity of Paso Robles, and present a high wildfire risk. The risk of wildfire within
the Gty of Paso Robles, however, is moderate because most development has occurred
in the flatter portions of the Gty, awayfmm the flammable foothill vegetation. Developed
areas that are adjacent to significant stands of native vegetation and that may be subject
to wildfire hazards arc located in incorporated areas west of the Gty. A fire that begins
in this area could migrate towards the Gtyposing potential wildfire risks, particularly for
areas of the Gty located between 14'" and 38,h Streets (I-Iemp, 1997).
Future residential development within the Gty is most likely to occur in the eastern
portion of the Gty. Willie not as mountainous as the areas furtherto the east, this portion
of the Gty is also adjacent to areas containing significant amounts of native vegetation.
11,erefore, there is the potential for a wildfire to affect tIlls part of tI,e Gty.
City of San Luis Obispo
Local Wildfire Hazards
11,e Gty of San Luis Obispo is confronted with one of the more .hazardous urbani
wildfire risks in the O:mnty because of its location near the foothills of the Santa Lucia
Mountains and the Irish Hills. For plalUung purposes, the entire perimeter of the Gty
should be considered as an urbani wildland interlace area. Specific areas with an increased
wildfire hazard include the foothills northeast and southwest of the Gtyand on CelTO
San Luis Obispo, Bishop Peak, Omtnash Peak, and Islay Flill. Although the Las Pilitas
and Highway 41 fires that OCCUlTed in 1985 and 1994 did not result in property losses
within the Gty linuts, structures in the Gty were threatened by these fires (DougheIty,
1997). The Fire Prevention o,de that has been adopted by the Gty considers all areas
within the jurisdictional limits of the Gty to be subject to regulations pertaining to
hazardous fire areas, such as requiring the installation of fire re.sistive roofing r,naterials ..
Urban Fire Hazards
Hazard Description
Influences on Urban Fire Hazards
11,e risk to life and property resulting from fires in urban settings is i.nfluenced by many
factors. Some of the factors that must be consi.dered when assessing potential urban fire
hazards and the appropriate level of fire protection that should be provided include the
following:
•    Availability of adequate supplies of water         •    On-site fire suppression systems
•    The size and height of the structure               •    The use occupying the structure
•    Flammable or hazardous items that may be           •    The t)'Pe of building construction and
     stored within the structure                             materials
•    Response time by fire su ppressio n                •    Adequate emergency ingress and egress
     person nel
Tee/mica! Background Report                                                               County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                         35

                              Different types of stmctures and land uses present their own fire prevention and
                              suppression characteristics and potential problems. In the developed area throughout
                              San Luis Obispo ColliltY, residential stmctural fires are the predominate urban fire risk.
                              TIus risk is increased when development is located in urban/wildland interface areas,
                              such as hillside and canyon areas. 'TI,e additional fire risk associated with residential
                              devclopment in urban fringe areas results from the proximity of stmctures to flammable
                              vegetation, the increased distance from fire protection services, limited access, and potential
                              for low fire flows for combating fires.                                           .
                              Effects of the Hazard
                              The potential for loss of life and property from urban fire hazards is greatest in places
                              where large groups of people gather, such as offices, stores, hotels, and theaters. Uses
                              wluch may suffer large monetary losses due to a major fire include businesses, factories,
                              and shopping areas. Types of development and conditions that present the most difficult
                              fire-protection problems in urban areas include:
                               •   Multiple-story, wood frame, high-density apartment developments;
                               •   Developed areas where stmctures have little or no setbacb;
                               •    Stmctures tbat contain combustible roofing and other building materials;
                               •    11,e storage, handling, and use of hazardous materials; and
                               •    Natural disasters.
                              Fire Prevention and Response
                              Fire prevention is a primary objective and the major activity oUire dCj,artnients in urban.
                              areas. After a fire stalts, it is the objective of the fire department to minimize the damage
                              to life and property. To mininuze potential fire risb, a variety of legislative and advisory
                              programs have been developed. Some of these programs include:
                              Uniform Fire Code
                              This Code maybe adopted bylocal jurisdictions, 'Willi amendments, and provides minimurn
                              standards for many aspects of fire prevention and suppression activities .. 11,ese standards
                              include provisions for access, water supply, fire protection systems, and the u'e of fire
                              resistant building materials"" ...
                              California Health and Safety c~ile 'c,'nd the UnIfOrm iluiiifJng(;e;de·' ' .
                              The Health and Safety Code provides regulation peltauung to the abatement of fire-
                              related hazards. It also requires that local jurisdictions enforce the Uniform Building
                              Code, wluch provides standards for fire resistive building and roofulg materials, and
                              other fire-related constI1lction methods.
                                                                        Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations
                                                                        These regulations pertain to fire prevention and
                                                                        engineering measures for new constnlction.
                                                                        Title 14 ofthe Public Resources Code
                                                                        11,ese reb'1llations provided additional fire prevention
                                                                        and suppression standards.
                                                                        Assembly Bill 337 (Bams Bill)
                                                                        In response to the o.tldand Hills fire of 1991, tltis bill
                                                                        was passed in 1992. It requires bmsh clearance and
                                                                        fire resistant roof material (dass A or B) to be used
                                                                        on all new construction that is located in areas
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                                  Technical Background Report
36

designated as being a "Vcry High Fire Severity Zone." Atascadero is the only city in the
County that has adopted this bilL
After a fire has started, the tune necessary for fire fighters to respond to the scene is a
critical factor in protecting public safety and 111inunizing propc;rty damage. Optln1U111
response dmes (approximately five. lninutcs or less) can typically be pnwidcd if a fire
station is less than 1.5 tniles from the response location in an urbanized area. \Xlhcn
making determinations about fire sml'lon locations, the type and density of development
that exists in an urbanized area, along with futnre land usc plans, should be cnm;idered.
Other factors that may also influence the location o[ fire stations includes roadway and
traffic conditions, topography, and possible access obstructions such as freeways mld
railroad tracks.
The anlOunt of warer thar is available to fight a fire, along ·with the pressure at which the
water is delivered and for how long it can be provided, is referred IT) as ufircHow."
Building construction, the proximity to other structures, the proposed usc of the structure,
and the provision of on-site fire protection sp;ICins, arc all considered when determining
the minill1UlTI fire How that is required to provide adequan: fire suppression protection.
In urban areas, fireDow recl"tirements may rypically range between 1000 and SOOO gallo!l5
per minute [or two to five hours. Acmal fireflow rC(luirCIl1enrs arc calculared based on
site conditions.
Hazard Analysis
San Luis Obispo County
Existing Fire Protection SelVices
Urban fire prevention and suppression services for rhe
unincorporated areas of San Luis Obispo County atc
provided b)i a combination of agencies and dcparunents,
including the Ca.lifornia Department {)f Forestry ~u1d loire
Protection (CDr~, rhe: Count)' of San Luis Obispo, fire
protection districts, community service districts, and
volunteer fire conlpanics. The CD1' is rcsponsib1c for the
a(hninistration of the fire stations that serve rhe
unincorporated arcas of the County not within fire
protection or other special districts, and provides
c<Iuipl11ent and training [or rhe volunteer stations. Table
3-4 lists rhe existing fire stations that are located in the
unincorpora ted areas of the County, and wha t agency /
dcpartll1Cnr is rcspollBible for the station operation. '1'hc
locations of the listed fire stations arc depicted on IviHp R
Ordinances and Regulations
Several local ordinances direct fire prevention aoivitlcs within San Luis Obispo County.
These include Chapter 19.20, Construction Standards of Title 19, of the County Code;
as well as Section 22/n.05.0S0 cr. secl. of the] .and Usc Ordinance and Coastal Zone
Land Usc Ordinance. These sections of Titles 22 and 23 contain standards pertaining to
the preparation and revic\\' of fire safery plans, fire safery srandards, sire access, and
driveway retluirelnenr.s. In addidon, The provisions of the Uniform Fire Code have been
adopted by San Luis Obispo County.
Technical Background Report                                                            County and Cil irs of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                       37

                            Table 3-4: Fire Stations in the Unincorporated Areas of
                                                 San Luis Obispo County
                                                                                                                                 ':, ~
                                                                                                                               ~WIV':
                                                                                                                               q",'
                                                                                                                               "',,.
        Source: CDF, 1007.
                              Local Fire Ifazaras
                              Los Osos
                              Existing Fire Protec!ionSewices
                              Fire suppression, fire prevention; and 'l;~;~~ainedic services \\;1thG~ the ~o~nlllnity of'- tos
                              Osos aie provided by the Los 0505 C01nmunity Services District: Fire Dcparuncllt.
                              The fire station is located at 2315 Bayview Heiglm Drive and is centrally located within
                              the community. The Dcparunent is presently staffed with eight full-time professional
                              firefighters and officers, along with four Contract Firefighters and 20 Reserve Firefighters
                              that work part-time. A fuB-time SCCfctary is included in the staff of 32 personnel. Fire
                              response cquiplncnt that is operated by the Dcparnnent include:
                                   (2)  1S00 gpm pumpers;
                                   (1)  1250 gpm pumper;
                                   (I)  150 gpni hndl patrol;
                                   (1) Paramedic rescue squad; and
                                   (1) Command unit.
                              local Fire Hazards
                              The area is charancri:tcd by low ro mcdiu111 density housing and llmitcd comnlcrc.ial
                              activities. Surrounding the. developed conlIl1unity are hundreds of acres of agriculture
                              and chaparral covered lands including J\-1ontana de Oro State Park The chaparral covered
                                                            1
                              lands present a moderarc fire hazard during 1110St of the year due to the coastal influence.;
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                               Technical Background Report
38
however, these lands present a high fire hazard area that is weather-induced during some
times of the year.
 Orclinances ancl Regulations
The 1994 Uniform Fire o,de with amendments has been adopted as a local ordinance,
and the Department enforces the o,unty of San Luis Obispo Land Use Ordinance
along with Title 19 and some sections of Title 24 of the C11ifomia Administrative o,de.
Cayucos, Cambria, Nipomo, and Oceano
Each of these communities arc developed with primarily low-density residential uses
with supporting commercial uses. With the general absence of dense or hazardous land
uses, basic fire protection and response needs are met by providing a minimum level of
stmctural fire protection. However, Gmbria and Nipomo's fire needs are greater because
their intennixed wooded areas are urban/wildland interfaces representing a higher level
of risk than the other coastal communities. Fire protection services could be improved
in these communities by providing additional fire fighting equipment, increasing water
supplies, and continuing to add full-time professional fire fighting persOlmel to augment
existing volunteer forces. As density increases .md if fuel conditiom become more
hazardous in areas like Nipomo and C1.lnbria, these areas may require additional mitigation
measures and fire protection. However, the cost of providing additional fire prevention
and suppression services must be weighed against the need for additional protection and
the benefit that may be derived.
Arroyo Grande
Existing Fire Prolr>clion Services
Fire suppression .md prevention services within the Anoyo GnUlde are provided by the
Otyof Anoyo Grande Fire Department. TI,e Oty's only fire station is located at 140
Traffic Way. TI,e station was constmcted in 1980 and is considered to be adequate to
serve the fire protection needs of the Oty. The Fire Department is staffed with a
professional fire chief, plus a volunteer force. Fire response equipment that is operated
by the Oty includes:
     (2) 1500 gpm pumper;
     (1) 1250 gpm pumper;
     (1) 1500 gpm, 7S-foot elevated stream ladder tmck;
     (1) heavy rescue squad;
     (1) 500 gpm combination bmshl stmcture engine;
     (1) 95 gpm bmsh tmck;
     (1) hazardous material unit; and
     (1) mass casualty unit.
Orclinances ancl Regulations
With the passage of Ordinance 472, the Otyof Arroyo Grande adopted the 1994
Edition of the Uniform Fire o,de with several amendments.
local Fire Hazarcls
Uhlll fire hazards in Anoy" Gnlllde are generally associated with residential development
that has occurred ,,~thin the mral portions of the Oty, or the urban/wildland interface
zone. Increased fire risk in these areas generally results from potential access problems
for fire fighting equipment, and reduced fire flows. In the more mban portions of the
Oty, no concentrated areas with deficient access or water supplies have been identified.
Access and fire flow requirements that are required for new constmction are based on
the requirements of the UnifOlm Fire o,de.
Technical Background Report                                                          Coumy and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                   39
                              Atascadero
                              Existing Fire Protection Services
                              Fire suppression and prevention services within Atascadero are provided by the Otyof
                              Atascadero Fire Department. TI,e Department is presently staffed with 15 professional
                                                                                                                                             (
                              firefighters. The Oty operates two fire stations: Station No.1 is located at 6005 Lewis
                              Avenue, and Station No.2 is located at 9801 West Front Street. Fire response equipment
                              that is operated by the Otyincludes:
                                    (2) 1250 gpm pumper;
                                    (1) 1000 gpm pumper;
                                    (1) State-owned 1,000 gpm pumper; and
                                    (2) mini-pumpers.
                              Iu a report titled Dnlji M'I.rtcrPlatljOrl'iir dlldJ~ft .Jdftty .JIm/1m (1990), it was reconunended
                              that a new fire station be considered in the southwest section of the Otyin the viciuityof·
                              Santa Ana Road and Santa Lucia Road. Another new station was reconunended for the
                              northwest portion of the Oty near San Ramon and Del Rio Roads. TI,ese stations were
                              reconmrended because of the excessive distance from the present stations to these areas
                              of the Oty. Properties have been purchased for these stations, however, it is uncenaln
                              when fWlding will be available for their construction.                                                 ,~~~;.-
                              Ordinances and Regulations
                              Oty Ordinance No. 304 amended Title 6, arapter 13 of the Atascadero MWlicipal
                              Code to provide a mechanism to allow the Fire alief to order the r¢moval of weeds,
                              rubbish, and similar material tllat has the potential to become a fire or health and safety
                              hazard. If compliance with the order is not provided in a reasonable period of tiule, the
                              Oty may contract to have the hazard abated. A tax lien for the cost of removing the
                              hazard will then be placed on the property wltil it is paid. Oty Ordinance 248 adopted
                              the 1991 Edition of the Unifollll Fire Code (UFq, with cenain revisions, as part of
                              Title 8 (Building Regulations). Sections 8-2.103 of Ordinance 248 adopted AB 337 (Bates
                              bill) into the Municipal Code for the Oty.                                         ...
                              Potential Fire Hazards
                              Urban fire haz.ards in Atascadero are closely related to wildfire hazards, and arc generally
                              associated with residential development that has occurred in the hill~ideand perimeter
                              areas of the Oty, or the urbani wildland interface zone. Residential development that has
                              occurred in the hillside areas of the Oty has resulted in a condition where extensive areas
                              with native vegetation are intellllixed with residential uses. Fire suppression in these areas
                              is often made difficult due to limited access, large quantities of fuel material near structures,
                              inadequate hydrant spacing, and reduced fire flows. In response to the requirements of
                              AB 337 (Bates bill), three areas witllin the Oty have tentatively been designated as "Very
                              Bigh Fire Hazard Severity Zones."
                              Not all of the Ot y is affected by fire protection issues associated with the urbani wildland
                              interface z.one. In the main conunercial area of the Oty, no siguificant access or water
                              supplies problems have been identified.
                              Access and fire flow requirements that are required for new construction are based on
                              the requirements of the UuifOllll Fire Code. Fire sprinlders arc required for structures
                              exceeding 5,000 square feet and all new constJ11ction is required to have aass A roofing
                              material or better. If it is not feasible fa; new dcvelopment to meet tl,e specified mlllinlUm
                              requirements, the Fire Dcpartment may consider altcmative methods of fire protection,
                              such as the provision of fire sprinklers within residential structnres.
County a/Jd eWes of SaIl Luis Obispo                                                                     TechnicaJ Background Report
40

Grover Beach
Existing Fire Protection Services
Fire suppression and prevention services within Grover Beach are provided by the Grover
Beach Fire Depanment. TIus depattment is a vol/mteer organization, headed bya Public
Safety Director. The City's only fire station is located at 867 Ramona Avenue. Eanhquake
safety deficiencies have been identified for the fire station stmcture that will require
modifications to correct. 11,e Cityis attempting to secure funding that would be used for
modifications to the existing station or to build a new station. Fire response equipment
that is maintained by the Depanment includes the following:
     (2) 1,500 gpm pumpers;
     (1) 1,000 gpm pumper; and
     (1) Rescue squad tmck.
Orclinances ancl Regulations
Ordinance 92-9 of the City of Grover Beach Municipal Code, A/tick VI - P"biie .Ic0?0
CAljJlel" 1 UllijOI7l1 Piir Code, provides the basis for fire regulations in the City of Grover
Beach. Section 6100-6112 of the Code adopts the UnifonnFire Code with amendments.
local Fire Hazarcls
111e low density urban development that is predominant in Grover Beachhclps to minimize
potential urban fire prevention and suppression hazards. TI,e City has historically had a
fire suppression problem related to inadequate spacing of fire hydrants, which can limit
the effectiveness of fire suppression e{fons. New development proposals are,reviewed
to ensure that adequate access to fire hydrants is provided. Fire flow and access requirements
for new development are based on the specifications contained in the Utllfonn Fire
Code.
Morro Bay
Existing Fire Protection Services
Fire suppression and prevention services within the City of Morro Bay are provided by
the Morro Bay Fire Depanment. The Depanment is staffed by professional fire fighters
and a volunteer force. The City's main fire station is l<;>cated at 715 Harbor Street, and an
unstaffed station is located in the nonhem ponion of the Cityat, 460 Botuta Street. B.oth
stations have design and constmction deficiencies that could result in structuml damagein
the event of an earthquake. A site for a new fire station site has been identified on the
southwest comer of Bighway 1 and San Jacinto Street. Fire response equipment that is
operated by the City is listed below.
     (2)   1,500 gpm pumpers;
     (1)   750 gpm pumper;
     (1)   75-foot elevated stream ladder truck;
     (1)  4-wheel drive squad vehicle;
     (1)  hazardous material vehicle; and
     (2)  harbor boats with 250 gpm pumps.
Orclinances ancl Regulations
The City of Morro Bay has adopted several fire prevention ordinances as pan of the
mmucipal code (MBMC) to address several general and specific fire sa[etyconcems. Fire
prevention ordinances include the following:
MBMC Chapter 8.12: Weed ahatement. TI,i5 ordinance provides a mechaJusm to
allow the Fire Chief to order the removal of weeds, rubbish, and sinlilar material that
Techl1icaJ RackgrOlJfJd Report                                                            County and Cities of San LlIis Obispo
                                                                                                                          41
                                has the potential to become a fire or health and safety hazard. If compliance with the
                                order is not provided in a reasonable period of time, the Oty may contract to have the
                                hazard abated. A tax lien for the cost of removing the hazard will then be placed on the
                                propeny until it is paid.
                                MBMC Section 8.16.280: Solid waste management, burning refuse. TIlls section
                                of the Municipal Code prohibits cl,e burning of refuse within the Otylimits.
                                                                                                         ,~,.
                                MBMC Chapter 14.60.010: Uniform Fire Code. This chapter of the Mmllcipal Code
                                adopts the Unifonn Fire Code, with amendments.
                                MBMC Section 14.60.200: Automatic sprinkler systems-rtre resistive roofs. These
                                regubtions require the installation of fire sprinklers in new buildings that exceed 5000
                                square feet, existing buildings over 5000 square feet where modifications are proposed
                                that will increase potential fire risk, and all new constmetionwestoftheEmbarcaderor.·
                                As pan of the fire resistive roof reqlllrements, wood shake and shingle roofs are prohibited.
                                MBMC Section 14.60.210: Spark Arrestors. TIllS section requires spark arrestors on all
                                chimneys.                                                                                     :r::;:
                                Local Fire Hazards
                                Fire protection issues of concern in the Otyof Morro Bay occur in the northem portion
                                of cite Oty where dense residential development, as well the constmction of ltillside
                                homes, present potential suppression problems. Poor.ac~ess.incite.waterfron\iarea of.
                                the Oty also presents a potential fire protection hazard. Another fire protection risk that
                                exists within the Oty penains to the presence of older buildings in the downtown area
                                that do not provide fire-resistant construction and have mUlll11al side yard setbacks.               (
                                In the northem portion of cl,e Oty, residential development has OCCUlTed Ul hillside areas.
                                Difficult access for fire vehicles and the potential for steep topography to contribute to
                                the spread of fire create an increased fire suppression risk in the hillside areas. Other
                                residential development in the nonhern ponion of the Oty has resWted in dense
                                concentrations of stIuctureswicitminimumsetbacks. To address previous problems that·
                                were associated with low water pressure Jar. fire suppression purposes.inthe.. nonhem
                                section of the Oty, new water lines were installed in the 1980's. Water supply capabilities
                                are now adequate throughout the Oty. For new construction, fireflow and' access
                                requirements are based on the provisions specified bythe Uniform Fire Code, which has
                                been adopted by the OtyGones, 1997).
                                Access to the waterfront area of cl,e Gtyis constrained by two factors: crowded conditions,
                                particularly in the SW111l1Cr months; and poor aCccss to buildulgs that front the water.
                                Building access in the waterfront arca is also constrained by the presence of nmnerous
                                structures that do not provide sideyard setbacks. To help address these .issues"the Oty
                                OpeI<ltes two fire boats, however, the vessels have minimal pumping capabilities. 1be
                                Oty has also adopted an ordinance that requ.ires automatic sprinklers to be installed in all
                                new construction located to the west of TI,e Embarcadero. TI,e acquisition of the Ot)"s
                                elevated ladder truck has also improved the Fire Department's ability to apply fire
                                suppression water to stmctures in the waterfront area Gones, 1997).
                                Paso Robles
                                Existing Fire Protection Services
                                Fire suppression and prevention services within Paso Robles are provided by the
                                Department of Emergency Services. 11,e Department of Emergency Services operates
COt/llCy and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                            Technical Background Report
42

three fire stations: Station No.1 is located at 13''' and
Spring Streets, Station No.2 is located at Santa Fe
Avenue and veston Road in the Shelwood Acres
area, and Station No.3 is at the Paso Robles Municipal
Ailport. All three stations are small and have difficulties
accommodating the size of modem fire trucks. TIle
Department is staffed by 6 professional fire
firefighters, providing for two on-duty personnel at
anyone time, along with a contingent of vollUlteers.
Fire response equipment that is maintained by the
Department includes the f o!lowing:
     (3) 1,500 gpm pumpers;
     (1) 1,250 gpm pumper; and
     (1) 1,000 gpm ailpOlt crash tmck.
Ordinances and Regulations
GtyOrdinance No. 706, amended Title 17 of the Municipal (Dde to adopt the provisions
of the Unifonn Fire (Dde with certain amendments. TIle Gty has abo adopted a weed
abatelllcnt ordinance.
Local Fire Hazards
(Dnditions that contribute to urban fire hazards in Paso Robles are primarily associated
with access difficulties from the existing fire stations, providing adequate fire suppression
service at the Paso Robles Airport, and reliance on volunteer fire fighting personnel. In
addition, there are approximately 40 buildings beyond the effective reach of fire ground
ladders. This wi!l require acquisition of an aerial tmck with at least a 75-foot reach.
Access problems from the existing fire stations are created by U.S. Highway 101 which
splits Paso Robles roughly in half, creating eastem and westem segments of tlle Gty.
With limited access to and across the highway from Gty surface streets, fire tmcks often
cannot take a direct route to an emergency call on the opposite side of the highway.
Fire fighting equipment at the Paso Robles airport consists of a govemment surplus
crash tmck TI1is vehicle, however, often has mechanical problems tllat limit its effectiveness.
Another fire suppression constraint at the airpolt is the absence of fire hydrants within
the flUlway area. Airpons will often provide subterranean hydrants within the mnway
that provide a source of fire suppression water. Without any hydr.llits near the nll1way
area, the only water available for fire suppression in the event of a mnway accident is
what can be carried on the response vehicles. A potential safety and access conflict with
the location of the airport fire station also results from existing airpon operations. Located
adjacent to the fire station is a helicopter flight-training school. TI,is results in students
making practice take-offs and landings adjacent to the fire station. It is possible that
access to and from the fire station could be impeded in the event of a tr.luting accident
(Hemp, 1997).
TI,e Paso Robles Department of Emergency Services relies on volunteer fire fighters to
supplement the pennanent staff of six career fire fighters. On occasion, there has heen
imufficient respome bytlle volunteers to adequately respond to emergency calls. A shonage
of trained persOlmel responding to a major emergency would have the potential to
result in significant life and safety hazards to the community and the fire fighters.
Tcc/mica] BackgrouJ1d Report                                                             County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                        43
                              Generally, adequate fire flows are available for fire suppression pUlposes throughout the
                              Gty. For new construction within the Gty, fire flow and access requirement are based on
                              the provisions of the Unifonn Fire Code. ]11ese requirements may be modified based
                              on the needs of a particular project. For example, residences may be requited to provide
                              structural sprinkler systems if response times from a fire station would not be sufficient
                              to provide adequate protection.
                              San Luis Obispo
                              Existing and Planned Protection Services
                              Fire suppression and prevention services within San Luis Obispo arc provided by the
                              Gtyof San Luis Ohispo Fire Department. TIle Department is staffed with 54 full-time
                              personnel, and has four fire stations at the following locations:
                                   Station No. 1,2160 Santa Barbara Avenue;
                                   Station No.2, 136 North OlOrro Street;
                                   Station No.3, 1280 Laurel Lane; and
                                   Station No.4, 1395 MadoIUla Road.
                              Fire Station No.1 was relocated to its present locationinJUlle 1996. The Fire Department
                              reports no structural or operational deficiencies that arc associated with the fire stations
                              (Dougherty, 1996). With the existing fire stations, the Department generally achieves its
                              goal of providing a four-minute or less response time for emergency calls. Fire response
                              equipment that is maintained by the Gty includes the following: ..
                                   (5) 1,500 gpm pumpers;
                                   (1) 1,250 gpm pumper;
                                   (1) 1,000 gpm pumper; and
                                   (1) Aerial truck
                              Ordinances and Regulations
                              Gty Ordinance 1288 (1995 Series) adopts the 1994 Edition of the Uniform Fire Code
                              with amendments. aapter 8.08 of the Muuicipal Code pertains to hazardous weeds
                              and debris, and provides a. mechanism to allow the Fire alief to order the removal of
                              weeds and debris that has the potential to become a fire, .health,.or _s~fety_hazard,If. .
                              compliance with the order is not provided in a reasonable period of time,-theGty may
                              contract to have the hazard abated. A tax lien for the cost of removing the hazard will
                              then be placed on the property lUltil it is paid.
                              The Gty has also adopted ordinances regarding the instalbtion of fire sprinklers in existing
                              structures and the use of fire resistive roof materials. The fire sprinkler ordinance requites
                              the installation of sprinklers in unreinforced masonry buildings in the downtown area at
                              the time that the structure is retrofitted for seismic safety. Other buildings in the downtown
                              area must have a fire sprinkler system by the year 2000. For new construction and the
                              installation of new roofs, the Gtyrequites automatic fire spnnJders in all but small accessory
                              Slluctures, and fire resistive roof material.
                              Local Fire Hazards
                              Urban fire protection issues in the Gty generally pertain to providing fire suppression
                              services in the dO"~ltown area, and low fire flows that may occur in portions of the Gty
                              that are at a higher elevation than sWTounding areas. Another fire protection concem
                              pertains to the ability to provide fire protection services to areas that may be annexed to
                              the Gty.
County and Cities or San Luis Obispo                                                                Tcdmical Bac*ground Report
44
Although it is not considered to be a significant problem, providing fire suppression
services in the downtown area of the City Gm be constrained by n1<lrginal fire flows,
minimal building and occupancy separations, poor access, and hydrant locations. These
hazards can be increased further by old structures that did not use fire resistive building
materials and do not provide fire sprinklers. To address these issues, the City has recently
upgraded water mains in the downtown area, and has adopted a fire sprinkler ordinance
(Dougherty, 1996).
Generally, adequate fire flows are available for fire suppression purposes throughout the
City. For new construction within the City, fire flow and access requirements are based
on the provisions of the Unifornl Fire Code. Elevated portions of the City, however,
can experience low fire flows resulting from a loss of water pressure. To address this
problem, the City has installed pump stations, and has required new development to
install water storage tanks that supplement existing fire flows. With the implementation
of measures such as these, there are no significant areas located in the City that have
inadequate water supplies for fire suppression purposes.
The City of San Luis Obispo is considering 'ill annexation of properties located in the
vicinity of the San Luis Obispo County Airport. This area contains a significant amount
of connnercial and industrial development, as well as open space. Annexation of this
area into the City of San Luis Obispo could have the potential to result in significant
impacts to tile Fire Department in regard to maintaining adequate response times within
the City and the ability to provide adequate fire protection infrastructure.
Technical Background Report                                                           COllnty and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                      45
                                                                                    9v
         J.IOdJ(f (J[IflOJiiJPRF{ ff!J!w(JJ,L odsrqo s,rW[ ems 10 sWJ.f;J put! l'JUno:)
      )
.,', -~-
              Geology 8<r. SeiSBnicity
Geologic hazards in San Luis Obispo County include scismicityrclated to fault mpture
and ground shaking, liquefaction, tsunamis and seiches, slope instability and landsliding,
and subsidence. TI,ese hazards can result in damage to public and residential buildings,
inteffilpt transportation systems, damage lifelines such as buried ntilities and power lines,
and result in loss of life. TIle influence on public safety depends on the geologic and
seismic conditions at a specific location. A review of regional and local geologic conditions
can provide a basis for identifying areas where public safety might be inlpacted by these
hazards for planning purposes. Site specific studies are needed to evaluate if hazards will
affect a particular property, and if and how they could be mitigated for a specific project
or development.
Ortain geologic fonnations or soil sedinlents are more prone to some geologic hazards,
such as landslides, liquefaction, and settlement. Similarly, the location and activity of a
fault detcnnines the potential hazards for grOlmd mpture or seismic damage. To help
correlate the geologic conditions with the potential hazards to public safety and
infmstmcture, a discussion of the geologic and seismic safety of the Countyis necessary.
Geologic Time Scale
Geologic rock fonnations or wnts are typically condated with other rock fonnations in,
relation to geologic time. Sinruarly, the potential hazardthat'a fault maypose is defined'in
relation to its activity in geologic tinle. TI,erefore, the geologic time scale and the various
names of ems, periods, and epochs that constitute the time scale, are inlportant temlS
that form the basis for much of the following discussions. A sinlplified geologic time
scale is provided in Table 4-1.
                                   Table 4-1: Geologic Time Scale
            Cenozoic
                             Tertiary
            M~ozoic
                          CarbQfliferolJs
Technical Background Report                                                              COllntyand Cities ()f San Luis ObL.,po
                                                                                                                          47
                                                                                           Regional Geology
   ,",        }   ~·'·~'l'1. ..\1
)\'·I~.IL'·I>.\~:.,'":,:.~:r; .3'~                                                         Structural Geology
(. ' ..,.' 'r-'~-" ~'{:-
  \~ :.,.'
        .~
          t
              '.;... ~ t:.
                    (.... \
                            ..                                                             Geologically, Califomia is divided into several physiographic or geomorphic
                                                                                           provinces, including the Sien11 Nevada range, the Central (Great) Valley, the
                                                                                           Transverse Ranges, the Coast Ranges, and others. San Luis Obispo County
            .~                ...         \J                                               lies within the Coast Range geomorphic province of C-'llifomia; .
           -k'"                             ,
            \"-
             \.
                       ".         \     "
                                     '\.\~~ \
                                                "
                          "
                                                                                           TIle portion of the Coast Range province that comprises the coast of centml
                ;;          \ "l. ".                  '. , ••
                          "" \.' .                      .,                                 CalifOlma was formed at the intersection of two tectonic plates: the Pacific to
                ~\..= .
                                                           ,",,'
                             '[>    \       ('
                                            ....      ;/                                   the west, and the North American plate. TIle compressive and shearing motions
                                       '~     ;./                  •...t... ~:••
                                           ,;"                      L,,·                   between the tectonic plates resulted in a complex system of active strike-slip
                                  .. :\~;f.~~.~' ':~':::?:/' . r                           faults, reverse faults, thmst faults and related folds (bends in roCklayel~) (dark
                                                    -...~
                                                 ....
                                                                        .. ·.\.'~1
                                                              ..~,··'.....   ~ t.;:;;.- ;J
                                                                                           and others, 1994).
                                                 '<-                         "
                                                                                           The various rock types found throughout the Colmty, and the type and severity
Geomwp},ic province, of CaMomia.                                                           of folding and faulting that has occurred in these rocks, allow for the division
(Norn' & Webb, 1990)                                                                       of San Luis Obispo County area into four structurally and physiographically
                                                                       distinct areas, called seismotectonic domains. 111e domains include the Santa Maria-San
                                                                       Luis Range domain, the Coastal Fr,lnciscan domain, the Salinian domain, and the Westem
                                                                       San Joaquin Valley domain. The seismotectonic domains are botmded by major Quatemary
                                                                       age faults that divide the Colll1ty into areas of distinct styles of faulting, seismic activity
                                                                       and geology. A description of the domains is presented below:                                             -:'"'.
                                                                       Santa Maria Basin-San Luis Range'Domain (SMB-SLR) .. TIle Sinta Maria Basui;;
                                                                       San Luis Range domain (SMB-SLR) comprises the southwestem area of the County,
                                                                       including Nipomo, Oceano, Grover Beach, Arroyo Grande, westem San Luis Obispo,                                   ..
                                                                       Avila, Los Osos, and the adjacent hills of the San Luis Range and Irish Hills. The domain                       I
                                                                                                       forms a transition between the Transverse Range geomorphic
                                                                                                       province to the south, and the Coastal Franciscan domain to the
                                                                                                       north.
                                                                                                       The surface geology in the low-lying areas of the domain
   Juan de Fuea Plat(' ----1                                                                           predominately consists of Quatemary and Holocene sediments
                                                                                                       of alluviunl, dune deposits, and Paso Rohles Fomlation. 'TIle terrain
                                                                                                       in the coastal ar~as is generally chamcterized by moderate relief,
        PACIFIC PLATE
                                                                                                       bound by the steep terraID of the uplifted San Luis Range to the
                                                                                                       east.
                                                                                                       Fault and fold trends within the domain generally trend
                                                                                                       northwesterly. The faults are generally northwest-striking reverse
                                                                                                       faults, with mainly reverse and left-lateral strike-slip fault movement.
                                                                                                       TI,ere are at least two recognized active faults in the domain, the
The San Andreas Pault in California is a transform
fault along which the Pacific Plate slides                                                             Hosgri fault and the Los Osos fault. Several moderate magnitude
nothwcstward relative to t-he North American Plate                                                     earthquakes have occurred in the 5MB-SLR domain (dark and
at a rate of about 7 1/2 em per year. (Levin, 1986)                                                    others, 1994).
                                                                       The main geologic hazards Ul tills area are grotmdshaloog and liquefaction or seisnllc
                                                                       related senlement of alluvium withullow lying areas, and tSlUlamis and coastal erosion in
                                                                       ocean front areas. As a result of the moderate relief within the westem and more developed
                                                                      portion of the domain, the landslide hazard is relatively low. There are, however, relatively
                                                                      severe landslide hazards withlll the steeper ten11in 'and less developed areas of the Santa
                                                                      Lucia Range and Irish Hills,
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                                                                                 Technical Background Roport
48

                                                                               SEISMOTECTONIC DOMAINS
                                                                                 TRANSVERSE RANGES
                                                                      ",~"'>I SIlNTA MARIA ElIl,SINISIlN LUIS RANGE
                                                                                 COASTAL FRIlNCISCAN
                                                                      roo:::',>] SALININ" AND N. SANTA LUCIA
                                                                       :' ,':';: SUBDOlvIA.lN (NSL)
                                                                      ~ VVESTERN SAN JOAQUIN VALLEY
           SIlN LUIS OBIISPI)--C
                                                                                                          ill
                                                                                                  LOS ANGELES
Coastal Franciscan Domain, The Coastal Franciscan domain generally lies along the
mountains and hills associated with the Santa Lucia Rlii.ge, The domain incorporates the
coastal communities of Morro Bay, C,yucos, Cambria and SanSimeon,artd the western
slope of the Santa Lucia Range in San Luis Obispo and east of Arroyo Grande, The
Santa Lucia Range resulted from uplift during the Pliocene and Quaternary periods,
The surface geology within the dot1:k1in consists of a northwest-trending sliver of largely
Franciscan fonnation rocks, bounded by the Hosgri fault and West Hnasna fault on the
west and the Nacimiento fault and the Rinconada fault on the east. The domain is
characterized by moderate rates of earthqual<e activity dlll'ing the Quaternary period and
has nlll'llCrollS northwest-striking, maiulynortheast-dipping faults, with lmcertain potential
to generate future earthquakes (Oark and others, 1994),
11,e main geologic hazards associated with tills domain are groundshaking, liquefaction
or seismic related settlement of alluvium in the low lying areas of the coastal portion of
the domain, tsunami and coastal erosion in ocean front areas, and severe landslide potential
on moderate to steep lllllsides, 11,e slopes of the Santa Lucia Mowltains are lmderlain by
mostly the Franciscan Formation and other Qetaceous age rocks that are considered to
be the formations most susceptible to landslides in the County.
Salinian Domain, 11,e Salitllan dot1:k1in is located in the northern and eastern portion
of San Luis Obispo C..ounty, including the commuuities of Paso Robles, Templeton,
Teclmica} BackgrolInd Report                                                             County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                        49
                                                                        Shandon, and Atascadero. 'TIle domain extends south· southeast to also include the Carrisa
                                                                        Plains area.
                                            Hi:n:.)irr~I"""'11
',.• "Il   !.:~s-.0::;;:-;5":'_,,>                                      TIus large domain is part of a northwest-trending tectonic terrain witllin the Califomia
                                                                                                                                                                        (
                             'Kl                            _-
            ('          -;s~tr:t--~r'..-,""".-r
                                                              ....
                                                                    _._
                                                                        CDast Ranges, characterized by gralutic and crystalline metamorphic basement rocks
                                                                        (C',ompton, 1966). The Salinian domain has a moderate- to high-relief western region
   r~II).'.~,)1
                            ".
                               "               .."..
                                                    ...r-~        '
                                                                        characterized by abundant northwest-striking faults with lustorical earthquake activity,
                      ':;;.) :.lnrJ'l:J lJiJr.tlo:.;utJkl.~             and an eastem region characterized by generally low relief and few recognized surface
                                                                        faults (Gark and others, 1994). I-Iistorical seismicityin the Salinian domain is concentmted
                                                                        mainly along its right-lateral strike-slip bowldary faults (Nacinuento and San Andreas),
                                                                        and is relatively sparse witllin the central portion of the domain.
         --::-;~~~.-
      ~~l'              \'~....... - --'"::;;.-
         '-",I. . . ._1\........--GJ.-;;'-',/
                                                   ~
                                                                        Seismically, the Saliuian domain away from the San Andreas fault is relatively quiet
                                                                        (Dehlinger and Bolt, 1987). The pronounced difference in seismic character between the
                                                                        Salinian domain and the adjacent CDastal Fl"lllCiscan d9main (with moderate. to high
 fh)     IMt-1111~f:'! I           i;,:rikl'! p..!ip) to'JUll           seismicity) is attributed to the clifferences in the strength of the rocks that comprise their
                                                                        respective wnes.
        ~
                                                                        TI,e Salinian domain has a generally lower occurrencc of geologic hazards in comparison
                                                                        to the 5MB-SLR and CDastal Franciscan domains. TI,e main gcologic hazards associated
                                                                        V\~th tlus domain are grOlmdshalcing, liqnefaction,or seismc rebred settlement of alluviwn
                                                                        in the low lying areas and landslide potential in lllllsides of moderate to steep slopes that
                                                                        have experienced large to moderate size landslides in some fmUlations.
                   (I;) Hwnlll\h.. ll                                                                             <.(
                                                                        Western San Joaquin Valley Domain. The Western San Joaqllin Valley domain (WSJV)
                                                                        bOWlds ilie edge of the OJwnyalong the eastern edge of the San Andreas fault. The San
         ~-rl~~-~
                                                                        Andreas fault separates the Salinian domain on the west from the Wcstern San Joaquin            (
                                                                        Valley domain on the cast. No major commwilties of San Luis Obispo OJWltyoverlie
                                                                        the WSJV domain, but it is important because of its relationship to the San Andreas
                ~,~.,                    /..-""
                                    ~.
                                                                        fault.
                 ,;c ,I     '(.:·"~r::a'l    fault                      A5 discussed by Gark and others (1994), recent geologic activity in the WSJV domain is
                                                                        characterized by thrust ancLn:versefaulting and associated folding. The 1983 CDalinga
                                                                        earthqual<e (magnitude, M, equalled 6Z), demonstratedthe,seismic potential associated
                                                                        with the active folds in the WSJV domaill.                                                   .
     ~::<;;
         -~
         ~~~.-~        . . \ ~---'4  -~--­    --~-'--
                                                                        Geologic characteristics of each of the domains are summarized in Table 4-2 -
     '<'\~.-~~-
            . . . . . J.......
                                              ~
                                                      ./"'"             Seismotectonic Domains in San Luis Obispo OJwny.
                                        /
                                                                        Stratigraphy
    ,:~.: h.:ll-I<'tl~r..dr·:.IlTml luu.
       ilf!ft...:!hl qUf! nc.·m-fil lil ult)                            Stratigraphy is the branch of geology which describes the fornlation, composition,
                                                                        sequence, and properties of stratified (sedin1entary) rocks. TIle major stratigrapluc wilts
                                                                        (geologic fornlations) in San Luis Obispo CDWltyare shown on Map 1 - Geology.
     c~:.Jf':~O
     c::~if,''. tf."  ~..)...-
                              l·
                        c>,. . -~~
                                       .....-.-/.-
                                                                        Except for regional l1lapping byJennings (1958),(here has not been a systematic geologic
                                                                        lllapping program conducted for San Luis Obispo Q)untythat incorporates existing data
                                                                        into a cotmty-V\~de regional map. A5 part of this study, geologic maps [onhe San Luis
                                                                        Obispo OJuntyarea by Dibblee (1971; 1972a, 1973; 1974), Hall (1973a; 1973h; 1974),
                                                                        Hall and Prior (1975), Hall and others (1979), and McOean (1994, 1995) were digitized to
   (") 18'1            ,~18f,\ "~'...,<:("".(~         1,),111
       ~1!?ft--DbliqU8 ri::\'i::r"3~                   fau:j
                                                                        foml a regional geologic map for San Luis Obispo OJunty (see Mop 1). TI,at data was
                                                                        then digitized and compiled into a GIS fonllat to generate the various geologic hazards
Kinds of fa uits.                                                       maps.
(Levin, 1986)
County and Cities of San Luis                                           ObL~po                                                              Technical Background Report
50

                               Table    4~2:  Seismotectonic Domains in San Luis Obispo County
                                                    A1odijict!jiWl/ ClaIR <ltd otOcn (1394)
       Relief                   Moderate to high              t. . 1odefate to high  Modef.ate to high in       Low to moderate
                                                                                     w€:ste:rn and eastem
                                                                                     margins; low to
                                                                                     moder.ate In centr al
                                                                                     portion (east 01
                                                                                     Rinoooada fault)
       Quaternary t.ault: ,and  WNW- to tWl/-strHdng          NW-trending reverse    NW-trending reverse        t~W- tr('!nding folds:
       tolds                    ro':!Vefse faults; locally    faults and folds with  faults and tQlds;          sei;; mloa1t!/ activo':! on
                                active WNW-trending           uncertain activity;    unoertain activity         western boundary
                                tolds                         middle andlor late     along tt))estern           (San Andreas: 1alJlt),
                                                              Quaternary actrvity    boundary
                                                              on West Huasna and     (Nacimiento fault);
                                                              Oceanic faults:        seismic,ally active
                                                                                     along eastern
                                                                                     boundary (San
                                                                                     Andreas fault);
                                                                                     spars e activity in
                                                                                     central portion (east
                                                                                     of Rinconadafautt),
                                                                                              High              Low to       der iltE!
       Largest reported         1927 earthquake that          1952 Bryson earth·     1857 fort Tejon            1983 Coalinga earth-
       historic earthqua.:e:    ocourred offshore:            qud<.(M-5.2)           earthquake (M""'?8)        q"d<e(M- 6.7)
                                near Lompoc (M=7.0)
       Predominant base-        Fr anctscan Complex           Franc~(;an Complex     $alirtiart plutonic and    Fr.anc~can Complex
       ment rows',              (\Noodring and                (Jenr.ings.1W7)        crystalline meta·          and GreatValley
                                Bramlette, 195(9                                     morphic (C ompton,         Group (Jennings,
                                                                                     19e6)                      1977)
Seismicity
San Luis Obispo Countyis located in a geologically complex and seismically active region.
Seismic, or carthquake-related hazards, have the potential to result in significant public
safety risks and widespread propcrtydamage. Two of the direct effects of an earthquake
that are required to be considered as part of the Safety Element include the rupture of
the ground surface along the location of a fault, and grotmd shaking that results from
fault movement. Other geologic hazards that may occur in response to an earthquake·
,md that are evaluated in this section include liquefaction, seismic settlement, tsunami,
seiche and landsliding. Other hazards, such as flooding from a dam failure, fires, and
structural hazards that may be related to earthquakes, are evaluated in separate sections
of the Safety Element.
Faull Adivity
A classification system has been devised by the Glifomia Division
of Mines and Geology (CDMG) to describe fault activity and the
potential for future fault movement. Providing a mechanism for
detemnning and describing the activity of a fault is important because
faults that exhibit signs of geologically recent (active within the past
11,000 years) movement are considered the most likely to experience
movement in the near future. 111crefore, active faults are generally
thought to have the greatest risk to public safety with regard to fault
mpture potential. Most agencies, however, ,,>ill consider potentially
                                                                                          Kinds of/fAds. (Levin, 1986)
active faults (active within the past two million years) as being capable
Tcdmical Background Report                                                                               County and CWi.'S of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                            51

                              of generating future earthquakes. Faults classified as inactive are not considered to present
                              a significant fault mpture hazard or seismic source.
                              To address tills hazard, Gilifomia has adopted the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones
                              Act (APSSZA) of 1972. 1he APSSZA act was updated in 1994 and the title was revised
                              to the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (APEFZA). The intent of this Act is
                              to mitllmize the chance for stmctures with human occupancy to be built over active
                              faults byreqniting a geological investigation for new development within designated active
                              earthquake fault zones. For purposes of implementing the Act, it is assumed that the area
                              within 50 feet of an active fault is lUlderlain by active branches of the fault, lUlW proven
                              otherwise by an appropriate geologic investigation.
                              Terms used by CDMG to describe fault activity are defined below.
                              Historically Active (HA). Faults on which earthquakes pave .occuned during historic
                              time (within the last 200 years) are classified as historically active.
                              Active (A). Faults that show evidence of displacement during the most recent epoch of
                              geologic time, the Holocene, are classified as active. TI,e Holocene cpoch is generally
                              considered to have beglUl about 11,000 years ago.
                              Potentially Active (PA). Faults which displace geologic fonnations of. Pleistocene age
                              but show no evidence of movement in the Holocene period can be considered to be
                              potentially active. Pleistocene tinlC is the period between about two milli6nyears ago and
                              11,000 years ago. TI,e exception is that certain Pleistocene f~lllts can Ileprestirnedto be
                              inactive based on direct geologic evidence of inactivity during the Holocene time or
                              longer.                                                                                         (
                              Inactive (IA). Faults which show no evidence of movement during the past two million
                              years and show no potential for movement in the future are classified as inactive.
                              As defined, the terms used by CDMG to describe fault activity are essentially based on
                              the recunence of fault rupture at a particular location, or the amount of time that has
                              passed since a fault last ruptured:'"
                              Most active faults are identified on the basis of surface expression of previous fault
                              movements, or observation of fault displacements in relatively shallow excavations or
                              outcrops. In addition to the known active faults with surface expression, there is also a
                              potential for earthquakes on "bUlled" or "blind" thrust faults that are more active at
                              depth but have poor expression of this activity at the ground surface. The 1983 o,alinga
                              and 1994 Northridge earthquakes have been attributed to fault movement on blind thrust
                              faults (Wentworth and Zoback, 1989; Working Group 011 California Earthquake
                              Probabilities, 1995). Geophysical research by Shaw and Suppe (1994a, b) identified
                              subsurface pattems which they believe represent blind thrust faults in the southem
                              Califomia area. voss sections prepared by Namson and Davis (1990) across the Santa
                              Maria Basin and southem O,ast Ranges of San Luis Obispo CoUllly identify a fold and
                              thmst belt they believe to be seismically active. On the basis of the limited data available
                              concenling the reoccunence intervals and other earthquake parameters, it is difficult to
                              fully evaluate the shaking hazard from blind tbmst faults. However, as shown by the
                              widespread damage from the 1994 NOlthridge earthquake, blind thrust faults can produce
                              strong ground motion that can effect widespread areas and cause significant damage.
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                              Tcc/micaJ Background Report
52
Measurement 01 Earthquakes
There are several systems used to measure earthquake ground shaking. In 1935, dlarles
Richter developed a system to measure an earthquake's strength in terms of its In1gnitude
(Richter magnitude, M,), which is commonly refened to as the Richter scale. Richter
magnitude is defined as the logarithmic measurement of the maxirmUll amplitude, as
recorded on a seismograph, calculated at a distance of 100 kilometers (62 nllles) from the
earthquake. Richter magnitude is fixed to an event and measured values do not vary with
distance. With the use of a logaritlmllc scale, an ir,crease of "1" on the Richter scale (e.g.,
a 5.0 to a 6.0) represents an approxinlate 32-fold irlCrease irl earthquake energy released
hy the event.
TI,e Richter scale is Iirnited byits ability to measure very strong seisnllc events associated
with great earthquakes. In response to this inconsistency, the most commonly used scale
today is thc moment magnitude system TI,e moment magnitude is related to the physical
size of fault rupture, the movement across the fault, and the strength of the rock that is
faulted. The seisrnic movement is calculated by the strength of the rock (shear modulus)
multiplied by the area Oength tirnes width) of the fault rupture surface and hy the
displacement of the fault during the earthquake. TI,e moment magnitude system symhol
is Mw (Snllth and dlishol111, 1998).
Earthquake induced grOlUld shaking can he measured quantitatively as ground surface
acceleration, the speed at which the ground moves with respect to the force of gravity
(g). An upward vertical ground acceleration of 1.0 g from an earthquake would throw
loose objects into the air hecause the downward force of gravity was overcome by the '
force of the groundshalci.ng in response to an earthquake. A qualitative description of the
inwnsityof an earthquake, onhe degree of shaking in terms of the damage at a partiCltlar
location, can be provided using the Modified Mercalli Scale. This scale is genel'al ir,nature
and provides a description of the effects of the eanhqualte at a particular site, ranging
from the Roman Numeral "I" (felt by very few individuals) to "XII" (damage is total).
Reported intensity ratings for an earthquake can vary from region to region, and will he
irilluenced by factors such as the size of the earthquake, the geologic conditions of the
site, and the quality of buildirlg construction. Earthquake intensity descriptions that are
used by the modified Mercalli scale are provided on Table 4-3.
To describe the largest earthquake event that In1y be produced by a panicular fault, the
terms "maximum probable earthquake" and "maximum credible earthquake" arc
conullonlyused. A maxinlUm probable earthquake is the largest event that is expected to
be produced by the fault within a certain tinle frame. The selected time period will typically
cones pond to the life expectancy of the structure. Therefore, a maximum probable
earthquake magnitude is con1Ulonlyused to design most structures.
A maxinlum credible earthquake is the largest estirnated event that could he produced by
a fault, regardless of time. For the design of critical structures, such as dams, hospitals,
power plants, and emergency response facilities, the maximum crcdihle earthquake is
often used. GllTent building codes define "maxirllUm moment magnitude," and the
"upper bOlUld earthquake" for the design of structures.
Faults in San Luis Obispo County
TI,e location of the major mapped faults witllin San Luis Obispo O,Wlty are shown on
Map 2. "nus map is meant to be used for general plamring purposes only and not as a
substitute for detailed geologic evaluation necessary to evaluate fault locations. CDMG
Special Publication 117 (1997 a), Guidelines for Evaluating and Mitigating Seisnllc Hazards
 Technical Background Report                                                            County and Cities of San Luis ObiSpo
                                                                                                                        53
                                                  Table 4-3: Modified Merealli Intensity Scale
                                     t'ly a tel'\l p~r$Qtls  at rest, es:peciallythose on upper 1100rs 01 buildings. Deticatet1suspended
             III.        Felt quite noticeably by persons indoors, especially in upper tIO(H$ of buildings. t. .1any people do not
                         recognize it. a;: an earthquake. Standing vehicles may rook slightty. Vib rations similado the passing' of a
                         tfIJd<. Duration estimated.
            IV.          During the day, felt indoors by many. outdoors by a few. At night. some ,=wlJakened. Dis: hes. lAIindwvs.
                         dODfs disturbed; tl\lalls- rna.:e cracking sound. Serrs-aiion Ii<:e he,;rvy trud< striking building. Standing
                         vehiole::; rock r.oticea
             V.          Felt bv nearlv evervone: many awakened. Some dishes, windows brd< en. Unstable objects overturned,
                                                           p.
            VI.        I FeH bv all, many frightened. Some he,avy furniture moved. A fEW, instanoes o11all"m pl~steL Damage
            VII.         Damage negligible in buildings: 01 good                                           to moder ate in well· built Qrdinary
                         structures; Qonsidel.able damage in                                                     broken:
           VIII.         Damage slight In spIH:ially-designed struetur!!!>; coosiderable damage In ordinary substantial buildings,
                         with paltial oollapse, Damage great in poorly- built structures. F a lien ohimney.;, factory staoks, oolumns,
                         monuments, walls. H eaw tumlture overturne d.                                                                     ...
            IX.        I Damaae oonsiderable in slJecialhr·d esianed sh uciures: lIt.1el~ des: ioned 1rame sll uctur es thrown out 01
                                                                                                                  shifted Qft 1oundations.
             x.
                                 in Gllifomia, developed standards for seismic evaluations. That document presents
                                 guidelines for assessing regional seismic hazards, site-specific fault evaluations, and
                                 mitigation of earthquake induced hazards.
                                 Building codes being developed for 1997 would require that CDMG maintain a database
                                 of faults tbat are considered to be capable of generating strong ground motion from
                                 future earthquakes. A SUllll11:!rY bf the current fault database that is being disseminated
                                 byCDMG via a World Wide Website (http://www.consrv.i:a.gov/ dmg) is presented on'
                                 Table 4-4. It should be noted, however, that there are many faults that are likely capable
                                 of generating future earthquakes in San Luis Obispo County tbat are not accounted for
                                 on Table 4-4. A summary of other faults that have been mapped in and near San Luis
                                 Obispo County are presented in Table 4-5.
                                 Additionally, there is a potential that areas of the County are underlain by blind thrust
                                 faults that GUl not easily be identified from review of surface geology. A summary of
                                 blind thrust faults that may underlie portions of the County according to Namson and
                                 Davis (1990) are presented in Table 4-6. TI,e faults 'presented in'Tables 4-5 hnd 4-6 are
                                 faults that are considered by most local practitioners but are not addressed in the current
                                 data base maintained by CDMG.
                                 TI,e location of the fault referred to in Tables 4-4 and 4-5 are shown on M1p 2. A
                                 desC11ption of those faults follows.
                                 Arroyo de          080    Fault. See San Simeon-Hosgri fault zone.
                                 Arroyo Laguna Fault. See San Simeon-Hosgll fault zone.
COUl1(Y and Cities of San Luis ObiSpo                                                                                  Technical Background Report
54

                                                     Table 4-4: Faults Listed in Current CDMG Database'
                                                                                         Charooter
                                                                                             ·Istio        Dov.n·                                 Earth·
    Faull Name                                                      Maximum                 Return            Dip                                 quake
         and                                                         Moment -              Interval         Width          Dip                    Hazud
    Geomctry"                Length             Slip Rae           M<:tJnitude               (yrs)           (km)        {deg.)   t-v:::ti\:lti    Zone?             Co mrnent:;
                        (km)         .,.     mmlyr       .,.
    Hos gr~San           172         17        2.5       1.00            7.3                  "45              12          90       actN~           Ye,s    Slip rate based             Sao
      Simeon                                                                                                                                                                      '"
                                                                                                                                                            Simeon fault slip Ilite
       (11·$s)                                                                                                                                              repNied 10 Hans-of} "d
                                                                                                                                                           Lett!s (1004). EHZ
                                                                                                                                                           mappI!.d i:ltong the onshore    "
                                                                                                                                                           S" Simeon portion
                                                                                                                                                           1ault.                          '"
     Casmalia             29          3       0.25      0.20             6.5                 2901              10        75 NE    potentiall        No.     Poolty    constrained slip
  (Orcutt tlMlaO                                                                                                                   yacthre                 rate based (1) deformation
          (,)                                                                                                                                               of terraces (Clail<, 1990).
     Los Osos                         4       O.ED                       8.8                                   14        45SW       llothte         y"     Poorly (Ions-trained late
          0)              ""                            0.'"                                 1925
                                                                                                                                                           QU.'IlernAryslip line based
                                                                                                                                                           on uplift C11 marine terr aces
                                                                                                                                                           .'tnd assumed t.autl dip Of
                                                                                                                                                           30·60 deQrellls (Lett!s /1.
                                                                                                                                                           Hall,1o(4).
      San Luis            04          5       0.2J      0.10             7.0                 8500              14         45N     potentiall         "0    Fault        system          with
       Range                                                                                                                       y.aotwe                  composite slip late of
    (S,' m.::ugio)                                                                                                                                          a.bout 0.2 mn/yr, Inoludcs
          (,)                                                                                                                                              S" Lui;; Bay, OceOlno,
                                                                                -                                                                          Wilma, Ave., 01$0;;10, "d
                                                                                                                                                           Santa Ma,ia RilI.:r faults.
                                                                                                                                                           (Lettis, et at. 19;;.ul).
     Sal'lJuan            88          7       1.00      1.00            7.0                  1333              13          gO     potentiaU         110    POOltv constri:liroed slip
       (,1'55)                                                                                                                     YOIcllve                rate b'ased          AndelSort
                                                                                                                                                           (1984).         '"
     Rinconada
       (11-5:»
                         189         19       1.00      1.00             7.3                 1704              10          90     pob!ntiall
                                                                                                                                   yactive
                                                                                                                                                     No    Long     "'m     slip rate: of
                                                                                                                                                            about 3 mrnlyr based on
                                                                                                                                                           Hart (1005).               Lacks
                                                                                                                                                           obvious Holocene offset.
   San Andreas-
   Carriz:o(ll-ss)
                         145         10      341)0      3.00             7.2
                                                                                              "'A              12          90       active          y"     Slip rate based on Sieh
                                                                                                                                                           and J.anns (UlB4). Model
                                                                                                                                                           assumes slip only in 1857.
                                                                                                                                                           type events.
   San Andreas-           62          6      341)0      0.00            5.9                   437              12          80       aclive          y"     Slip rate based on al'lalogy
      Cholame                                                                                                                                              with Carrizo segment.
       (rl·5$)
   San Andreas-
      Pari<field
                          37          4      34.00      5.00             6.7                   25              12          90       active          y"     Slip
                                                                                                                                                                   ,,'"
                                                                                                                                                           wGCEP (1995).
                                                                                                                                                                           leported       bV
      Segment
       (,I.:ss)
   San Andreas           345         35      34.00      5.00             7.8                  205              12          90       active          y"     Rupture       of     Parkfield,
  (1857 r uptrmi!)                                                                                                                                         Cholarne, Carri;z:(:I, 'nd
       (11·ss)                                                                                                                                             Mojave segments. Max.
                                                                                                                                                           Magnitude based on 1857
                                                                                                                                                            event (Ellsworth, 199C/).
                                                                                                                                .                          Slip r ak! ba; ed on Calljzo
                                                                                                                                                           segment.
   SanAndfeas            470         47      24.00      3.00             7.9                  210              12          90       acir"e          y"     Slip fate based on Niemi
       (1906)                                                                                                                                              ,,'      Hall
                                                                                                                                                           prentiCE!,
                                                                                                                                                                            (1992) and
                                                                                                                                                                                    (1991).
                                                                                                                                                           Assumption    " " that      1fOe
                                                                                                                                                           ever.ts      rupture       North
                                                                                                                                                           Coasi,      Penins ula,      'nd
                                                                                                                                                           santa CfUZ Mountains,
                                                                                                                                                           S(:gments to San Juan
                                                                                                                                                           Bautista. Max. Magnitude
                                                                                                                                                           based .(:In 1906 average :5
                                                                                                                                                           m dts"placement (\fi/G-CEP,
                                                                                                                                                           1800;           Lienkaemper,
                                                                                                                                                           1900).
 1. SOUIC(! of in1olmaih.n: COMO (19W) unless otherwise noted.
 2. (ss) strike s lip, (I) lev>;! Ise, (n) normal, (II) right Iale ral, (II) lett latel ai, (0) ob liqu e, (i:>t) blind thrust
 3. Ba:; ed 00 J eMk.-{Jt (1904) F aul! Acth/itv M;;p of California:
TccJmic;J/ Background Report                                                                                                                    County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                                                                          55

                                          Table 4-5 - Other Faults in and near San Luis Obispo County'
                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                   Chara::;te-
                                                                                       -istio     OOIM"\·                           Earth·
                                                               Maxi mum               Return        Dip                             quake
    Faull Name                                                  Moment               Interwl      Width          Dip                Haza-d
          and               length          Slip Rue           Magnitude               (yrs)       (km)        (deg.) Ac1i\1ty!     Zone?                     CornmE:!nts
     GeomEtri
                                                  ,--
                       (km)      +1·     mmlyr        +/.
I -. -Big  Spring        20       ..       n,                        n'                  n,          n,          n,     inadiw        N.          8ranch 01 San Juan 1aut!
       Cambria           04       ..       na          ..          0.25                  ..                           potentially
                                                                                                                            3{tilf@
                                                                                                                                      No         Magnitude estimated 1rom
           (,)                                                                                                                                   Mualchin            ,nd    Jonr/!.
                                                                                                                                                 (1992). PO&E (1900)
      Cayucos            54       ..       n,          ..           6.5                  na         n,           n'     inactive      N.         Aft.:!f       I<ilbourne     and
           (,)                                                                                                                                   Mualchin (1000b)
   East HUBsna           70       ..       n,         ..             n,                  n,         n'           n,   p01Brrtially    No
           (,)                                                                                                             actl\"!
         Edna            43       ..       na          ..            n,                                               potoeMially     No         Oenerally considered to be
                                                                                                                           acti-.re              P<Ht 01 ihe Lru:- Os os fault
                                                                                                                                                 zone,
       Morales           '0       ..       na         ..             na                  n,         n'                pot(!ntially    No
           (,)                                                                                                             active
     N.:Icimiemo:>       90       ..       n,         ..            7.5                  n,         na           n,    inactive?      No         Magnitude after Kilbourne
          (s:;:)                                                                                                                                 and Mualchin (1980b). The
                                                                                                                        active?
                                                                                                                                                 1(;152 Bryson e.Hthquake i;:
                                                                                                                                                 often a;.sign'lld to this tau II.
                                                                                                                                                 which would chang!:!
                                                                                                                                                 acUvltv flom Inactive to       "
                                                                                                        . .                                      .1ti1rv:e, .
       Ocuno             20       ..      0.10      0.10              6                  n,         n,         45 NE    Inactive      No         Aft":!r Letli~ and others
           (,)                                                                                                                                   (1094). Activity based on
                                                                                                                                                 Asquith (1997). Note that
                                                                                                                                                 the fauH is typioally listed
                                                                                                                                                 separately          1rom    butts    (
                                                                                                                                                 given 10r San Luis Ri'Hloe
                                                                                                                                                 fault in Table4.
        Pecho           22        --      OJ"       0.D1           6.25                  n,         n,         55 NE  pMerYilally
                                                                                                                           active
                                                                                                                                      No         A1te:r PG&E (1900)
           (,)
  San Miguelito           0       --       na                        n,                  n,         n,           ,,'     .... acth~   N.
    Sant.1luoia         135       --       na         n,           7.25                  n'         n'           "'        Mw        aotlve      I\fte:r       I-<ilbourne:   'nd
         Bank                                                                                                                                    Mualohln (1000b). Mapped
                                                                                                                                                 offshore.
                                                                                                                                          ..
         Souih           51       ..       n,         ..            7.0                  na         n'     'r'   na   potentially     N.         Aft";"tWesnou;ky (1g~m .
      Cuyama-                                                                                                              aal¥\"'!
        OZena                                                                                                                                                           '.
                                                                                                                                                                                    I
  Wed Huasnal           120      20        n,          ..           70                   na         n,           90   poterrtially    No .       Afb!/         Kilbourne      ,nd
       Oceanic                                                                                                             active                Mualchin (1000b).
          (r,o)
     Whllerock           18       ..       na         ..             na                  n,         na           n,     inactive      No
           Co)
 1. SOUWI[! of information: C DMG (1097) unless oiherwise noted.
 2. (ss) strikes lip, (r) reverse, (n) normal, (rl) right lateral, (11) left lateral, (0) obllque,(bt) blind thTUst
 3. Sa:;; ed onJl[!nnings (1094) F aut! Activity Map ot California:
 na:: not aDDlic.able otthe irdormation has not bJi!efl .available                                                                                                                J
                                           Blind Thrust Faults. The 1983 Mw 6.7 (Dalinga earthquake, the 1987 Mw 5.9 Whittier
                                          Narrows earthquake, and the 1994 M,. 6.7 Nonhridge eanhquake demonstrate that
                                          moderate to large earthquakes can occur on blind thrust or reverse faults without ground
                                          surface rupture. To date, the subsurface ~)lind tluust) faults that have caused eanhquakes
                                          are associated with active Quatemarygeologic structures compnsed of folds in the bedrock
                                          unit.s. In most areas, geodetic studies have shovlIl that those structures are actively growing
                                          through coseismic uplift of the axis of anticlines (Stein, 1985). 'This strongly indicates a
                                          link between faulting at depth and near-surface fold development. Research by Suppe
                                           (1983) has shown that the association between folding at the surface with faulting at
                                          depth can be kinetically modeled using fault-bend or fault-propagation folding
County and Citics of San Luis Obispo                                                                                                         Tee/mica! Background Report
56

Espinosa Fault.
Foxen Canyon Fanlt. See Santa Maria River and Foxen C.anyon faults.
                  See San Simeon-Hosgri fault zone.
Indian Knob Fault.
Jolon Fanlt. See Rinconada fault.
                     11,e northwest trending La Panza fault has been mapped for 71
kilometers along the westem base of the La Panza Range Qermings, 1994). Estimated
TI,e La Pam.a fault has been identified as a thrust or reverse fault by dark and others
(1994), with northeasterly dips ranging from 37 to 55 degrees (Namson and Davis, 1990).
1976). The La Panza fault is considered potentially active.
Los Osos and Edna Fault Zones.
in an east/west orientation, along the northem flank of the Irish :Hills. The westem end
of the onshore fault zone is located near the community of Los Osos, and the eastem
continue along the northeast flank of the Irish Hills as the Edna fault zone. The Edna
fault and the Indian Knob faults are both mapped by Hall (1973) just west of. the trend
                                                                -<,--- '."    '   - -  ,-;: :-.
fault for the putposes of evaluating the potential seis'rilic source capability.'
The locatiou and recent activity of various strands of the Los Osos fault zone i, discussed
the Los Osos fault zone as including both the Los Osos and the Edua faults, and identifies
the Los Osos fault as being offset Holocene sediment, and is therefore considered to be
a west-northwest strilcing reverse fault that extends from the Hosgri fault (offshore)
eastward up to 35 miles to an intersection with the West Huasna fault near Twitchell
TIle C-ilifomia Division of Mines and Geology (Treiman, 1989) conducted field evaluations
for the main strand of tbe Los Osos fault near the intersection of Los Osos Valley Road
the main strand of the fault within the last 11,000 years. TItis evidence of reccnt activity
resulted in the establishment of all Earthquake Fault Zone byCDMG in 1989 underthe
Otyof San Luis Obispo. It should not be interpreted that the active portion of the main
trace of the Los Osos Fault is limited only to the designated Earthquake
Rather, the limits of the established Earthquake Fault Zone correspond to the limits of
the available infonnatioll provided by studies perfom1ed by Hall (1973), Hall and Prior
is provided by additional studies, it may be "ppropriate for CDMG to expand the
Earthquake Fault Zone.
limb of the Pismo syncline within the San Luis Range. Hall (1973) shows both Pliocene
and Late Pleistocene fOl111ations displaced by the Edna fault. Geologic studies by Lettis
Tecimica/ Background Report                                                           County ilnd Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                      59
                              and Hlll (1994), confirm that the Edna fault has no late Quatemalyage movement.
                              COMG (freiman, 1989, Jennings, 1994) considers the Edna fault to have Quatenmy-
                              age movement, therefore, the fault is considered potentially active.
                              H111 (1973a) mapped a second thrust fault, the Indian Knoh fault, about one mile southeast
                              of the Edna fault (Figure 1-1). On the basis of "meager field and stratigraphic evidence,"
                              I-Jail (1973a) estimated that "there has been approximately 1,000 feet of reverse-slip
                              movement" on the Indian Knob fault. TI,e activity statllS of the Inelian Knob fault is
                              tmcertain, but is assumed to be similar to the Edna fault (potentially active).'
                              Mapping by Lettis and Hall (1994) and recent tmpublished geoteclmical stuelies by Asquith
                              (1997) suggest that the Los Osos fault may segment or splay within the con11l1tUutyof
                              Los Osos. Asquith (1997) mapped a northwest-southeast strilUng fault strand that may
                              offset the main strand of the Los Osos fault. TI,e location of the notthwest-southeast
                              fanlt st"md has been inferred based on ground water leveL, and other geologic conditions.
                              1he activity of tilis fault segment is unknown, but is inferred to be potentially active or
                              possibly active. TI,e existence and activity of tlus fault segmeut is of concem because it
                              is located several hundred feet south of the South Bay fire 'station and the Sunnyside
                              Elementary School.
                              Assuming an overall fault length of 35 nilles, the Los Osos fault has the potential to
                              generate an earthquake with a magnimde Mw6.75. PG&E (1988) estim';ted a slip rate of
                              0.1 to 0.6 mm/yr and a surface displaceII!ent of 1.6 to 5 meters per event. More recently,
                              Lettis and Hall (1994) estimated a verticals lip rate of approximateiyO.2wO.8 mmlyr.
                              COMG reports a slip rate of 0.5 .± .4 mm/yr (see Table 4-4).
                              Morales Fault. The Morales fault zone is mapped by Dibblee (1973) and Vedder and
                              Repenning (1975) as an east-west to northwest treneling reverse thrust fault that rtUlS
                              along the Glyama Valley in the southeast area of the ('=>tUlty. TI,e fault is manifested as
                              a complex array of faults of diverse types and orientations that tun for about 50 km
                              from the San Andreas fault to the east to the southem end of the San Juan - Big Spring
                              fault zone. Jemlings (1994) indicates that the Morales fault is potentially active.
                              Morro Bay Fault. See Ca)~lCOS Fault.
                              Nacimiento Fault Zone. The Nacimiento fault zone is described by I-brt (1976) as an
                              ill-defined, complex array of northwest trending faults of diverse types and ages. The
                              Nacinuento fault zone separates the soft rocks of the o,astal Franciscan domain on the
                              west from the primarily granitic rocks of the Salinian domain on the east. As discussed
                              by Hart (1976), the fault zone "lies on trend, both locally and regionally with faults and
                              fault zones generally identified as the Nacimiento fault along the southeastem portion by
                              I-Jall and o,rbota (1967) and Vedder and Brown (1968) and Sur-Nacinuento fault to the
                              northwest (Jennings, 1958; Page, 1970)." Based on mapping by several investigators, it
                              appears that the Nacuniento fault zone is 110t a single fault line' of specific age, but rather
                              a complex zone of branching and discontinuous faults of diverse orientations, movement
                              and ages. TI,e fault zone is more or less defined by a nan'ow sinuous "utcrop band of
                              Franciscan melange.
                              Although mapped as a regional fault by many investigators, the NacinUento fault zone is
                              not ulCluded as part of the data base of Califomia faults byCOMG.TI1C fault repottedly
                              does not have surficial features suggestive of Quaternary movement, and is considered
                              inactive (Jelmings, 1994). However, the Bryson earthquake of 1952 is sometin,es assigned
                              to the Nacinuento fault zone which contradicts the Jemlings activity, and would make the
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                              TecJmicai Background Report
60

                                             Table 4-6: Thrust Faults Interpreted by Namson & Davis (1990)'
                                                                                                   Character
                                                                                                       ·'i::;tic       DOWl-                            Earth·
                                                                             Ma~      rnu m           Return            Dip                             quak'B
   Fault Name                                                                  Moment                Ir.ter....al      Width        Dip                Han:fd
       and                     length           Slip R<te                  Magnitude                    (yrs)          (krn )     (deg.l Aoti"Viti      Zone?             Comments
    Geoma.rl
                           [km]      +1·      mm""           +,.
       Black
     Mount.ain
                             50      ..        2.3
                                                to
                                                              ..               6.0- 7.5                    ..            ..       17 HE  Ue>t Rated       No     After Namsol'l      ..   Davt;
                                                                                                                                                                 (1990). All sUp Is assum(!d
        (hi)                                   4.8                                                                                                               to be seis.mic.
     La Panza                88      .'        0.3            ..                5.0..7.5                  ..             ..       37 NE  No1 Rat'Zd       No     After Namson & Davis
         (,)                                    10                                                                                                               (1990). AI! slip is assume.d
                                               0.8                                                                                                               to be: seismic.
 Point San Luis"
      Thrust
                             85      ..        2.3
                                                to
                                                              ..               5.0- 7.5                   ..             ..       35 HE  Not Rat>:!d      No     After Namson        ..   DavE;
                                                                                                                                                                 (1990). All slip is assumed
        (bl)                                   4.9                                                                                  .                            to be seismic.
     Purisma-
     Solomon
                            100      ..        1.2
                                                10
                                                              ..              0.0· 7.6                    ..             ..        25 S  Not Ri'1H!d      No     After Namsol'l
                                                                                                                                                                 (1990).
                                                                                                                                                                                     ..   D .wi:>
                                                                                                                                                                                    Interpreted
      ThrIFt                                   3.2                                                                                                               sfruniure is coincident with
        (bl)                                                                                                                                                     Ih. Casmalia- Orcutt 1auft
                                                                                                                                                                 system. All slip [s: .lssumed
                                                                                                                                                                 to be seismic
   Santa Lucia               00      ..        1.7            ..              6.0- 7.15                   ..             ..       26 NE  Not Rated        No     After Namson & Davi;
                                                I,                                                                                                               (.1900). AU slip Is: assumed
                                               3.3                                                                                                               to be sei>:mic.
 1. SOUIO>:! Of information: CDM<3- (1997) unless oihelVllis(! rooted.
 2. (S5) strilo: e s lip. (I) revelse. (0) n olm.'!l, (II) rig ht l.i!I:>:!Iil:1. (II) lett later al. (0) ()bliqtl e, (bt) blind thrust
 3. Bas ed on J enninas (19941 'r suit Activitv Mso 01 C.'!lrtornla:                                              .. .
tecluuques. Several large thmst faults are postulated beneath southem Califomia (Shaw
and Suppe, 1994a, 1995b; Working Group of Califol1ua Eanhquake Probabilities, 1994).
Based on evaluation of geophysical data, subsurface oil well data, and previous geologic
suIface mapping, Namson and Davis (1990) hypothesized the presence of several blind
tluust faults beneath the Santa Maria basin and San Lws Obispo County area, including
the coastal cities and San Luis Obispo. These faults are listed in Table 4-6, and are
concealed, low angle thmsts referred to as the BlackMountain fault, La Panza fault,
Point San Luis fault, Purisima-Solomon fault, and the San Lucia fault. TI'Cir model
suggests that the thmst ramps merge into a regional detachment at a depth of 11 to 14
kilometers. On the basis of their structural evaluation, Na!l1Son and Davis (1990)
conclude that the thmst ramps are capable of generating moderate to large eanhquakes
of m,tgnitude Mw 5.0 to magnitude Mw 7.5. The Na!l1Son and Davis model snggests
that blind thrust faults could pose a significant seismic risk throughout the Connty.
As pan of their model, Namson and Davis (1990) estimated that there has been on the
order of 27 kilometers of lateral shoncning in an east-west direction in the last two to
four million years. That corresponds to a convergence rate of 6.7 to 13.4 nnn/yr. By
geologic standards, these convergence rates are very high, suggesting an active tectonic
environment. The Namson and Davis model is controversial, with an opposing argument
(Lettis and others, 1994; PG&E, 1988) that movement along faults such as the Los
Osos, San Luis Bay, and Wilmar Avenne faults accommodate for the regional
convergence assigned by Namson and Davis.
Big Spring Fault. See San Juan fault.
Cambria Fault. TI,e nonhwesterlytrending Cambria fault is approximately 64 kilo!l1Cters
long, including an 8 kilometer projection across eastem Estero Bay. Hall and hior (1975)
Teclmical Background Report                                                                                                                          COl/nty and Cities of Sail Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                                                                            57

                             show the fault coming back onshore ncar Morro Bay, and converging with the Oceanic
                             and West Huasna fault near San Luis Obispo. 'l1,e fault, located within the enastal
                             Franciscan domain, has been mapped locally as a reverse or thrust fault (Jelmings, 1994;
                             Kilbourne and Mualcbin, 1980b); Hall (1974). Weber (1983) noted that a terrace deposit
                             in the Cambria area may be displaced by the Cambria fault, with an apparent 3-inch step
                             in elevation of the terrace surface near Ellysly G-eek but could not be confirmed during
                             review by CDMG (Manson, 1985). TI,e Cambria fault is considered potentially active.
                             Casmalia Fault (Orcutt Frontal-Pezzoni Fault). Several authors have hypothesized
                             the presence of a fault zone along the northeast flank of the Casmalia Range and Solomon
                             Hills and running offshore just south of the mouth of the Santa Maria River. Krammes
                             and Cunan (1959) and G-awford (1971) originally defined the Orcutt Frontal fault as a
                             high angle, southwest-dipping reverse fault on the hasis of subsurface oil well data. PG&E
                             (1988) referred to the Orcutt Frontal fault as the Casmalia fault and continued the mapped
                             fault trace offshore to intersect the Hosgri fault. PG&E considered the Casmalia fault to',
                             be a continuous, high-angle range-front reverse fault with probable surface expression.
                             Other authors such as G-ouch and others (1984), Nitchman (1988), and Namson and
                             Davis (1990) believe that the high-angle faults mapped as the Orcutt frontal fault are
                             discontinuous, secondary faults in the hanging wall of a major blind thrust fault system
                             The CDMG fault activity map (Jennings, 1994) shows the Casmalia fault as a west-
                             northwest striking, 20-kilometer long fault along the nonheastem flank of the Casmalia
                             Range. TI,e Orcutt frontal fault is intetpreted to have Quatemaryoffset and is considered,
                             potentially active (Jennings, 1994). The 1980 magnitude Mw5.1 earthquake that occurred, '
                             offshore, near the mouth of the Santa Maria River, is plotted along the offshore segment
                             of the Orcutt frontal fault as mapped by Namson and Davis (1990) which suggests that
                             the fault could be seismically active.
                             Cayucos Fault. TI,e C,yucos fault is mapped by Hall (1974, Hall and Prior, 1975) trending
                             nonhwest though the commmtity of C,yucos between the Oceanic and C,mbria fault
                             zones. Hall and Prior (1975) map a trace of this fault zone as the San Bemardo and
                             Morro Bay faults, wltich have not been differentiated from the Cayucos fault for the
                             putposes of this study. Kilbourne and Mualchin (1980b) indicate that the Cayucos fault
                             offsets Oligocene-age sediments but apparently not Miocene-age sediments. Geologic.
                             mapping by CDMG (Yennings, 1994) indicates that the Cayucos fault is ,a pre-Quaternary
                             fault, therefore, the fault is 'considered inactive.
                             Chimineas Fault. Sec San Juan fault.
                             East Huasna Fault Zone. Tbe East Huasna fault zone trends north-northwest for a
                             distance of about 70 kilometers from near Sisquoc in Santa Barbara ComIty northward
                             through the central portion of the Coastal Franciscan domain until it intersects with the
                             South Cuyama fault about 20 kilometers east of the at y of San Luis Obispo. For the
                             most part, the East Huasna fault is located within fairly steep terrain that has not been
                             studied in great detail. Geologic m,pping by Vedder and others (1986a, 1986b, 1988)
                             suggests that the East Huasna fault is a near veltical to steeply westward dipping reverse
                             fault that bounds the eastem flank of the Huasna syncline and locally brings Franciscan
                             basement rocb to the surface. Geologic mapping byCDMG (Jennings, 1994) indicates
                             that the East Huasna fault offsets Quatemary eanh materials, therefore, the fault is
                             considered potentially active.
                             Edna Fault. See Los Osos and Edna fault 7.ones.
Coumy and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                             Technical Background Report
58
San Luis Obispo County, is poorly understood and may be attributed to movement on
other faults such as the active San Simeon or potentially active Rinconada fault zones.
                   As described by Lettis and others (1994), the Oceano fault is a 20-
kilometer-long notthwest-striking reverse fault that extends from north of Santa Maria
expressed. On the basis of subsurface geophysical and well data from the Nipomo area,
the fault is interpreted to dip 40 to 50 degrees to the northeast with an offset of as much
probably dies out in the Sama Maria Valley. Nonhwesterly, near the coast, estimates of
the slip mte along the onshore ponion of the fault are based on vertical separation of an
of probable Pliocene or early Pleistocene age. Oil and water well data indicates that the
vertical separation of that unconfonnity in the Nipomo area is about 77 to 126 meters
Review of the existing infonnation by Asquith (1997) suggests that there is no evidence
from existing geophysical data, well data, or exposures within the bluffs of Nipomo
of one to two million years for the unconfonuity underlying Quatemary deposits yields
a net slip mte for the Oceano fault of 0.04 to 0.20 nm:.! yr near Nipomo, decreasing to
deposits, the Oceano fault is conservatively considered to be potentially active by current
state standards (fermings, 1994). TI,ere is no evidence that the fault should be classified
Oceanic Fault_ See West Huasna/Oceanic Fault Zone.
                 See San Miguelito fault.
Orcutt Frontal-Pezzoni Fault.
Pecho Fault. The northwest-trending Pecha fault lies entirelyelfshore west and south
expressed geomorphically by a trend of discontinuous seafloor scarps that extends about
five kilometers from near the Hosgri fault zone at the latitude of Pecho Creek southeast
scarps in Franciscan or middle Teniary bedrock TI,e fault is interpreted to be a nearly
vertical to steeply nonheast-dipping reverse fault that displaces early Pleistocene sediments
 18,000 years), the fault is considered to be potentially active.
Pezzoni Fault.
Pismo Fault. H111 (1973a) maps a fault trace nonh and adjacent to the Wumar Avenue
form the westem margin of the Santa Lucia Range. Lettis and others (1994) indicates
the Pislllo fault dismpts lower Miocene Pliocene rocks, but not Quanemary sediments.
Reliz Fault. See Rinconada Fault.
 TcchniGli Background Report
                               Rinconada Fault. TI,e Rinconada fault is characterized bya linear, natTOW, near-vertical
                               zone of faults about 189 kilometers long that is located along the westem margin of the
                               La Panza Range. The Rinconada fault is inferred to be part of a zone of faults including
                               the Jolon, San Marcos, Espinosa, and Reliz faults that extends from Monterey Bay
                               southward to its jWlCture with the Nacimiento fault (Hart 1976; 1985).
                               As described by I-fan (1976), the Rinconada fault zone is well defined over most of its
                               length and is recognized as one of several closely spaced, parallel to branching faults that
                               clearlytmncate all pre-Quatemarygeologic units. Large-scale strike-slip movement along
                               the fault zone is indicated bya predominance of right-lateral displaced drainages along
                               various segments of tlus fault. TI,e Rinconada fault clearly offsets the Paso Robles
                               Formation indicating Pliocene to early Pleistocene activity. Late Pleistocene to Holocene
                               activity is suggested by sag ponds, locally offset and clockwise-rotated drainages, faint
                               aerial photographic lineaments in younger alluviwn in the Rinconada drainage area, and
                               possible crudely located, scattered seisrnic epicenters in the vicinity of the mapped trace"
                               of the fault zone.
                               Based on Hart (1985), COMG (1996) has assigned a long-term slip rate of 3 mm/yr to
                               the fault. Hart (1985) indicates that evidence of late Quartemary displacement of the
                               fault is indirect but fairly strong based on a preponderance of well-defined, large-scale
                               geomorphic features. I-Iart further states that the lack of geomorphic features in young
                               alluvium, normally associated with stril<eslip faults, suggests the fault has been inactive
                               during the Holocene tinle. Nonetheless, COMG considers the Rinconada fault to be
                               potentially active.                       ' ". .                    , ,(
                               San Andreas Fault Zone. TIle San Andreas fanlt zone is located along the eastern
                               border of San Luis Obispo CoWltY. TIus lusroricallyactive fault has a length of over 960
                               kilometers and forms the tectonic bOtmdary between the Pacific Plate to tl,e west and the
                               North American Plate to the east. NWllerous major earthquakes have been recorded on
                               the San Andreas fault, and it is generally considered to pose the greatest earthquake risk
                               to California. The San Andreas fault is ukelycapable of producing a maximwn credible
                               earthquake of magnitude M w 8.25.
                               The San Andreas fault has been divided into several seg~nts (Working Group; 1988;
                               Working Gronp of C'llifonua Earthquake Probabilities, 1995; COMG, 1996). The Oroiame
                               segment extends from o,olame southeastward for about 62 kilometers. o,aracteristic
                               fault displacement along this segment of the San Andreas fault is approximately5±·2
                               meters, with a slip rate of 34 ± 5 millimeters per year (Working Group on Califonua
                               Eanhquake Probabilities, 1995). TIlls segment has an earthquake recurrence interval of
                               437 years for a magnitude M w 6.9 event.
                               The Carrizo segment of the San Andreas fault extends from southeast of o,olame for
                               approximately 145 kilometers. TI,e estimated recurrence interval for earthquakes along'
                               tllls segment is 206 years, witll a sup mte of 34 ± 5.0 millimeters per year, and a displacement
                               of 7 ± 4 meters (Working Group on California Earthquake Probabilities, 1995). TIlls
                               studypredicts an 18 percent probability of a mpture on the 010Iame and Carrizo segments
                               of the San Andreas fault for the period between 1994 and 2024.
                               The San Andreas fault is zoned under the Alquist-Priolo act as shown on
                               Map 2. Historically, activity on the San Andreas fault includes the 1857 Fort Tejon
                               earthqual<e that is believed to have ruptured 345 kilometers of the Parkfield, o,olame,
                               Carrizo and Mojave segments of the fault with a magrutude Mw 7.8 earthquake.
COUnly and effies of SaJJ Luis Obispo                                                                Technical Background Report
62

                          See Cayucos fault.
 San Juan Fault.
 Andreas fault (Han aud others, 1986). Vedder aud others (1986c) map an extension of
 tlus fault zone as the dUnUneas fault through the Chimineas Ranch area. Dibblee (1973)
Juan fault into the C,rrizo Plain area. 'TI,e dumineas and Big Spring faults have not been
 differentiated from the Sanjuan fault forthe pUlposes of this study. TI,e fault is located
 Pleistocene and possibly Holocene deposits. TIle estimatedmaxi.mmn moment magnitnde
for the San Juan fault is M].O. Slip rates for the approximately 68·kilometer-l0m fault
 are estimated to range from 0.75 to 2.50 mm/yt (Anderson, 1984), On the basis-of the
 repmted fault displacements, the San Juan fault is classified as potentially active.
 San Luis Bay Fault. On the basis of onshore geologic studies, offshore drill holes, and
 geophysical data (pG&E, 1988), the San Luis Bayfault is intelpreted to be a west-nonhwest
striking reverse fault located along the coast near Avila Beach. Geologic data presented
 by PG&E suggests that the San Luis Bay fault has a maximum length of about 19
 kilometers (including both onshore and offshore segments). TI,e onshore ponion of the
fault is estimated to have a length of 4.5 kilometers (pG&E, 1988). In the near· surface,
 the fault dips about 15 to 40 degrees to the nonh, however the dips steepen to about 70
degrees at depth. Long-term slip rates estimated from offset marine terraces are in the
 range of 0.02 to 0.11 mm/yt, suggesting a fairly low activity and recurrence intervals of
about 35,000 years for a magnitude Mw6 eanhquake (PG&E;··1988). Mapping by Lettis
and others (1994) indicates that the fault cuts strata of Pleistocene age terrace deposits;
and is considered potentially active by COMG.
San Luis Range Margin. See San Luis Bay, Wilmar Avenue, Olson, and Santa Maria
River faults.
San Marcos Fault. See Rinconada Fault.
San Miguclito Fault. TI,e San Miguelito fault is a.. 9,~lillomcter-Iong, west-northwest·
striking zone within the San Luis Range located along the soutl)western margin of the
San Luis Obispo syncline. As described by Lettis and others (1994), the fault juxtap~~es
Miocene and Pliocene volcanic and sedinlentary rocks on the nonheast ag,llnst Mesozoic
 basement rocks on tl,e southwest, and is interpreted to be a high-angle, generally northeast-
dipping fault zone with predominately normal dip-slip displacement. TI,e northwestern
part of the fault is characterized by intense folding and some localized shearing, but no
mappable fault traces (dark and others, 1988). Faulted upper Pliocene rocks of the Pismo
Formation show that movement along the fault has occurred since late Pliocene (Hall
 1973, 1981). Trenching studies and detailed mapping by Lettis and others (1994) indicates
that the San Miguelito fault is not an active late Quatemary stmcture. On the basis of
studies by Lettis and others (1994) the San Miguelito fault is considered inactive.
West of the mappable trace of the San Miguelito fault, the Olson Trace has been mapped
by Lettis and others (1994) on the basis of a dismption in the marine tell'ace sequence.
'The Olson Trace is interpreted to trend approximately cast-west ".jth a moderate to
steep dip to the north, and is apparently primarily an up·to-the-nonh reverse slip fault
(Lettis and others, 1994). The Olson Trace is considered inactive by COMG,
San Simeon-Hosgri Fault Zone. TI,e San Simeon-Hosgri fault system generally consists
of two fault zones: the Hosgri fault zone represented bya series of faults that arc mapped
TcciJniGlJ Background Repurt
                                                                                               63

                               off of the San Luis Obispo Omnty coast; and the San Simeon fault zone, which appears
                              to be associated ",>ith the Hosgri, and comes onshore ncar the pier at San Simeon Point.
                              Hanson and Lettis (1994) map a westem trace of tIlls fault zone as the Arroyo del Oso
                              fault. Manson (1985) refers to the eastem-most trace of the faults as the Arroyo Laguna
                              fault. For the purposes of tIlls study, the Anoyo del Oso and Arroyo Laguna faults have
                              not been differentiated from the San Simeon fault.
                              TIlis fault system has been the subject of considerable investigation and debate regarding
                              its slip rate, sense of slip, soutbem tennination, and dipping geometry (Qark and others,
                               1994). On the basis of studies by I-Ianson and Lettis (1994) and I-Iall and others (1994),
                              the San Simeon fault zone appears to be a narrow zone or a single fault at San Sinleon
                              Bay, but north of the bay, it appears to splinter into several branches. On the basis of
                              displaced Holocene-age sediments, investigators estimate Holocene-age slip rates in the
                              range of 1 to 3 nU11!yr. Two of the San Simeon fault strands yield net slip estimates of
                              three to seven feet per event. On the basis of the slip rate and net slip· per event,.Hall and-
                              others (1994) estimated a reCUlTence interval of 600 to 1,800 years for large surface
                              events on the fault. TI,ese studies have determined that the San Simeon fault zone shows
                              multiple displacements of Holocene deposits. Therefore, the fault is considered to be
                              active Gennings, 1994), and a Earthquake Fault Zone has been established along strands
                              of the fault by the Division of Mines and GeologYilllder the Alquist-Priolo act as indicated
                              onM~p 2.
                              The Hosgri fault zone has been interpreted to extend from the northem. tennination.
                              west of the southem San Simeon fault in the Cambria/Point Estero area to its sauthem ..
                              termination offshore of Point Pedemales (PG&E, 1988). 111e fault is located entirely
                              offshore, where conventional geologic mapping and paleoseisnllc studies cannot be
                              perfornled. On the basis of geoph)~ical work bySteritz and Luyendyk (1994), the Hosgri
                              fault is characterized as a near-veltical oblique right-slip fault along most of its length.
                              An altemative interpretation of the southem Hosgri fault zone byGllnmllgs and Jolmson·
                              (1994) suggests that both the vertical and latel"l slip decreases to the south and the fault
                              dies out offshore from Point Arguello. On the basis of studies perfolTl1ed for PG&E
                              (1988), the Hosgri fault (offshore and not rated) is interpreted to have late Quaternary
                              strike-slip displacement along a ·lllgh-angle northwest strike fault zone ..
                              Santa Lucia Bank/Offshore Faults. Mapping by PG&E (1988) has identified a zone
                              of defolTl1ed marine platfonns interpreted to be the Santa Lucia Bank fault zone. The
                              zone trends northward off the coast of San Luis Obispo ('DillltY. The zone of faulting
                              was interpreted from geophysical logs of the offshore area as part of the Diablo Canyon
                              project and USGS f,mded research for offshore oil potential. Jennings (1994) indicates
                              portions of the Santa Lucia Bank fault zone to be active. The remaining portions apparently
                              show Quatemary offset and are considered potentially active. The fault is mapped by
                              Jennings (1994) at least 30 kilometers off of the San Luis Obispo CDunry coast at its
                              closest point.
                              In addition to the Santa Lucia Bank fault zone, there are numerous untlamed offshore
                              faults shown on regional geologic maps. TI,ese faults typically are depicted as extensions
                              of onshore faults or as discontinuous, fairly short thrust fault segmcnts that are generally
                              less than five kilometers i.nlength. As with the Hosgri and Pecho faults, there is a high
                              degree of difficulty involved with evaluating these faults because they cannot be directly
                              observed. The existing geophysical data gener.llly is from deep seisnllc exploration and
                              does not include shallow subsurface data acquisition that could be used to estimate fault
                              activity. If the discontinuous fault elements represent a continuous fault surface, there is
                              a potential for eanhquakes on some of the unnamed features to occur.
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                             Technical Background Report
64

Santa Maria River and Foxen Canyon Faults. TI,e Santa M~ria River and Foxen Canyon
faults are buried northwest-striking reverse faults that extend from south of Sisquoc in
Santa Barba!" County about 40 kilometers northward to north of Nipomo. TI,e faults
have no surface expression where concealed by late Pleistocene and Holocene alluvium
(Manson, 1985). TI,e fault trace is buried and is inferred to parallel the Santa M.aria River
and U.S. Highway 101 on the basis of interpretation of oil well and seismic data. TI,e
fault zone is mapped byJennings (1994) as extending into the southem end of the Wilinar
Avenue fanlt zone, and shows the Santa M.aria River fault as potentially active.
Serrano Fault. See West Huasna/ Oceanic fault zone.
South Cuyama Fault. TI,e South Q,yama fault is located in the Salini,m domain. It
extends from roughly New Cuyama northwest to Garcia Mownain, a distance of
approximately61 kilometers. TI,e South Cuyama fault is a west dipping thmst or reve"e
faultresponsible forthe uplift of the Sierra M.adre Range (Oark and othe." ,1994) , and is
potentially active (Dibblee, 1971; Jennings, 1994).
Sur-Nacimiento Fault. See Nacimiento Fault Zone.
West Huasna/ Oceanic Fault Zone. TI,e West HU;Lmai Oceanic fault zone trends north-
northwest for approximately 100 kilometers through the central portion of the Coastal
Franciscan domain. The fault extends from approximately the Santa M.ariaRiver on the
south to San Sinleon on the north. Hall and Prior (1975) map a trace of tllls fault zone as
the Serrano fault ncar Morro Bay, wlllch has not been differentiated from the largerWest
Huasna-Oeealllc fault zone for the purposes of tllls study. TI,e West Huasnafault; as
mapped by Jcmlings (1994), extends about 30kilomete" from the Santa Maria River
northward to near San Lnis Obispo. TI,e Oceanic fault continues northward from near
San Lnis Obispo to San Simeon.
Hill (1973a) interprets the West Huasna fault zone to consist of low- to high-angle reve"e
faults cut bya younger set of nearly vertical faults. The last recoglllzable movement along
the fault zone took place during the late Miocene. More recent episodes of faulting
during tlte late Pliocene and Pleistocene are possible if the West Huasna and Edna fault
zones have the same history (rL1ll, 1973a). CDMG '(fellnings, 1994) cons ide" the West
Huasna fault to have late Quatemary movement, therefore the fault is considered
potentially active.
Whiterock Fault. TI,e Whiterock fault is mapped as a parallel tlmlst to the Morales
fault towmls the westerly end of tl,e Q,yama Valley. Jemlings (1994) indicates that the
W1llterock fault is inactive.
Wilmar Avenue Fault. TIle westem segment of the WIlmar Avenue fault stril,es west-
northwest and extends westward from Arroyo Grande Creek ahout seven kilometers to
an area offshore near Pismo Beach, where the fault is exposed in the seacliff. At Arroyo
Grande Creek, the eastern segment of the fault extends in a southeasterly direction
following U.S. Hghway 101 to the Santa M.aria River. The fault is known primarily from
a sea cliff exposure ncar Wumar Avenue in the Crt)' of Pismo Beach, where it displaces
the 120,000-year-old telTaCe a vertical distance of 6.4 meters (Nitchman and SleI11I11ons,
1994).
As discussed by Nitchman and Slemmons (1994), the eastem segment of the Wumar
Avenue fault extends approximately six kilomete" between Price Canyon and Arroyo
Gr.mde Creek The eastem section of the fault is not exposed at the surface and is
interpreted as a blind reve"e fault that has fonued a surlicialmonocline. 11,at interpretation
Trdmical Background Report                                                              County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                       65
                              is based partially upon geologic data obtained from the "Fanl1boy" quarry where there
                              are steeply folded rocks on the north side of u.s. Highway 101 and essentially flat rocks
                              of about the same age on the south side of the highway.                                           (
                              Mapping by Nitchnlan and Slemmons (1994) indicates that the westem segment of the
                              Wumar Avenue fault, located northwesterly of Arroyo Grande veek, has displaced late
                              Quatemary nlarine terrace deposits, but extensive urban development along the projected
                              trace of the fault preclude recognition of possible Holocene activity. On the basis of the
                              available geologic data, the Wumar Avenue fault should be considered as potct;tiallyactive.
                              However, as discussed by Nitchman and Sleml110ns (1994), the fault is part of the
                              seismogenic southwestem bOlmdaryzone of the San Luis/Pismo block system and could
                              pose a seismic hazard to nearbycol11l11lUtities. Although there is no evidence for surface
                              movement along the eastem fault segment southeast of Arroyo Grande a·eel; that portion
                              of the fault is intetpreted by Nitchlllan and Slemmons (1994) to be a blind thmst fault
                              that has not propagated to the snrface. If that i.nterpretation is correct, there is a potential
                              for the eastem portion of the fault to generate dalllaging earthquakes. Additional studies
                              are needed to further evaluate the seismogenic potential of the fault.
                              Historical Seismicity of San Luis Obispo County. San Luis Obispo Q,untyis located
                              within an active plate nlargin tectonic environment. The central C,lifonlla coast has a
                              ltistory of dalllaging earthquakes, primarily associated with the San AJldreas fault and
                              faults within the Transvel>e Range to the south. However, there are a number of magnitude
                              M w5.0 to Mw6.2 which affected large portions
                                                                       _"
                                                                                of the Central -Q,ast (PG&E,
                                                                             " .'                         -
                                                                                                                  1988).
                                                                                                                   -_'
                                                                                                                         Some
                                                                                                                          .
                              of these historical earthqual<es with amagnitude of 5.0 or greater (compiled byQarkand, .
                              othel>, 1994) are sunm1allzed on Table 4-7.
                              Large historical earthquakes, with magnitudes greaterthan Mw6.5, have occurred only in            (
                              the Transverse Ranges, offshore Santa Maria Basin, and along the San Andreas falUI. "TIle
                              recent seisnllc activity indicated by this historical record (from 1969 to 1989) indicates
                              significant earthquake activity occurred along the San Andreas fault, and moderate activity
                              in a broad area along sections of the Hosgri, San Simeon, Los Osos, Nacintiento and
                              possibly the West Huasna fault zones. The historical earthqual<e record in Califonlla
                              spans less than 200 ycarsand provides orilya partial indication of seismic hazard. The
                              absence of earthquakes on nlany recognized active faults and fault-related .folds. in'
                              Califonlla probably reflects recutrence intervals greater than the ltistoric record, rather
                              than lack of potential for future damaging earthquakes.
                              Earthquakes with nlagnitudes of MwS.O to MwS.5, or less, generally result in minor damage
                              that is typically localized near the epicenter region. Larger earthquakes that have been felt
                              in the Q,unty during the last century have generally occurred outside of the Q,lUlty, and
                              include events such as the Mw7.0 Lompoc eatthquake in 1927 and the MJ.7 Arvin-
                              Tehachapi earthquake of 1952. Other more recent earthquakes, such as the 1983 Q,alinga
                              earthquake (Mw6.7), 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake (M]:l), 1992 Landers earthquake
                              (MJ.5), and the 1994 NOlthridge earthquake (Mw6.6) were felt in the Q,unty; however,
                              no dalllage to stmctures is known to have occurred.
                              An evaluation of the effects that histOllc earthquakes have had in San Luis Obispo Q,unty
                              is useful to document the levels of shaking that have occurred in the past and that lllay
                              likely occur again in the future. Several historic earthquakes are described below.
                              1830 San Luis Obispo Earthquake. The 1830 earthqual<e is noted in the annual report
                              from the Mission, and has an estinmtcd lllagnitude of 5 (PG&E, 1988). The location of
County and Cities of San Luis ObiSpo                                                              TccJll1icai Background Reporl
66

          Table 4·7: Selected Historical Earthquakes with M 5.0 in Coastal Central California
                                           from 1830 through f989
~
                                                                       ;:,.•.. ;'.~
                       ~                  ~
                               Santa r...1aria Basin/San Luis Range Do main
0712819)2                           5
                34.75       120.33             VIII          5.4                E            Los .Alamos area
1211219)2       34.75       120.37 1i           VII          5.0                 F           Los Alamos area
101201913       35.12       120.58'                          5.0                 F         Arroyo Grande area
011201915       34.73       120.23'            VIII          5.8                E            Los Alamos area
                                                                  '.
12.01 1916      35.18        120.73              VI          5.0                 F               Avita area
11l181G27       34.95        120.40              VI          5.0                 F          Santa Maria area
051291980       34.94        120.78              V           5.1                0           Oroutt Frontal faun
                                         Coastal Franciscan Domain
??m1830         353          120.6'             VII          5.0                F         San Luis: Obis: po area
                                                                                                     (?)
02,011053       35.6         121.1'              VI          5.0               D, F        San Simeon area (?)
07.091917       3525        120.48'              VI          5.0                F          Lopez Canyon area
11122 1952      35.77        121.15             VII          6.2                F              Bryson area
081291983       3584         121.34              VI          5.4                G           San Simeon area
                                               Salinian Dom<':lin
11m 1052        359          121.1'                          5.0                F             Poor location
02126 '1932     360           121.0              IV          0.0                B             San Ardo area
091271938       36.45        121.25              V           5.0                B
11.021955       35.96        120.92              VI          5.1                F             S.:m Ardo area
011.231984      3635         121.91               • " b'-- •
                                                             5.2                G             Point Sur area
                                  Western San Joaquin Valey Domain'
03!J61832       36.9         121.2'              VI          5.7                D
08,051915       35.7          121.3             VII          5.5                C             Paicine:s area
071.25 1G25     36.5          120.8              VI          5.0                C                ldria ar~a
12127 1G25      362           120.3             VI           5.0                C             Coalinga area
02.051947       3523         120.55             VI           5.0                8
10125 1982      3532         120.52              VI          5.4                G             New Idria area
05.021983       3623         120.31            VIII          5.7                G          Coalinga earthquake
071221933       3624         120.41             VI           6.0                G          C"aling. aftershock
08,04 '1985     36.18        120.17                          5.7                 I        Kettleman Hills earth·
                                                                                                   qua< •
                                      San Andreas FdlJlt :and Vioinity
01.091057       363          119.8'             IX+          7.9               D,E        rod Tejon earthquake
02.021831       35D          120.5'            VIII          5.6                D         San Andreas fault (?)
                                                                                    County and eWes of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                  67

                Table 4-7: Selected Historical Earthquakes with Mw~5.0 in Coastal Central California
                                             from 1830 through 1989 (continued)
                                          -
                                                                                                                                      (
   ~                                                               ~        ~           ~~                             ~
     03.81 1335           35.7          '121.3'            VII             5.5       D               San Andreas fault (?)
     04.021335            36£           121.41i           V·VI             5.4       D               Sal) Andreas fault (?)
      041'12 1335         36.4          121.0'             VII             B.2       D               San .A.ndreas fault (?)
      11/13 1332          35.8          121.5'             VII             5.5       D               San Andreas fault (?)
     07122 1339           342           '117.46            VII             5.5       D               San Andr.as fault (7)
     07,221339            34.3          117.5'             VIII            13.5      D               San Andreas fault (?)
     03.03 1001           3BD           120.5'             VIII            5.5       C                    Parkfield area
                                                                                        ..                            .
      091201007           342            117.1             VII             5.0       C               San Andreas fault (7)
      12131 1910          35S            121.4             VII             5.0       C                    Hollister area
      10123 1916          34.6           118.9             VII             5.0       C                  T~jon    Pass are:a
      10J23 1Q15          34.7           119.0             VI              5.5       C                  Tejon Pass area
     02t16l19'19          35D           119.0'             VII             5.0       C                  Tejon P.ass area
      031'101922         35.75          120.25              IX             5.5       8               Cholame VallE!y area
      081'181922         3575            120.3             VII             5.D·· ;   C     I ...·..· Cti·olam·eVam:!"~/:.ar"e"a':' I·
     05,051934           35BO           120.33              V   .,         5.0       8
                                                                                        .                P;;lIkfield  area
     06.081934           3520           120.33             VIII            6.0       B                   Parkfield area
      12J241G34          35.93          120.48             IV              5.0       B                   Par1<field area
     061241939           86BO           121.45             VII             5.5       8                    Hollister area
      12/281939           35BO          120,38              V              5,0       8                   Partdield area
      09121 1941         34.87          118.93             VI              5.2       A                 Cuddy Valley area
     0712911951          35.58          121.18             VI              5.0       B             Southeast of Mulbi;!rry
      111'15 1955        3595           120.47             VI              5.0       B            SO"lJtillflJesfo'f Coalinga
     0'1/20 1960         35.78          121.43             VI              5.0       8                 South of Holliste-r
      06128 1966          3597          120.50                             5.1       B                P a rkfi eld s eq u enoe
      061281965          35.95          120.50             VII             5.6       8                P andield sequence
      09t12 1970         3427           117.54             VII             5.4       Go                 Lytle CreEl< area
      021241972          3658           121.21             VI              5.0     ,
                                                                                     Go              Southeast of HolH.der
    Reft::rence Index! Symbol Legend
       A      Hileman and others, 1973
       8      Bott and tu1i11er " 1975
       C      Toppozada and Qth~rs. 1978
       D      Toppco:ada et al" 1981
       E      Yeri<es, 1986
       F      PGo&E, 1988
       Go     U.S. Geologioal Sunn?y Earthqu.:J<e Catalog
       H      Hauks$ on and others, 1938
        I     HUI and others. 1900
       f.i    t·~onin$trum~nt.alloc.atiort$. oE!stimated from int~ns-it~( data
       ?      Indicate il'lformation is not pr8ois€!ty  kn~/lJn
County and Cities of S'an Luis Obispo                                                                Technical Background Report
68

the event is poorly constrained and cannot be attributed to a specific fault source, but the
c<lrthquake reportedly occurred somewhere near San Luis Obispo.
1906 San Francisco Earthquake. TIlls earthquake has been studied in detail and the
effects in San Luis Obispo County have been documented. Modified Mercalli intensity
mUngs ranged from III· IY in the inland and north coast portions of the O)tllty, and IY·
Y in the south coast ·areas. TI,e higher intensities were felt in areas tllderlain by alluvial
soil, wIllIe the lower intensities occnrrcd in areas underlain by bedrock formations.
1916 Avila Beach Earthquake. TIlls magllltude Mw5.1 event occurred offshore of Avila
Beach in San Luis Bay. TI,e earthquake reportedly resulted in tumbling smokestacks of
the Union Oil Refinelyat Port San Luis, and a landslide that blocked the milroad tracks.
The maximum intensity appears to be approximately VI (PG&E, 1988), but the available
descriptions of the shaking are somewhat limited.
1952 Arvin-Tehachapi Earthquake. TI,is M].7 magllltude earthquake occurred on
the Wlllte Wolf fault, located south and west of Bakersfield. TIlroughout most of the
CoWlty, ground shaking intensities of VI were felt. Intensities of IY· Y were experienced
in the northwest portion of the County, and magnitude VIII .intensities were felt in the
Oly,tma area, in the southeast portion of the o,Wlly. TI10 higher intensities were likely
due to closer proxinilty to the earthquake epicenter.
1952 Bryson Earthquake. TIlis magnitude Mw 6.2 earthquake likely occurred on the
Nacinllento fault, and resulted in intensity ratings of VI throughout most of. tlle westem
portion of the County. Intensities of IY· Y were experienced in the eastern portion of.
the County. Higher intensities were gener,tllyfelt in the coastal valley areas that are underlain
by alluvial soils.
1934 and 1966 Parkfield Earthquakes. TIlese earthquakes had magnitudes of Mw6.0
and Mw5.5, respectively, and occurred on the San Andreas fault in the nOltheast comer
of the County. Earthquake intensities generally conformed to anticipated characteristics
for events of this size, with intense shaking (VII· VIII) heing limited to a relatively small
area near the epicenters of the quakes. Moderate shakiJlg,was experienced in most of the
central and western parts of the County. A variation from the ~xpected int,ensity
characteristics W.1S experienced in the La Panza area during the 1934 earthquake. La Panza
is approximately 40 miles south of the fault mpture area, but experienced earthquake
intensities of VII.
Fault Rupture
Hazard Description
A fault is a fmcnrre in the earth's cmst along which movement has occurred either suddenly
during earthquakes or slowlydurillg a process called creep. Cltmulative displacement may
be tens or even hundreds of miles if movement occurs over geologic time. However,
individual episodes are generally small, usually less than several feet, and are commonly
separated by tens, hundreds, orthousands of years. Damage associated with fault· related
ground mpture is nOffilally confined to a fairly narrow band along the trend of the fault.
Stmctures are often not able to withstand fault mpture and utilities crossing faults arc at
risk of damage. Fault displacement involves forces so great that it is gener,illynot feasible
(stmcturallyor econonllcally) to design and build Stlucturcs to accollill1odate this rapid
displacenlent.
Geologic research (Zionyand Yerkes, 1985) has shown that historically active and active
faults 0.e., those with Holocene displacement) are the most W,e1y sources for potential
 TcdmicaJ Hackground Report                                                                CouJl(yaml Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                           69

                             damage associated with fault rupture. 1110 Alquist-Priolo Earthquake J:-Lozard Zone Act
                             (AP) was developed by the State of Ctlifomia to regulate development near active faults
                             and mitigate the smface fault rupture hazard. The Act identifies active earthquake fault
                             zones and restricts building habitable structures over known active or potentially active
                             faults. Out of necessity, utilities, roads, and bridges often cross known active and potentially
                             active faults.
                             Fault displacement can also occur ill the form of barely perceptible moycment called
                             "fault creep." Damage by fault creep is usually expressed by the mpture or bending of
                             buildings, fences, railroads, streets, pipelines, curbs, and other linear features. Excellent
                             examples of fault creep can be seen in the Carrizo Plain area of eastem San Luis Obispo
                             GlUnty where gradnal creep on the San Andreas fault has offset stream beds, roadways,
                             and fence lines. In addition, there is also 11,e potential for coseismic creep, where movement
                             on a fault is triggered by an earthquake on another nearby fault.
                             As mentioned above, historically active and active faults are gener.lllythought to present
                             the greatest risk for future movement and, therefore, have the greatest potential to result
                             in fault rupture hal-ards. A conmlon problem in detennining where ground displacement
                             may occur is identifying the location of the fault. Mony faults are hidden beneath deep
                             accumulations of soil. Additionally, fault displacement may occur in rupture'zones (similar
                             to the Landers and Lama Prieta earthquakes) instead of along a single fault trace. Another
                             consideration is that detailed geologic studies have not been perfomled in large portions
                             of San Luis Obispo Caunty. With the difficulties associated With mitigating the effects
                             of fault rupture and in detennining the precise location of faults,' the most 'effecti~e
                             method to minimize fault rupture hazard is to avoid placing structures in proxuruty to'
                             suspected fault locations.
                             Because of the presence of munerous active and potentially active faults in San Luis
                             Obispo Calmty, it is appropriate to consider the potential for ground surface rupture due
                             to faulting. Portions of the Los Osos, San Suneon-Hosgri, and San Andreas faults have
                             been designated active by CDMG under the Alquist-Priolo Fault Zoning Act legislation.
                             The approxinlate limits of the earthquake fault zones recommended byCDMG are shown
                             on Map 2. Guidelines for evaluating and mitigating seismic hazards in California are
                             discussed in a recent publication by CDMG (1997).
                             Effects of Surface Rupture
                             Permanent effects of ground displacement may ulclude ablupt changes Ul me ground
                             sUlface elevation, damage and possible destruction of structures, alteration of surface
                             draulage pattems, changes in groUlld water levels, misaligmnent of streets, and changes
                             Ul the gradient of sewer and water utilities. A qualitative description of fault hazard
                             potential is presented below.
                                                                Table 4-8: Fault Rupture Hazard
                                        ,,:-.-
                                  .i':,'1;.~··-
                                    Very Low
                                    Low               Crosses fault thought to     b~ inilctrofe.
                                    MQderate          Crosses potentially aciive fault
                                                      C r ('SS es a
                                    V~rv        High  Crosses acthr(! taulhl\lrt:h Historical offset
County and ClUes of San Luis ObL~J)()                                                                TccJlllicai Background Report
70

  Unincorporated San luis Obispo County
  Fault Rupture Hazard Potential
  Active and potentially active faults in San Luis Obispo u,wltyare shown on Map 2.
  Active faults identified by the Alquist-Priolo Fault Zoning set include the San Andreas,
 San Sinaeon-Hosgri, and Los Osos faults. Fault zonation is continually updated and
  reviewed by CDMG, and it is likely that other faults in addition to those currently listed
. by CDMG will be added to the list in the future.
 Tables 4-4, 4-5, and 4-6 list major faults that have been mapped in San Luis Obispo
  u,unty. The potential for fault mpture hazards along other faults listed in Table 4-4 as
 inactive faults is generally considered to be low. However, tills hazard should be considered
  when placing a stmeture near or over any suspected fault location.
 The following paragraphs briefly discuss the fault mpture hazard potential for the.several .
  unincorporated areas of the U,Ullty including Cambria, G~yucos, Nipomo, Oceano, the
  South Bay area, San Miguel, Sama M,rgarita, and Templeton.
  Cambria
  Mapped faults in the vicinity of Cambria include the G~mbria and Oceanic faults, and the
 offshore Hosgri fault. Although the offshore Hosgri fault is considered to be active and
  a W,ely source for future seismic events, it does not itself provide a fault mpture hazard
  to onshore facilities.
 111e potentially active Cambria fault consists of a complex web of thmst faults tim trend
  northwest along Highway 1 into the town of Cambria. In the vicinity of Cambria, ilie
  fault zone extends from the eastem ponion of the town eastward for about two kilometers.
 'The potentially active Oceanic fault zone (Jennings, 1994) consist.s of a zone of nonhwest
  trending faults located about 8 kilometers northeast of Cambria. Because the faults are
 considered to be potentially active, they present a moderate fault mpture hazard to the
  town of Cambria. Funher studies to evaluate the activity of the faults are warranted prior
  to placing stmctures near the mapped fault traces,
  Cayucos                                                   ".",                       .' .'.
  Faults in the vicinity of Cayucos include the Cayucos, Cambria, and Oceanic fault zones.
  Geologic mapping by Kilboume and Mualchin (1980) and H~ll and Prior (1995) mapped
  the buried trace of the nOMwest striking G~yucos fault beneath the town of Cayucos.
  TI,e fanIt is considered to be inactive and therefore results in a low potential to serve as a
 fault mpture hazard. Although CDMG considers the Cayucos fault to be inactive (Jennings,
  1994), it is often undesirable to site structures over any fault as a result of nonuniform
  fowldation suppon conditions and the potential for coseismic movement that could
  result from eanhquakes on other nearby faults.
 The northwest striking Oceanic fault zone is located about two kilometers northeast of
  Cayucos. The Cambria fault zone is mapped by H,ll and Prior (1975) as going offshore
  north of Cayucos, and rettlluing to shore as a broad zone of faults passing through
  Cayucos between the cemetety and Willow Oeek. These faults arc considered to be
  potentially active and therefore present a moderate fault mpture hazard. Funher studies
  to evaluate the activity of the faults are warranted, prior to placing structures near the
  mapped fault traces.
  TccJmicaJ Bilckground Report                                                            Coumy iJnd Cil ies of San Luis' Obispo
                                                                                                                           71
                               Nipomo
                               TI,e faults in the Nipomo area include the Santa Maria River, Wumar Avenue, Oceano
                               and West Huasna faults. '11,e buried trace of the Santa Maria River/Wumar Avenue fawt
                               is inferred to parallel U.S. Highway 101 in the vicinity of Nipomo. TI,e Oceano fawt
                               generally is trending nonhwest across the Nipomo Mesa and into the town of Oceano.
                               TI,e West Huasna fault is mapped along the eastem side of the valley. As discussed in the
                               fault descriptions ponion of the tcxt, those faults gencmlly have a subdued topographic
                               expression and are considered to be potentially active by COMG. Review of the Oceano
                               fawt by Asquith (1997) suggests that the fault is inactive. On the basis of that infonnation,
                               potentially active faults present moderate fault rupture hazard in the Nipomo area. 'The
                               inactive Oceano fault presents a very low potential as a fawt rupture hazard. Although
                               the Oceano fawt is inactive, it is often midesirable to site structures over any fault as a
                               reswt of nonunifonn foundation suppon conditions and the potential for coseismic
                               movement that could result from eanhquakes on other nearby faults. Funher studies to
                               evaluate the activity of the Wmnar Avenue and West Huasna faults are w,uTanted, prior
                               to placing structures near the mapped fawt traces.
                               Oceano
                               TI,e only known mapped fault in the vicinity of Ocea1)o is the Oceano fault. TI,e buried
                               trace of the potentially active Oceano fault is interpreted to strike nonhwest along the
                               southwestem side of the Gcnega Valley about 1,000 meters southwest .of Oceano, and
                               goes offshore near the mouth of Anaya Grande Creek Although the fawt is classified
                               as potentially active by COMG, review of the Oceano fault by Asquith (1997) suggests.
                               that the fatut is inactive. TI,e Oceano' fault presents a very low faWI rupture. hazard to
                               Oceano. Although the Oceahofawt is likely inactive, it is often undesrrable to sitestructures
                               over any fault as a result of nonunifonn foundation suppon conditions and the potential
                               for coseismic movement that could result from eanhquakes on other nearby fawts.
                               South Bay
                               As discussed herein, the South Bay area includes the communities of Los Osos, GIesta-
                               by-the-Sea, Baywood Park, and the south Morro Bay area. Mapped fawts in the South
                               Bay area include the active Los Osos fawt. As mapped by Lettis and others (1994), the
                               Los Osos fawt consists of a several hundred meter wide zone of west-nonhwest sttiking
                               lineaments and scarps located along the southem side of the Los Osos Valley Portions ..
                               of the Los Osos fawt have been zoned active by COMG (Treinlan, 1989). Several
                               investigators (Lenis and others, 1994; Asquith 1997) have postlliated that a splay of the
                               Los Osos fault trends northwest beneath the town of Los Osos. Asquith (1997) provides
                               the most detailed evaluation of the fault's location, and has mapped the splay just west
                               and running parallel to the extension of Farrell Avenue. The location of the "Strand B"
                               splay of the Los Osos fawt is shown on Map 2.
                               As discussed previously, the activity of this fault segment is unknown, but is inferred to
                               be at least potentially active or possibly active. On the basis of growld water data;Asquith
                               (1997) infers that the nonhwest-southeast strilcing fault splay is an effective ground water
                               barrier in wind blown sand fOlTIlations at shallow depths, suggesting that the fault is
                               active. This could be of concem because the inferred fault splay is located several hWldred
                               feet south of the South Bay frre station and the Sunnyside Elementary School. On the
                               basis of this infonnation, the Los Osos fault and related branches present a moderate to
                               very high fault rupture hazard to the. area. Funher studies to evaluate the location and
                               activity of the fault arc warr.mted, prior to placing structures ncar the mapped fault
                               traces.
County and Cities of SaIl Luis Obispo                                                              Technical Background Report
72
San Miguel
As indicated on Map 2, the data reviewed does not indicate that there are mapped active
or potentially active faults in San Miguel.
Santa Margarita
11,e only mapped fault ill the Santa Mlrgarita area is the potentially active Rillconada
fault. 'TI,e fault trends northwest through d,e Santa Margarita area near Pozo Road, Trout
Creek, and the Salinas River. According to Hart (1985), although there is a preponderance
of evidence d,at indicates movement along the Rinconada fault during the late Quartemary,
the fault lacks any geomorphic features within ymmg allnvium to suggest the fault is
active. Because the Rinconada fault is potentially active, it poses a moderate fault mpture
hazard to this area. Further studies to evaluate the activity of the faults are warranted;
prior to placing structures near the mapped fault traces.
Templeton
'TI,e only mapped fault in the Templeton area is d,e western trace of the potentially active
Rinconada fault system referred to as the Jolon fault. 11,e fault trends northwest through
the community just south of the junction of Highways 46 and 101. According to Han
(1985), although there is a preponderance of evidence that indicates movement along the
Rinconada fault during the late Quanernary, the fault lacks any geomorphic features
within young alluvium to suggest the fault is active. Because the Rinconada fault is
potentially active, it poses a moderate fault rupture hazard to tlus area. Fnnher studies to
evaluate the activity of the faults are warranted, priorto placing stmctures ncar the mapped
fault traces.                                               . '. J,. ,
Arroyo Grande
 Fault Rupture Hazard Pomntial
Mapped faults in the aty of Arroyo Grande are the potentially active Wliruar Avenue
fault and the inactive Pismo fault. As described by Nitclunan and Slemmons (1994), the
Wilmar Avenue fault is exposed in the seacliff near Pismo Beach and the buried trace of
the fault is infelTed to strike northwest-southeast parallel and adjacent to   u.s.  Highway
 101 beneath ponions of Arroyo Grande. Within IDe aty limits, the Wilmar Avenue fault
is mostly concealed by deep alluvium along Arroyo Grande Creek The potentially active
fault presents a moderate potential fault rupture hazard to the aty.The inactive Pismo
fault presents a very low potential fault mpture hazard. Further studies to evaluate the
activity of the faults are warranted, prior to placing structures near the mapped fault
traces.
Atascadero
Fault Rupture Hazard Pomntial
 Mapped faults in the vicinity of Atascadero are the potentially active Rinconada f"ilt and
the Nacinliento fault zones. The Rinconada falilt and its western associated fault, the
Jolon, is mapped trending nonhwest along the eastern aty limits. 11,e fault mostly lies
east of the Salinas River and outside the aty limits. According to Han (1985), although
 there is a preponderance of evidence that indicates movement along the Rinconada fault
during the latc Quanemary, the fault lacks any geolllOlpluc features within yo'mg alluvium
to suggest the fault is active. Because the Rinconada fault is potentially active, it presents
a moderate fault rupture hazard to the at y of Atascadero. Further studies to evaluate the
activity of the faults are warranted, prior to placing structures near the mapped fault
 traces.
11,e Nacimiento fault zone consists of a nearly 10-kilometer wide northwest trending,
complex fault zone located in the Santa Lucia Range of southwest Atascadero. 11,e
 Technical Background Report                                                             County amI Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                        73
                               Nacimiento fault zone is classified as inactive byCDMG Gelmings, 1994), but is believed
                               to  be coincident with the location of the epicenter for historic emthquakes that suggest
                               the fault is seismically active. Given the uncertainty of the Nacimiento fault's activity,
                               further studies to evaluate the activity of the faults are warranted, priono placing structures
                               near the ll1.1pped fault traces.
                               Grover Beach
                               Fault Rupture Hazard Potential
                               The only mapped fault near Grover Beach is the potentially active Wumar Avenue fault.
                               As described by Nitchman and Slemmons (1994), the Wilmar Avenue fault is exposed in
                               the seacliff near Pismo Beach and the buried trace of the fault is inferred to strike
                               northwest-southeast generally along the alignment of U.S. Highway 101 past Grover
                               Beach. The mapped location of the fault runs along a pOltion of the northern city limits
                               for Grover Beach. TI,e Wumar Avenue fault apparently offsets late Quaternary deposits;
                               therefore, it is considered potentially active and presents a..moderate fault rupture ,hazard.
                               to the Oty. Further studies to evaluate the activity of the fault are warranted, prior to
                               placing stluctures near the mapped fault traces.
                               Morro Bay
                               Fault Rupture Hazard Potential
                               The only known mapped faults in the OtyofMorro Bayare the potentially active Cambria
                               fault and possible splays of the active Los Osos fault system TIle C,mbria fault is mapped
                               within the eastern limits of the Oty. The Cambria fault consists ,of a complex s)~tem of
                               thrust faults located primarily in the hill~ northeast of Morrei Bay Thepot~ntiallY'ai::tive'
                               fault presents a moderate fault rupture hazan! to Oty developments in that area: .. The
                               Los Osos fault is active, but presents essentially no fault rupture hazard to the Oty as.it
                               is only mapped in tmdeveloped areas. Further studies to evaluate the activity of the faults
                               are waffa11ted, prior to placing structures near the mapped fault traces.
                               Paso Robles
                               FoultRupture Hazard Potential
                               TIle only known mapped fault within the Otyof Paso Robles is the Rinconada fault. The
                               potentially active Rinconada fall1\.is. !l1apped through southwestern Paso Robles and crosses
                               Highway 101 just south of Spring Stre~t.p; trace 9f the. fault i~,als() id~ntifiedbYDib9Iee.
                               (1971) as running up Spring Street, which corresponds to a line of hot spruigs that once
                               existed in this area but have since been capped and buried. As a potentially active fault,
                               the Rinconada presents a moderate fatut rupture hazard to the Oty Further studies to
                               evaluate the activity of the faults are warranted, prior to placulg structures near the mapped
                               fault traces.
                               TIle nonhern end of the potentially active La Panza fault is located about 20 kilometer,;
                               southeast of the Paso Robles, near the town of Creston. TIle northwest strilcing La
                               Panza fault is about 75 kilometer,; long. TI,e Huerhuero fault is a possible extension .of
                               the La Panza and is mapped trending northwest along Huerhuero Creek south of Highway
                               46, but is not within the current Oty limits.
                               San Luis Obispo
                               Fault Rupture Hazard Potential
                               CDMG ('Trein1an, 1989) has mapped the active Los Osos fault through a ponion of the
                               Oty, which strikes nonhwest-southeast along the southwestem margin of the Los Osos
                               Valley. Treiman (1989) conducted field evaluations forthe main str,md of the Los Osos
                               fault nearthe intersection of Los Oms Valley Road and Foothill Road, and fowld evidence
                               of movement in the last 11,000 years. This evidence of recent activity resulted in the
COlJnty and eilies of San Luis Obispo                                                               Technical Backgrol1lJ(f Report
74
establishment of an Eanhquake Fault Zone by CDMG in 1989 under the Alquist'Priolo
Fault Zoning Act. It should not be interpreted that the active portion of the main trace
of the Los Osos Fault is limited only to the designated Eanhquake Fault Zone. Rather,
the limits of the established zone correspond to the limits of the available infomlation
provided in site specific studies that show a preponderance of evidence of recent fault
activity in that area. As additional infomlation about other segments of the fault are
provided by additional studies, it may be appropriate for CDMG to expand the zone. On
the basis of the above data, the Los Osos fault presents a high to very high fault IUpture
hazard to City developments near and southwest of the Los Osos Valley Road area.
Additional geologic studies are warranted to locate proposed stlUctures in the vicin.ityof
the mapped trace of the fault away from postulated splays.
Other faults that are near the borders of San Luis Obispo are the West Huasna, Oceauie,
and Edna faults. These faults are considered to be potentially active and present a moderate
fault IUpture hazard to developments in their vicinity.
Groundshaking
Hazard Description
Sudden slip along all or pan of a fault surface releases energy that has accumulated
within the eanh's ClUst and radiatcs that energy in the foml of eanhquake waves in all
directions away from the source. As the waves pass through an area, they produce the
shaking effects that are the predominant cause of eanhquake damage. In general,
groundshakllg intensity diminishes as the di,tanee from the eanhquake epicenter increases.
TIle loss of eanhquake energy that occurs as distance fron~ ihe f~ult inc~eases is called
"attenuation." Numerous attenuation relationship theories have been proposed by various
scientists, and these theories are frequently revised and updated as more infor.nlation
about the behavior of eanhquakes is leamed.
GrolU1dshaking has historically resulted in a significant risk to life and property damage.
The e).1.ent of loss that can result from groundshaking was demonstmted by the 1989
Lonla Prieta and 1994 Nonhridge earthquakes which resulted in the loss of nlany lives
and propenyand infrastlUcture damage in the billions of dollars.
Groundshaki.ng can also trigger secondary seismic phenomenon such as liquefaction, .
lateral spreading, seismically induced settlement and slope instability, tsunami and seiche·,
and other fonns of ground IUpture ,md seismic response.
San Luis Obispo Qmntyis located in a geologically complex and seismically active region
that is subject to eanhquakes and potentially strong groundshaking. TIle intensity of
groundshaking at a panicular si.te or stlUcture is a fWlCtion of .l11anyfactors including: 1)
eanhqualre magnitude, 2) distance from the epicenter, 3) duration of strong ground motion,
4) local geologic conditions (soil type and topography), and 5) the fundamental period of
the stmcture. A brief description of those factors is presented below.
Earthquake Magnitude. Eanhqualre magnitude, as measured by either the Richter or
Moment Magnitude scale, is a measurement of energy released by the movement of a
fault. As the amount of energy released by an earthquake inereases, the potential for
groundshaking impacts also inereases.
Distance From Epicenter. Eanhquake energy generally dissipates (or attenuates) with
distance from a fault. Over long distances, tlus loss of energy can be significant, resulting
in a siguificant decrease in groundshaking with increased distance from the epicenter.
TccJmicaJ Background Report                                                            County nnd Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                      75

                               Duration of Strong Shaking. 11,e duration of the strong growldshaking constitutes a
                               major role in detenl1ining the amown of structural damage and the potential for grotmd
                               failure that can result from an earthquake. Larger magnitude earthquakes have longer             (
                               durations than smaller ealthquakes.
                               Local Geologic Conditions. 11,e geologic and soil conditions at a particular site have
                               the potential to substantially increase the effects of groundshaking. The thiclmess, density,
                               and consistency of the soil, as well as shallow grotmd water levels, have the potential to
                               amplify the effects of groundshalung depending on the characteristics of the earthqualte.
                               In general, the presence of unconsolidated soils above the bedrock surface can amplify
                               the groundshaking caused by an earthquake.
                               Fundamental Periods. Every structure has its own hmdamental period or natural
                               vibration. If the vibration of groundshalcing coincides with the natural vibration period
                               of a structure, damage to the structure can be greatly increased.
                               11,e extent of damage suffered duriug an earthquake can also depend on non-geologic
                               factors. The type of building and its stmctural integrity will influence the severity of the
                               damage suffered. Generally, small, well constructed, one- and two-story ",ood and steel
                               frame buildings have perfonl1ed well in earthquakes because of their lig],t weight and
                               flexibility. Reinforced concrete stmctures will also usually perform well. Buildings
                               constmcted from non-flexible materials, such as wlleinforced brick and concrete, hollow
                               concrete block, clay tile, or adobe, are more vulnerable to eanhqual<e damage ..
                               Effects of Groundshaking
                               The primary effect of groundshaking is the damage or destruction of b,;ildings,
                               infrastmcture, and possible injury or loss of life. Building damage can range from minor
                               cracking of plaster to total collapse. Dismption of infl'Jstructure facilities can include
                               damage to utilities, pipelines, roads, and bridges. Ruptured gas and water lines can result
                               in fire and scourlimmdation damage, respectively, to stmctures. Secondalyeffects can
                               include geologic impacts such as coseismic fault movement along nearby faults, seismically
                               induced slope instability, liquefaction, lateral spreading, and otherfonns of ground failure
                               and seismic response.
                                                                        'I,C,)                  .!'   l':
                               Seismic Risk
                               Seismic risk associated with earthqnalres and public safety is being addressed on an ongoing
                               basis by local, state and federal agencies. The most significant elements ·of this ·assessment
                               are the building codes and regulations that define acceptable risks and govem seismic
                               design standards for residential, public, and infl<lstmcture buildings and facilities.
                               Building safety and constmction is regulated predominately by the requirements contained
                               in the Unifonn Building Q,de (UBq, which is published periodically by the Intemational
                               Q,ngress of Building Officials (laO). The UBC provides mininmm standards that
                               represent current practices in building safety and the constmction of earthquake-resistant
                               stmctures. The building reqniremcnts of the UBC can be adopted by local jurisdictions,
                               with amendments when necessary.
                               Previous editions of the UBC have recognized the seismic exposure of San Luis Obispo
                               Q,untyto growldshaking hazards by categorizing the entire Q,untywithin Seismic Zone
                               IV, the most stringent categolY for seismic design in the UBC According to UBCstandards,
                               stmctures in Zone IV should be designed to the same seismic criteria regardless of their
                               proximity to faults. The 1997 UBC, not yet adopted by the State of California, still classifies
                               the Q,unty within Seismic Zone IV; however, the code now considers soil profile type
Coullty and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                               Technical Background Report
76

and a near-source factor in the design of structures. Additional seismic hazards such as
amplification of ground motion and liquefiable foundation support soils are considered
in the selection of the soil profile type. TI,e near-source factor considers modifications
for design based on the closest distance to a potenti,u seismic source (faults), the maximwn
moment magnitude, and the slip rate of the fault. TI,ese types of parameters, as identified
in the CDMG database, are swnmarizcd for selected San Luis Obispo faults in Table 4-
4, and arc being updated on an ongoing basis by CDMG. Design professionals may
recommend that structures also consider faults that are not listed in Table 4-4. A SWlilllary
of other faults in San Luis Obispo ("mwtyis presented in Tables 4-5 and 4-6, which may
be considered in addition to those listed by CDMG. Ongoing studies arc also being
performed by CDMG to map seismic hazards for areas founded on soil profiles subject
to ground failure during seismic events.
Groundshaking Hazard Potential
Growldshaking caused by fault movement during an earthquake has the potential to
result in significant life, safety, and propeltydanlage impacts throughout San Luis Obispo
Onwty. Groundshaking may occur as a result of movement along a fault located within
the Q:,untyor along a more distant fault. Similarly, an earthquake on anyone of the faults
in the Q:,unty limits could affect each of the Gties within the Q:,unty. Since proximity to
the causative fault is an important factor in assessing the potential severity of
groundshaking impacts, tlus analysis focuses on faults located in San Luis Obispo Q:,unty.
Two recent studies byCDMG have estimated potential groWld acceleration that could be
experienced in California. Mualchin and Jones (1992) deienninistically estimated the
maximum credible groWld acceleration that could be genemted by active and potentially
active faults. Detenuinistic peak horizontal ground accelerations from this study range
from a low of 0.4 g in the central portion of the Q:,Wltyto a lugh of about 0.7 g along the
San Andreas, Rinconada, Oceanic-West Huasna, and coastal fault zones.
It should be noted that the attenuation relationslups used by Mualchin and Jones (1992)
and others to predict strong groWld motion are based on empirical correlation to historic
ground motion records. As a result of statistical deviations associated with these
tecluuques, ground motions lugher than those estinJated can occur for the potential
earthquakes being considered, plus or minus 50 percent or more. It should also be noted.
that the ground acceleIlltions shown on Mualchin and Jones are for maximum credible
earthquakes, wluch considers the greatest potential earthquakes that could occur, and
does not considerthe probability of that earthquake occurring within a given tin,e period.
CDMG (1996) published a probabilistic seisnuc hnard nlap for the State of Califonua
widl contours showing the peak horizontal groWld aceelemtion with 10 percent probability
of being exceeded in 50 years. The westem portion of the Q:,Wlty has a 90 percent
probabiliry of experiencing groWld accelerations in the range of 0.3 g to 0.4 g in the next
50 years. The eastem portion of the Q:,unty adjacent to the San Andreas fault has a 90
percent probability of experiencing a peak ground acceleration of 0.5 g to 0.7 g in the
next 50 years. Again, the statistical variance in estimated grotmd acceleration could easily
be plus or minus 50 percent of the estinJated ground motion.
San Andreas Fault
The S<Ul Andreas fault is one of the most seismically active faults in California and presents
a significant grOlmdshaking risk to San Luis Obispo Q:,unty, especially to cOllllmmities
located in the eastem portion of the Q:,unry. Because of the proxinuty of the fault <Uld
the relatively high probability of a major earthquake in the near fnture, the San Andreas
fault is generally considered the most likely source for strong groWld motion in the Q:,lWty.
Technicill Background Report                                                            COU1Jty and eWes of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                      77
                       '                       '.',                                                                                               ...... ' ,                                 ,
             ~
                                                          \ ' , ' , '.                          . " , \ ,'.                                 '.  '                           ,
             ~ '.
                 ,\
                  , .....
                         ':                       ",',','>
                                                           , \ ",,, \'. '                 ',,'      .. ,...... ~
                                                                                             •• "~,\,,
                                                                                                                                  ,                 ' : \ ' ':-
                                                                                                                                                ',\.,
                                                                                                                                                                               "~' ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S<NLUIS08'SI"J
                                                  ." . . , ~-"'.",                                     '-'~"'\"" -~ .. -,~~, ~~,--'. . rAsOnOOl.Er-------
             ~~    . . '. '>.                     .'                   ,,"                        "",.", '..                ',"                    . . ' .... ". , •                                    ~    COI,JUTYeoMDER
               .. 'J'"', '.
                              , . . ,. ', " ,                            1\'                                         ' .. .'~"".'X"'"                                        : .. '-""                       ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                '.                                 ,
                       r._~~\."                              ',.,               "",",\                            '.       ,\,>,~ -\.~~ ,,::.~,;.:'Io;;~ ,~'., ...     "~'
                                                                                                                                                                   ' .....                     '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .                 \. S~hN!,XJN
                             ~
                                                '                      J'~~                                                 J . '-.                           . ---",' "" .~~:>, ,,~
                                                                                                                               ..., "'~:                                      .~,          \..>o:;~'''''\ ~-,AT.AS::AD£kO
                                                    .' •    ..:.:..                        . •' _ ' _ • •
                                                   . """                ,I \' ',\ '                                                                              J,                    \
                                                          ,t                   \,...                                           ;    _,,,(,,"",          ..    ~.J .'"        ~" '.... ~ '~"                                        \
                                                      ~", ,~/., . . ..:--: ..~<,,>,,/,                                                                                                                                                                                  /~-
                                                             ',', ••              '                    • ", ',~                                 t          >'   ~                   ......   ,         '"    ,.',         \           •         Ar:P.<:WOGoflilNOE'
              ",",'.·'0"--'
                                                                     . "".-.'                 ".. , "'~.'                  " , '--"~                                               " \ '.'; >-'0                              \ '.              '"                    .' /-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '\.... ,;.f.)
                                                                                                                                    ,~"                                                                                                                                       "~'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ' I I'
                                                   • ___   ,      ' ..    "     ...."      '       '.                  "                                                        ....',.,                            '\,'                           ...              I
                        C' .......... r-I-'\ _....           ....               ~'                                ., .... ~.                          "                           ~.                               '\ .. I
                                                                \         '-'               " : •.                   -~                    , " , ,.'\', "                                                 ..... '.. ~.,.. .../!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <'                            . . .,;. ":;':
                               """"co,,.·-·" ".'.'\,,~~,,;,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .~
                                                                .": :                 "                •             '\ ; •                   '                \,         \    If.                        "\'
                                                                                                                '. "                                                 "                                         ' , ' \',>~,                                               ,\~'::;"
                                        .... O'lflO I.'-.'\.... - •.-.•
                                                                       ,
                                                                         \c.~,
                                                                               \,.',.-
                                                                                              -_............
                                                                                                          .. :       ,     .','."
                                                                                                                                 "              .""        ,
                                                                                                                                                                   X \  ' "     ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                     : . ", \'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        "'..     ""
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I.....
                                                                                                                                                              . . . ,. >. ""\',..'..\,",.....,.~.~~.,; . '.\.,. "-. . ."'\. "" . . . . . . . . . -~. . . - '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,r
                                                                              \ . :(*';""              ~         ~,,\., ... ,.,            •• •.~K\.
                                  S~t:Tt".""":]:;:;,'J,r<lrA _/"\ '.~.~                                          " '.         '?~\.'
                                                                                              "          ""'.:...;" ",:-. ~'~.,. ~:~:;:.~",,:'\, i··'·.... ..... 1"J~,"""""......                                                       "'\"                            .-.' .~/
                                             Rr.V .. \1150B-1SPO-"". '.. ' / , ,~;.~ \ ::<. . . . I" ••<>.!
                                                                                                                              " .;.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                  \, ~~~"' "~I               . ' . . , '~. . . . . .-"'...__ ~"
                                                    f:'ISM:l(!'!::(',CH~'.V"/            ',,;C-'A .......                                 .'. , , " ..... ,... ~','                  ...     \,         "". ,                  ..~.-:-. '\,..- __ .-- ,"                .J'f.....
                                                  a',evER "E'Ci'-'-~'/':' ~{k                                                             ~~ ~
                                                                                                                                                       .,/:::·,::...·:t:'~..;\:o-..:'"'> ' " ~
                                                                  (:,c[J.t.,.n                    A"   '.              .... ",
                                                                                                                   -'l..,~~:j<...//
                                                                                                                                    ..:                    • I      . '.      ,      '"
                                                                                                                                                                     \\.\:'o;-\'_~~'!."~,~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                   "'"             .....', , I            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .... .-:-...:::
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y-'.
                                                                         \.fPO.JD.......                 \"'''":[:''t)~'>.'~''~:';'~'l\''~ _:~, \.'~\ . ":~--"~~:~"'\ ~~'-f~.~~:~.:::::~T--
                                                                                                                                                                                         '>,
                                                                                                           ,\ ' ,,'
                                                                                                             .                          " """ " ,'. '.
                                                                                                                                               ~                                          "< "' ..~;:;:.~    :(::<:::,- .. ,,;:.;\~
                                                                                                          .-:. ':~ \,.~,C~      .::,:,~;':(:':~~:~~~:;~~~::,~~;,~;~f:00~:~
                                                                                                                                          ~ ""'---....                                                                              ..... ~~"                                   e~
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ................,                           :;..-• .,....-.
                                    From PI u:I'ole I'll ":r:IiIl:1 Jon",,- ,:Hi92:,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ~     tWR1"1
                                                             LEGENC                                                                                                                                                                 i:                                  a-:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L:::::                          nnt
                                                                          'J~ Tt:'o'':'; k.':-.:-:i~.IY <: '-":-Ijr~:>                   'n::mr.-l1l)';:';: lilur;:-
                      T JLARCITOS f!)
                                                                         c· th ~        ~->;),X    "Y"l\  n,   (1'!;:<I ~I!I   e,;,r: 'lI!U:\     (,i):                                                                                            ""
                               --
                               .-
                                                                          ~ •. lll1:;; ""lflr'le :;:'u '(">;;
                                                                          ~p~cla f,~"IIU~ I;ell":""
                              ({~"~-::~.~~    "                           Cu•. I,)J.:.of Po''''!. f(;"'''
                                                                          ig= '";1,0 :-:1'1' ,l=. ~(:-:'»
                                                                                                                           ~'~l  u,     itl   k .. d u,           1,)' {I
                                                      Coastal Faults
                                                      TIlere are numerous active and potentially active faults in the westem pOltion of the
                                                     county and in the offshore area that have the potemial to generate strong ground motion,
                                                      TIlOse faults are shown on Map 2 and listed in Tables 4-4,4-5, and 4-6, On the basis of
                                                     recem studies by PG&E (1988), the most likely earthquake sources for generating strong
                                                      grOlUld motion in the coastal region of San Luis Obispo County are considered to be the
                                                      San Simeon·Hosgri, Los Osos, and Santa Lucia Bankand offshore faults,. which are
                                                     shown as active faults byCDMG (Jennings, 1994), Other potentiallyac<ive faults that are
                                                     thought to be seismically capable of generating strong grOlUld motion include the Wilmar
                                                     Avenue/Sama Maria River, Oceano, Pecho, West Huasna-Oceanic, Cambria, Casmalia
                                                      (Orcutt Frontal·Pezzoni), Nacimiemo, and Rinconada falilts.
                                                      Blind Thrust Faults
                                                     A potentially significant source of strong motion in San Luis Obispo ComItyis buried or
                                                     blind thmst faults and duust ramps hypothesized beneath the Santa Maria Basin and
                                                     coastal areas of San Luis Obispo County by Namson and Davis (1990), TIle ramps
                                                     described by Namson and Davis are the Point San Luis, Sama Lucia, Black Mountain and
County (1m/ Citics     or San Lllis Obispo                                                                                                                                                                                                      TecJmical Background Report
78

  La Panza faults. On the basis of their evaluation, Namson and Davis hypothesize that
  there ,He several blind thmst faults and a regional detachment fault located between
  about three to 14 kilometers beneath the San Luis Obispo COlmty area. Based on
  comparison with the 1983 Coalinga, 1987 Whittier Narrows, and 1994 Northridge
  earthquakes and a database of worldwide earthquakes, they estimate that the thrust faults/
  ramps beneath the central '-"llifomia coast could produce eanhquakes with magnitudes
  in the range of magnitude M w5.0 to M w7.5.
" As demol1stmted by the 1994 Nonhridge earthquake, blind tluust faults have the potential
  to produce strong ground motion and significant stmctural damage without surface fault
  rupture. In addition, strong ground motion measurements from the Nonhridge eanhquake
  demonstrate that: 1) earthquakes on blind thrust faults can produce ground accelerations
  in excess of those cUftentlyestimated by conventional attenuation relationships for areas
  directly above the thrust fault! ramp, and 2) there can be a significant amplification of the
  ground motion due to the variation in alluvium depth and propenies, refen'ed to asa
  "basin effect". TIlere is a potential for both of the above conditions in the coastal and
  central San Luis Obispo County areas if a large eanhquake were to occur on a buried or
  blind thrust fault.
  Amplification of Ground Motion
  Research has shown that areas that arc tmderlain by layers of unconsolidated, recent
  alluvium and wlConsolidatcd soil material with high growld water have an increased risk
  of experiencing the damaging effects of grotmdshaking (Zionyand Yerkes, 1985). Dming
  the Loma Prieta eanhquake, grotmd motion was amplified up to 4 times as it moved up
  through the San Fmncisco Bay muds and caused significant damage to the Oakland Bay
  Bridge and collapsed the Nnnitz Freeway structure even though they were located more
  than 60 km from the earthquake.
  Areas within the Countythat are underlain by recent alluvial sediments (Qal) are depicted
  on Map 1. TItOse areas include the coastal valleys and plains and interior valleys near
  annual streams and water sources. The coastal areas considered to be at increased risk to
  amplification of ground motion include the Los Osos Valley, San Luis Valley, South Bay
  area, Cambria, Cayucos, and the Grover Beach/Oceano/Arroyo Grande areas. Inland,
  the main area with an increased risk appears to be along the Salinas River and Rinconada
  Oeek There may also be a potential for eanhquake induced groWldshaking damage
  along QtOlame Oeek, Estrella Oeek, and the Paso Robles area.
  To help quantify the risk associated with eanhqual<e induced grotmdshaking and secondary
  phenomena such as liquefaction, previous regional geologic studies by the United States
  Geologic Survey (USGS) and CDMG have gener-Illy classified regions on the basis of
  three factors: 1) soil/bedrock type; 2) depth to ground water, and 3) level of anticipated
  strong grOlmd motion. 11\C above three factors are genemlly subdivided further to more
  fullyev"luale the level of risk depending on the available data.
  San Luis Obispo County
  Ordinances and Regulations
  In S,m Luis Obispo County, the UBC was adopted with amendments into the CoWlty
  Building and Construction Ordinance, Section 19.01.012, Title 19 of the CowltyCode.
  Arroyo Grande
  Groundshaking Hazard Potential
  The atyof Arroyo Gmnde is proxinlal to active and potentially active faults capable of
  producing strong ground motion in response to seismic events. Table 4-9 lists faults in
  Toc/mica} Background Repurt                                                            CouJJly and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                         79
                          Table 4-9: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of Arroyo Grande
              Fault             Approximate                                    Maximum                 Anticipated
                                   Distance             Maximum                 Probable              Acceleration
                                (kilometers)'      ... Earthquake             Earthquake                Range (g) ..•..
        Wilmar Avenue                   0                  6%                      4                     0.1-0.7
          Blind Thrust                  0                  7%                      6                     0.2 - 0.8
        Point San Luis
           Los Osos                     6                   7                      5                     0.1 - 0.5
             Pecho                      9                  6 '/4                   3                    <0.1 - 0.3
             Hosgri                    25                  7%              ""' .  6 % ....               0.1 - 0.2
           Casmalia                    21                  7%                      6                     0.1 - 0.3
           La Panza                    32                  7%                      5                    0.05 - 0.2         'Y;"; ,"
         San Andreas                   62                  8Y.    ------ ----
                                                                                   8                     0.1 - 0.2
           *Measured from the intersection of Branch and Mason Streets
                               the vicinity of Arroyo Grande considered to be potential sources of relatively strong
                               ground shaking.
                               With a high probability for producing a major eatthquake in the near future, the San
                               Andreas fault and the offshore Hosgrifault present the.most likelygn?undshakinghazard;
                               to Anoyo Grande. Other faults that have the potential      to geri~r.ite strong'gro~d motion
                               in Atroyo Gr,l11de include the acti:"e Los Osos fault, and the pot~ntially ~~tive W~r
                               Avenue, Pecho, and Orcutt frontal faults. Although the prc;bability, or retlllJl interval, on
                               one of these closer faults is lower, the peak ground acceleration that could result from a
                               near-field event would likely be significantly greaterthan would be expected from a high
                               probability event on the San Andreas or Hosgri faults. In addition to the mapped faults,
                               there is also a potential for strong ground motion associated with earthquakes on
                               hypothesized buried thrust faults beneath the coastal area,
                               Portions of Anoyo Grande thature'undcrlain by layers of unconsolidated, recent allUVial
                                                                                                            of
                               soil material have an increased risk of cxphriei1cing the damaging eff~cis grouridshaking.
                               11,ese areas arc considered to be at an increased risk because of the amplifying effect that
                               can occur when lillcollsolidated soil materials are subject to grow1dshaking.Major areas
                               within Anoyo Grande that are underlain by recent alluvial sedin1ents are depicted on
                               Maps 1 and 3.
                               Ordinances and Regulations
                               The Gtyof Arroyo Grande has adopted the Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
                               TIus code belongs to a family of codes, published byICBO, that conelate with the UBe
                               to provide jurisdictions with a complete set of building-related regulations for adoption.
                               Atascadero
                               Groundshaldng Hazard Potential
                               The Gty of Atascadero is proximal to active and potentially active faults capable of
                               producing strong ground motion in response to seismic events. Table 4-10 lists faults in
                               the vicinity of Atascadero considered to be porential sources of relatively strong ground
                               shaking.
                               With a high probability for producing a major earthquake in the ncar future, the Sru1
                               Andreas fault presents the most likely source of groundshak:ing to Atascadero. The closest
County and Cities of S'an Luis Obispo                                                               Technical Background Report
80

                           Table 4-10: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of Atascadero'
                     Blind Thrust               5                       7'1>  5 I.           0,1-0.5
                     Black
                     Mountain
                    "Measuro:!d from EI Camino Real and Tf affic W ay
mapped fault is the potentially active Rinconada fault which has the potential to generate
a magnitude 6'4 to 7th earthqual,e with an estimated growld accelemtion in the range of
OAg to O.6g., which, if it were to oecur, could have a widespread damaging effect on the
Oty. Other faults that have the potential to genemte strong groWld motion in Atascadero
include the active Los Osos and Hosgri faults but are located at some distance from the
Otyand therefore pose a lesser ground motion hazard. In addition to the mapped faults,
there is also a potential for strong ground motion associated with earthquakes on
hypothesized buried thrust faults beneath the La Panza and Santa Lucia Ranges:, : ,,"
Ponions of Atascadero with an increased risk of ~~eriencing the damaging effects of
groundshal<ing are those areaS that arc underlain by layers of Wlconsolidated, recent
alluvial soil material. Areas within Atascadero that are Wlderlail1 by recent alluvial sediments
are depicted on Maps 1 and 3.
Ordinances and Regulations
In Atascadero, the UBC was adopted by Ordinance No. 248, which amended Title 8
(Building Regulations) of the Atascadero Municipal       < -
                                                                  Code.
                                                             '-!".'{:,-
Grover Beach
Groundshaking Hazard POI.mtial
1ue Otyof Grover Beach is proximal to active and potentially active faults capable of
producing strong ground motion in response to seismic events. Table 4-11 lists faults in
the vicinity of Grover Beach considered to be potential sources of relatively strong
ground shaking.
With a high probability for producing a major earthquake in the near future, the San
Andreas fault and the offshore Hosgri fault present the most likely sources of
groWldshaking to Grover Beach. Other faults that have the potential to generate strong
gromld motion in Grover Beach include the active Los Osos fault, and the potentially
active Wllmar Avenue, Pecho, Orcutt frontal faults. In addition to the mapped faults,
there is also a potential for strong ground motion associated with earthquakes on
hypothesized buried thrust faults beneath the coastal area.
Portions of Grover Beach that are underlain by layers of Wlconsolidated, recent alluvial
soil material have an increased risk of experiencing the damaging effects of groWldshalcing.
Major areas within Grover Beach that are Wlderlain by recent alluvial sedinlents are
depicted on Maps 1 and 3.
TCc/111icaJ Background kcport                                                              COl1nty and Cities of San Luis Obispu
                                                                                                                            81
                        Table 4-11: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of Grover Beach
                                         3                        7~         6                0.3- 0.7
          Casmalia-Orcutt-              19                        7~         6                 0.1-0.4
             Utile Pine
                                       27                          7                          0.1 - 0.2
         <Measured from Grand Avenue and             I~orth 81h Street
                             Ordinances and Regulations
                             In Grover Beach, the UBCwas adopted by Ordinance No 95-5, which amended Municipal
                             Code section 8101-8110.
                             Morro Bay
                             Groundshaking Hazard Polential
                             TI,e Gty of Morro Bay is located in proximity to active and potentially active faults
                             capable of producing strong ground motion in response to seismic events. Table 4·12        /
                             lists faults in the vicinity of Morro Bay considered to be potential sources of relatively I
                             strong ground shaking.
                             With a high probability for producing a major earthquake in the ncar future, the San
                             Andreas and the offshore Hosgri fault present the most likely sources of groundshaking
                             to Morro Bay. Other faults that have the potential to genemte strong ground motion in
                             Morro Bay include the active Los Osos fault, and the potentially active Wilinar Avenue,
                             Rinconada, Pecho (offshore) and Santa Lucia Bank (offshore) faults. In.addition to.the·
                             mapped faults, there is also a potential for strong ground motion associated, with
                             earthquakes on hypothesized buried thrust faults beneath the coastal area.          .
                         Table 4-12: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of Morro Bay
                                                   G
                                     J:'-;'---'-'-
         BlindTr,rust                7                           7 'I.         5                  0.2 - 0.6
                                    14                                       6Yo                  0.2· 0.3
                                     5                                         5                  0.1·0.5
         Rinconada
        San Andreas                 64                           8%            8                  0.1 ·0.2
     "MeJS1Jred from the Embaroadero and HarbOI street.
County and CWes of San Luis Obispo                                                          Technical Background Report
82

Portions of Morro Bay that are underlain by layers of unconsolidated, recent alluvial soil
material have an increased risk of experiencing the damaging effects of groundshaking.
Major areas within Morro Bay that are underlain by recent alluvial sediments are depicted
on Maps 1 and 3.
 Ordinances and Regulations
In Morro Bay, the DEC was adopted in aapter 14.18 (Ordinance No. 450) of the
Municipal (Dde. In 1996 the aty (Duncil amended a,apter 14.18 to provide for voluntary
compliance with Gllifomia and Safety (Ddes sections 19160-19169.
Paso Robles
Groundshaldng Hazard Potential
11,e aty of Paso Robles is proxmul to active and potentially active faults capable of
producing strong ground motion in response to seismic events. Table 4-13 lists faults in
the vicinity of Paso Robles considered to be potential sources of relatively strong ground
shaking.                                                                        .
With a high probability for producing a major earthquake in the near future, the San
Andreas fault presents the most likely source of grolU1dsh"king to Paso Robles. 11,e
closest nupped fault to Paso Robles is the potentially active Rinconada fault which has
the potential to generate a nugnitude 6 '/4 to 7~ earthquake, which, if it were to occur,
could have a ,,~despread danuging effect on the aty. In addition to the nupped faults,
there is also a potential for strong ground motion associated with earthquakes on
hypothesized buried thmst faults beneatlt the Paso Robles area:.
Portions of Paso Robles that would have an increased risk of experiencing the danuging
effects of groundshaking are those areas that arc wlderlain by layers of unconsolidated,
recent alluvial soil materiaL Areas within Paso Robles that are underlain by recent alluvial
sediu1Cnts are depicted on Maps 1 and 3.
Ordinances and Regulations
In Paso Robles, the DEC is adopted in a,apter 17.04 of the Municipal (Dde.
City of San Luis Obispo
Groundshaldng Hazard Potential
The atyof San Luis Obispo is proximal to active and potentially active faults capable of
producing strong growld motion in response to seismic events. Table 4-14 lists faults in
the vicinity of Sw Luis Obispo considered to be potential sources of relatively strong
ground shaking.
                             Table 4·13: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of Paso Robles
                                                                     '. -; .,-"    . "-'--'" '
                                                                "'-:-;i'                         "> ;,
                                                                                                       0.2· 0.4
          xr·.oIeasured from Spriog Sh~et and 11th Street
Technical Background l?(:port                                                                Cuunty and Cities of San Lllis Obispo
                                                                                                                             83

                        Table 4-14: Sources of Ground Shaking in the Vicinity of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                         -",~-:v
                                                                                                       ,.,                        (
                                                                                                                  . ',~--,
          Los Osos                     4                   7                       5                       0.2 - 0.6
         Blind Thrus{s                 o                  7Yo                    5                         0.2 - 0.6
        Point San Luis
                                                         7Yo                     6 Y..
                                                         7Yo                     6
         San Andreas                  57                  8%                       8                       0.1 - 0.2
    "M'i:asured 1rom tl!1onterey Street and 0$05 Street
                               With a high probability for producing a major earthquake in the ncar future and proximity
                                to the aty, the San Andreas fault and the offshore Hosgri faults present the most likely
                               sources of groundshaking to the aty of San Luis Obispo. Other faults that have the
                               potential to generate strong ground motion in San Luis Obispo includes the. active Los
                               Osos faults. In addition to the mapped/aults, there is also a potential {or strong ground,
                               motion associated with earthquakes on hyPothesized buried 1hmst faults beneath the
                                coastal area.
                               Portions of the aty of San Luis Obispo that are underlain by layers of lUlconsolidated,
                               recent alluvial soil material have an increased risk of experiencing the damaging effects
                               of growldshaking. Areas within San Luis Obispo that arc underlain by rccent alluvial
                               sediments arc depicted on Maps 1 and 3.
                                Ordinances and Regulations
                               In the atyof San Luis Obispo,lhe UBC is adopted in Chapter 15.04 of the Municipal
                               Code.                                                             .; '.' . , '
                                Liquefaction
                               Areas that have geology that may be susceptible to liquefaction are indicated in Map 3.
                               Liquefaction potential is dependent on site-specific features that can only be assessed by
                                a detailed evalmtion of subsurface conditions at a panicular location. PLuUlers and public
                                agencies often use mapping of alluvial areas, such as indicated 011 Map 3, as a guide for
                               knowing when they should request site-specific studies to evaluate liquefaction potential
                               and its impact on development. These general maps of alluvial areas are often
                               misinteIpreted by subsequent agencies and/or practitionerS' as depicting areas where
                               liquefaction hazards are known to exist. Care should be exercised in how these maps are
                               used, and what inteIpretations can be made from theln
                                Hazard Description
                               Liquefaction is defined as the sudden loss of soil strength due to a rapid increase in soil
                               pore water pressures resulting from seismic groundshaking. In order for liquefaction to
                                occur, three general geotechnical characteristics should be present: 1) growld water should
                                be present within the potentially liquefiable zone; 2) the potentially liquefiable zone
                               should be granular and meet a specific range in grain-size distribution; and 3) the
COUJ1ty and Cities of'San Luis Obispo                                                                Tech/lica] Background Report
84
potentially liquefiable zone should be of low relative density. If those criteria are present
and strong ground motion occurs, then those soils could liquefy, depending upon the
intensity and duration of the strong ground motion. Liquefaction that produces surface
effects generally occurs in the upper 40 to 50 feet of the soil colunm, although the
phenomenon can occur deeper than 100 feet. The duration of ground shaking is also
an imponant factor in causing liquefaction to occur. The larger the earthquake
magnitude, and the longer the dur,uion of strong groundshaking, the greaterthe potential
there is for liquefaction to occur.
Effects of Liquefaction
\Xlhen liquefaction of the soil does occur, buildings and other objects on the ground
surface may tilt or sink, and lightweight buried structures (such as pipelines) may float
toward the ground surface. liquefied soil may be unable to support its own weight or
that of structures, which could result in loss of fotmdation bearing or differential
settlement. Liquefaction may also result in the development of cracks in the ground
snrface followed by the emergence of a sand/water mixture, typically referred to as a
sand-boil. In areas underlain by thick deposits of saturated, loose granular sediment
(such as alluvial valleys or beaches), subsidence as much as several feet may result. Because
the alluvial sediments are a heterogeneous mixture of soil types with variable thickness,
the resulting settlement is often differential. TI,e cJjfferential settlement can cause significant
damage to rigid structures such as buildings and linear features such as pipelines and
highways.
Liquefaction may also lead to the lateral spreading of soft saturated soils. Lateral spreading
is a form of slope instability that results when the lateral movement of a soil-block
toward an unconfined free face can occur when a layer of soil below the ground surface
liquefies. An example of where lateral spreading may occur is adjacent to stream hanks.
Lateral spreading has been reported to occur on slopes of less than five percent, but it is
difficult to evaluate the magnitude of the potential lateral spreading.
Liquefaction Hazard POfential
The areas of the o,unty most susceptible to the effects of liquefaction are those areas
underlain by young, poorly consolidated, saturated granular alluvial sedinlCnts. TI,ese soil
conditions are most frequently fonnd in areas lmderlain by recent river and flood plain
deposits. Table 4-15 sunIDlanzes a general guide for assessing the vulnerability that some
soil/bedrock types may have towards liquefaction.
Map 3 indicates areas of low to high liquefaction potential hased on the geologic units
mapped in these areas. Holocene-age alluvium (Qa), and beach deposits may have a high
to very high liquefaction potential depending on their density and the depth to ground
water. Dune sediments (Qds, Qos) and pleistocene-age alluvial deposits (Qoa) and terrace
deposits (Qt) generally have a moderate liquefaction potential. The Pleistocene-age Paso
Robles FOffi1ation (QTp), Tulare Formation (QTt) and unnamed valleysedinlent (QTu),
                                                         Table 4-15: Vulnerability to Liquefaction
    ';:c:;:",                    i,;;;:,;:' ",'(
                                                                                oj,,':::"" i                   \,:,.'   ,""';;,,':;
                                                                                                                                    ~;.~,~j1~:~~~,5tr~b,~:.F'ht~~!:i~~'~
                         '~i"""'"                                                                    "";"">"
           Recen1sediment                             Da           U f)oonsolidated sand. gr ave I. silt, and olav depc-zlts.                       High
        Quartemol!Y Sediments                 Qoal,Ot, Ods, Oos    Gener alty uncc.nsolldate d to poorly coru:.olidirled with                   Moderate
           <Ir.d f" otrtl<lti()f)s                                 d~ep ground water.
                                                 OTp, Ott QTu
                                                                   Weakty con,:: olidated to poorly indul ated sand, gr ave I,
                                                                   sill and clay aliuvial1ormation.
                 ViHious                      Pliocene and oldJ;!f C onsotidatJ;!d bedrock                                                          L".
Technical Background Report                                                                                            County and Cities of San Luis ObiSpo
                                                                                                                                                                         85
                              which consist primarily of wealdy cemented silty sand, is exposed in large areas of the
                              County and also have a moderate liquefaction potential. Areas lUlderlain by Pliocene or
                              older bedrock (including sandstone, shale, granite, and Franciscan rocks) are considered         (
                              to have a very low to nil liquefaction potential.
                              County of San Luis Obispo
                              Portions of coastal San Luis Obispo CoWlty are underlain by sediments that may be
                              vuhlerablc to liquefaction. Developed areas that may be underlain by geologic units having
                              a higher potential for liquefaction are the coastal communities of Oceano,' Avila, South
                              Bay, ('-'lyucos, and Cambria. Inland conmlwlities that have development adjacent to rivers
                              or major creeks and drainages may have limited areas that have a high potential for
                              liquefaction hazards to exist. TI,ese inland communities inclnde N!pomo, Santa Margarita,'
                              Templeton, and San Miguel. Large portions of the County east of Highway 101 are
                              underlain by Quartemary age formational sediments and alluvial mateljals that have a
                              low to moderate potential for liquefaction. Site-speeifie'studiesare·needed·to evaluate'if,
                              a geologic wut actually contains potentially liquefiable materials and if they require
                              mitigation for development.
                              Arroyo Grande
                              Liquefaction Hazard Potential
                              11,e areas of Arroyo Grande that have a high potential to be underlain by potentially
                              liquefiable sediments arc those areas lUlderlain by younger alluvium (Q,,). The younger
                              alluvium underlies most of the low-lying downtown areas south of Branch Street and
                              along Grand Avenue. Higher elevations atthe west end of the Gty, and north of Highway:
                              101 and Branch Street are underlain by older QuartemarysedinlCnts comprised of sand
                              dune deposits (Qos) and the Paso Robles Formation (QTp) that have a moderate potential
                              to be underlain by liquefiable soils. Site-specific studies are needed to evaluate if a geologic (
                              unit actually contains potentially liquefiable materials, and if they require mitigation for
                              development.
                              Atascadero
                              liquefaction Hazard Potential
                              TI,e areas of Atascadero thathaye a high potential to be underlain bypotentially liquefiable,
                              sedin,ents are those areas underlain bYYOlUlger alluvium (Qtl) ..,Porti9nS, Qf ..the. Oty in ."
                              the low lying areas adjacent to Atascadero 0eek, Graves 0eek, and the Salinas River are
                              m.apped as being underlain by younger alluvium. Other portions of the Oty are
                              Wldeveloped. A majority of the Oty is lmderlain by older alluvium and Paso Robles
                              Fomution, wluch are cOlL,idered to have a moderate liquefaction potential. Site-specific
                              studies are needed to evaluate if a geologic unit actually contains potentially liquefiable'
                              1IJ.1teljals, and if they require mitigation for development.
                              Grover Beach
                              Liquefaction Hazard Potential
                              The areas of Grover Beach that have a high potential to be underlain by potentially
                              liquefiable sediments are those areas underlain by beach sand and young alluvium (Qa).
                              High grOlmd water levels can be expected near the Pacific Ocean and adjacent to Meadow
                              0eek. Areas underlain by dune sand (Qds) and older sediments that have a moderate
                              potential to contain liquefiable materials are nupped as older d,me deposits (Qos). Site-
                              specific studies are needed to evaluate if a geologic unit actually contains potentially
                              liquefiable materials, and if they require mitigation for development.
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                               TecfmicaJ Background Report
86

Morro Bay
liquefaction Hazara Potential
111e areas of Morro Bay that have a high potential to be underlain by potentially liquefiable
sediments are those areas underlain by beach and sand dtme deposits (Qs) and younger
alluvium (Qa), A majority of the aty is underlain by these alluvial, estuarine, beach and
sand dune deposits, High ground water levels can be expected in the Embarcadero area
and other beach front areas. Flood plain areas along OlOrro, Little Morro and Morro
0eeks are also w1derlain by younger alluvium (Qa), 11,e higher elevations of the atyare
underlain by older alluvium (Qoa), old dtme sand (Qos), Franciscan Fonnation (KJf),
and volcanic (Td) bedrock, and have a moderate to nil potential to be underlain by
liquefiable sedinlents, Site-specific studies arc needed to evaluate if a geologic unit actually
contains potentially liquefiable materials, and if they require mitigation for development,
Paso Robles
liquefaction Hazara Potential
11,e areas of Paso Robles that have a high potential to be tmderlain by potentially liquefiable
sediments arc those areas underlain by younger alluviuam (Qa) , Geologic mapping indicates
that most of the atyof Paso Robles is underlain by late Pleistocene and older alluvial
deposits (Qoa) and Paso Robles Formation (QTp) that have a moderate potential to be
underlain by liquefiable soils, Portions of the at}' that are located on recent alIuviwn in
the low lying areas adjacent to the Salinas River (or its tributaries) appear to have the
highest potential for liquefaction, Site specific smdies are needed to evaluate if a geologic
tuut actually contains potentially liquefiable materials, and if they require mitigation for
development,
City of San Luis Obispo
The areas of the atyof San Luis Obispo that have a high potential to be underlain by
potentially liquefiable sediments arc those areas underlain byyotmger alluvitm1 (Qa), Most
of the atyof San Luis Obispo is underlain byalluviul1l. Other portions of the atythat
are tmderlain by older alluvium are considered to have a moderate liquefaction potential.
Areas of the aty located on Monterey Formation, Franciscan Formation, or other bedrock
units have a very low to nil liquefaction potentiaL Site specific studies are needed to
evaluate if a geologic unit actually contains potentially liquefiable materials, and if they
require nutigation for development,                           ' ':'                           ,,'
Tsunami ancl Seiches
Hazard Description
Tsunamis (pronotmced soo-nom-ee) are ocean waves generated byvel1ical movement of
the sea floor. 11,e movement is typically caused by earthquake-related faulting, but can
also result from submarine landslides or volcatuc emptions, San Luis Obispo CDtu1ty
could be affected by tstmami caused by fault-related ground displacement on a local
offshore fault, or on a more distat1t fault. A common source of tsunami affecting Califonua
in the past has been earthquakes on faults off the coast of   awe    at1d the NOl1h American
coast (up to Alaska),
In the open ocean, tsunami waves have a long wavelength (distance from the crest of one
wave to the crest of the succeeding wave) no!1llaliyover 100 ntiles, at1d a very low amplitude
01eight from crest to trough), As these waves approach shallow water, their speed decreases
from a deep water speed of over 600 nwes-per-hourto less than 30 miles-per-hour, The
wave energy is transferred from wave speed to wave height. 11ms, waves as high as 100
feet have been foruled.
Tcc/mica} RlCkgrollIJd Report                                                             County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                         87
                               Tsunanus arc a unique hazard because the arrival tinlC of a wave generated far out at sea
                               can be predicted fairly accurately. Unfotttmately, the intensity of the wave when it reaches
                               shore cannot be accurately predicted. Tsunamis are sometimes preceded by a trough or
                               recession of ocean water that can attract people to the shore to examine what appears to
                               be a very low tide.
                               Seiches are defined as oscillations of enclosed and semi-enclosed bodies of water, such
                               as bays, lakes, or reservoirs, due to strong ground motion from seismic events, wind
                               stress, volcanic emptions, and local basin reflections of tsunami. Seiches can result in tbe
                               creation of long-period waves which can cause water to overtop containment features or
                               cause seiche mnup on adjacent land masses, sin,ilar to tsunami nmup. The intensity of
                               the damage caused by a seiche is proportional to the magnitude and proximity of the
                               event causing the seiche, and the amowlt of freeboard present at the time of the seiche.
                               Freeboard is defined as the vertical distance from the free surface of the water to the top
                               edge of the containment stmcture.
                               Effects of Tsunami
                               TI,e threat of tsunami- related damage is primarily confined to low-lying coastal areas. If
                               the gradient is shallow, tsunanli waves can tnwel upstream into river channels. 11,e primary
                               effects of a tsunami can be widespread destmction and damage to coastal structures. In
                               1964 in Crescent Oty, C-liifonlia, tsunami waves up to 20-feet high caused more than $11
                               million dollars in property damage and resulted in 11 deaths.
                               According to Kilboume and Mualchin (1980a), the following historical tSUllanll have'
                               OCCUlTed   in the area:
                                               Table 4·16: Historical Tsunamis
                            Unknown                                                    Unk nOlAln
       1927                 Local                        PismQ Beaoh                   1.8 fTil;!'ters.(5.Q
       1946                Aleutian Trene!)              San Luis Obis po Say          1.2-1.5mclers(3.g- 4.9fe.::t)
       1960                 Chile-Peru Trench            Central C oad                 >1,0 me-to'!r:s: (>3.3 feet)
       1964                 Gu~  of Alaska               Central C O.15t               >1.0 meiers (>3.3 feet)
             Speculative
       2
            Re portedly cw ert opped tite sand sptt tI1at separates 111 e bay from tile ocean (Asquith, 1975).
                               Large tSUllamis have not been conunon on the Central Coast of California. So few
                               tSUllamis have been recorded that the historical record is not extensive enough to develop
                               accurate recurrence predictions. TI,e largest recorded tsunanli to affect Califomia was
                               caused by an earthquake in the Santa Barbara Channel in 1812. Resulting tswlanli runup
                               waves are reported to have been up to 50 feet above sea level at Gaviota, and 35 feet
                               above sea level at Santa Barbara.
                               PG&E (1973) reported that the historical record for San Luis Obispo CoUllty includes
                               no tsunamis that have exceeded the nomw tidal range. PG&E (1973) sLiggests that faulting
                               in the offshore area could generate tsunanli wave height as great as six feet. In San Luis
                               Obispo County, coastal areas ncar Pon San Luis, GlynCOS, and San Simeon were designated
COllIJW and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                                        TccJI11icai J3ackgrolllu/ Report
88

as having a "potential danger" from tsunami. This potential hazard level was the lowest
risk designation included in the study. The potential for damage to coastal structures
would be increased if the tsunami event were to coincide with a high tide.
As noted in the above table, the historic record shows tsunamis generated from far- field
sources. Houston and Garcia (1978) estimated the 100- and 500-yeartsunami runups in
the study area based on far-field source generation locations (such as the Aleutian or
a,ile-Pem Trenches). On the basis of their stud)\ the estimated tsunami nmup along the
Coyucos/Morro Bay coastline is approximately 9.5 feet to 24.2 feet for the 100-year and
SOO-year events, respectively. TIlOse mnups were calculated using astronomical high tides,
and compare well with recorded tsunamis that have occurred in Q-escent Otyand other
locations along the California coast. However, according to Kilbourne and Maulchul
(1980), the worst case scenario would occur if a tSWlami occurred during a meteorological
high tide (storm surge), which would add an estimated 14.5 feet (4.5 meters) to the mnnp
values calculated by Houston and Garcia (1978). Thus, with a worst case scenario, the
estinlated tsunami mnup forthe 100-year and SOO-year would be approximate/yelevation
24 and 39 feet above mean sea level, respectively.
TI,e Houston and Garcia (1978) study did not evaluate the tsunami runup potential
generated from local seismic events or local submlrine landslides. It is difficult to model
the tsunami nnmp magnitudes based on local events; however, it is thought that local
events can generate tsunami of equal magnitudes as far- field tsunami sources (Kilboume
and Mualchin, 1980a).
San Luis Obispo County
 Tsunami Hazard Potential
TI,e tSW1ami hazard for the San Luis Obispo O"mty coastal areas is greatest for those
comrmmities or portions of communities located below the estunated elevations for the
100- to SOD-year events, that is, below elevation 24 and 39 feet above mean sea level,
respectively. In general, much of the coast of San Luis Obispo o,Wlty is protected from
tsunami hazards by wide beaches, coastal dunes, or sea cliffs that provide protection to
coastal developments. o,astal developments most vulnerable to the tsunami hazards are
those located near mouths of coastal streams that drain into the Pacific Ocean, such as
San Sinleon Q-eek in San SUllCon; Cayucos Q-eek, Little CayucosQ-eek, Old Q-eekand
Willow Q-eek in Cayucos; Mono Q-eek and Alva Paul Q-eek in Morro Bay, 01Orro Q-eek
in Morro Bay and the South Bay area; San Luis Obispo Q-eek in Avila; and Meadow
Q-eek and Arroyo Grande Q-eek in Oceano. The severity of the exposure to the tsunami
hazard will vary locally depending on specific natural and artificial coastal conditions.
Seiche Hozard Potential
Seiches could occur Ul any reservoir located in the o,Wlty, and Ul Morro and San Luis
bays. Accordulg to Kilbourne and Mualchin (1980a), seiches have been recorded in San
Francisco, Monterey, and San Pedro bays. The extent of potential seiche runup withirl
Mono Bay is unknown, but is thought to be less in magnitude than the affem of potential
tsunallU.
Arroyo Grande
Tsunami Hazard Potential
TI,e Otyof Arroyo Grande has no coastal exposure and is therefore not vulnerable to
tsunami hazards.
Technical Background Report                                                           Cuunt)' and Cities uf San Luis Ohispo
                                                                                                                      89
                               Atascadero
                                Tsunami Hazard Potential
                               11,e atyof Atascadero has no coastal exposure and is therefore not vuh1emble to tstmarni
                               hazards.
                               Grover Beach
                               Tsunami Hazard Potential
                               Specific analyses have not been perfoffi1ed for Grover Beach to estllTJ;l~e the potential
                               tsunamiJUnup height. The tstmam; hazard is greatest forthat portion of the coml11lmity
                               located below elevations of the 100-year to SOD-year events, that is, below elevations 24
                               and 39 feet below mean sea level, respectively. Additional areas of potential hazard are
                               along the l110uth of Meadow Creek. In general, ponions of coastal Grover Beach· are
                               protected from tsunami hazards by wide beaches and coastal dunes. The severity of the
                               exposure to the tslmal11i hazard will valY locallydependillg on specific natural and artificial
                               coastal c o n d i t i o n s . " " :                             " ..'
                               Morro Bay
                               Tsunami Hazard Potential
                                                                                                                                 .,.,
                               Specific analyses have not been pel{onned for Morro Bay to estimate the potential tsunami
                               runup height. The tsunami hazard is greatest for that portion of the eonununity located
                               below elevations of the 100-year to SOD-year events, that is, below elevations 24 and 39
                               feet below mean sea level, respectively. Additional areas of potential hazard are along the
                               mouths of Morro Creek and Alva Paul Creek, and within the bay at C1lOrro Creek. In
                               geneml, much of the coast of Morro Bay is protected from tSlmami hazards by wide·
                               beaches, coastal dunes, or bluffs. that provide protection to coastal developl11Cnts.· The
                               severity of the exposure to the tsw1ami hazard will vary locally depending on specific
                               natural and artificial coastal conditions.
                               Paso Robles
                               Tsunami Hazard Potential
                               The aty of Paso Robles has no coastal exposure and is therefore not vulnerable ·to
                               tsunami hazards.
                                                                 c".,:
                               San Luis Obispo
                                                                           " -'
                               Tsunami Hazard Potential
                               TI,e atyof San Luis Obispo has no coastal exposure and is therefore "not vulnemble to
                               tstUlami hazards.
                               Slope Stability
                               Hazard Description
                               Landslides result when the drivillg forces that act on a slope (i.e. the weight of the slope
                               mlterial, and the weight of objects placed on it) are greaterthall the slope's natural resistillg
                               forces (the shear strength of the slope material). 11,e down-slope movement"of earth
                               material, either as a landslide, debris flow, mudslide, or rockfall, are pan of the contlllUoUS,
                               natural process of erosion. TIus process, however, can be influenced by a variety of
                               causes that change the stability of the slope. Slope illstability may result from natural
                               processes, such as the erosion of the toe of a slope by a stream, or by ground shalung
                               caused by an eanhquake. Slopes can also be modified altificially by gradillg, or by the
                               addition of water or stmctures to a slope. Development that occurs on a slope can
                               substantially illcrease the frequency and extent of potential slope stability hazards.
                               Areas susceptible to landslides are typically characterized by steep, unstable slopes ill
                               weak soil/bedrock muts which have a record of previous slope failure. CDnvcrscly, areas
County and Cities of Sail LuiS Obispo                                                                TccJmicaJ Background Report
90

with little topographic relief underlain by geologic formations of high strength generally
have a low potential for slope-related hazards. 1bere are numerous factors which effect
the stability of the slope, including: slope height and steepness, type of materials, material
strength, structural geologic relationships, ground water level, and level of seismic shaking.
Slope steepness or gradient is an in1pOltant consideration with regard to slope instability.
Slopes with an inclination of 5 horizontal to 1 vertical (5h:1v, about 11 degrees) are
nonnally fairly stable tmless the earth materials exposed in the slope are very weak As
the gradient increases, the potential for slope instability increases. Slopes steeper than
about 2h:l v in weak materials are prone to lo~g tenn instability. Generally, sandy or
granular soils and rock units are stronger and less lil,ely to be associated with large scale
landsliding then are soil and rock units composed of fine-grained silt and clay.
In many slope failures, water is an important con1ponem. Water adds to the weight of the
slope material, thus increasing the driving force. Water can also facilitate movement by
decreasing the strength of the soil along a "slip plane" or a zOlie·of. wealrness in·the
materials, and by providing a buoyant upward force against the base of the landslide.
Water may be added to a slope as a result of development (i.e. through irrigation, septic
systems, and changes in drainage) or naturally as a result of rainfall. 1-1eavyrains, particularly
in areas that have been affected by wildfires, can trigger debris flows and mudslides,
which can be a particularly desttuctive fonn of down-slope movement.
Methods to mininuze potential landslide hazards can best be implemented prior to
development that may cause, or be affected by, slope movement. The risk of slope
movement can usually be reduced by perfomung a geologic! geotechnical study of the
existing geologic conditions, and by implementing an appropriately engineered grading
plan. Many jurisdictions have adopted specifIC guidelines for geologic! geotechnical studies
in hillsides areas. CDMG (1997) provides minimum standards for geologic studies to
address slope stability issues. Mitigating landslide hazards
after development occurs, however, can be constrained
by the presence of existing structures and multiple
property owners. Remedial methods to correct the                                                                 Rotational Failure
                                                                                                              (no structural conttOJ)
effects of slope movement in developed areas may
include measures such as dewatering the hillside,
buttressing or retention of the slope, or removing the
unstable material. However, these measures may be
expensive and difficult to implement, depending on the
size of landslide.
                                                                   (n)
                                                                                                                PJanar Fallur-e
                                                                                                       (Olle controlling diScOntinuity)
111is appraisal of potential landslide hazards is intended
to be used as a general guide for land use planning
purposes, only. It should not be considered as a
substitute for perfonning appropriate geologic and soils
investigations, or a substitute for providing proper site
design and engineering of individual development
projects. The data typically needed to adequately assess
the potential for slope-related hazards must be obtained
as pan of a detailed geologic! geotechnical study of the                                                              Wedge Failure
site, along with an evaluation of proposed terrain                                                                    (corltrulled by
                                                                                                                    two lntcrsedlug
modifications. 11,is type of site specific evaluation                                                               discontinuities)
should be conducted at the time a specific project is
proposed.
                                                                 Effect of structure  011 pIlUlar slope faililres.
Technical Background Report                                                                  COllnty and CIties or San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                   91

                                Effects of Landslides
                                Downslope movement can range from the almost imperceptible creep of soil and rock
                                material to the sudden mass movement of an entire hillside. Soil creep generally produces
                                fissures in the soil, cracked building foundations, tilting utility poles and trees, and damaged
                                underground utilities. lvfass slope movement during a landslide can cause substantial
                                da!1lage to buildings, roads, and infrastmcture. Sudden slope movement <:an also result in
                                permanent changes to topography and drainage pattenlS, such as the temporarydall1!ni.ng
                                of streanlS. Construction on slopes steeper than about 20 percent gradient.typically require
                                some type of special grading, modified foundation design, or site modification to address
                                sloping ground conditions and redu<:e the potential for slope instability.
                                lvfap 4 presents a sumrmuyof landslides hazards related to slope gradient <md topography
                                that were identified within the study area based on <:urrentlyavailable infmmation. TI,e
                                data presented on lvfap 4 is limited, and areas of slope instability exist locally that are not
                                shown on tlus and other regional geologic maps. Criteria that·were.usedto evaluaterhe··
                                potential for landslide hazards as shown on lvfap 1, as well as factors that can be indicative
                                of slope instability locally, are sunIDut1zed below:
                                 Table 4-17: Landslide Hazard and Slope Instability Potential
   Potentia                    Criteria Used to Prepare M1V 4                       Additional CriterialtUlic11i:ive ofSlope •..'
                                                                                                 'InStooility'"              .
      La#            Slopes gradients of less Ulan 20 percent, and no         Ge01 og ie un Hs not susc epti bIe to 81 op e in stab if ity
                     previous landslides !lave been mapped ..                 such as Cretaceous sandstone and hard
                                                                              volcanic rocks. Flat lying terrain 'hith no previous
                                                                              knowledge of slope instability in that area. .
   Moderate          Slopes madients exceed 20 percent. and no                Flat ~!inq or favorable oriented beddina
                     previous landslides or formations havinq a               consistina of aeoloaic unHs not susceptible to
                     kno'Ml propensity tcwvards slope instability have        slope instabilitY. Fe-w knovm cases of distreSB to
                     been mapped in that area                                 bulldinqs or infrastructure resultinq from slope
                                                          ." "-'--~';"
                                                                              instability . fI.reas within 100 feet of a slopes
                                                                              steeper than 50 percent conslsiinq of potentiallv
                                                                            , unstable rnaterials."Orar8asunderlain~ bY" poorly
                                                                              consolidated or ,'leak rocks such as the Paso
                                                                              Robles F arrnati on. Pismo Forrnation or
                                                                              equ~!alent.
      High           Slopes    gradier~s  8l(ceed 50 percent ortr,e slope     HiqhlV fractured rocks. or formations I"!'Nino
                     qradier~8    exceed 20 pereem and are underlain          moderatelv slapinq adverse beddinq conditions.
                     bV f ormati 0ns kno'M", to 1',av8 a PtOP en stt, for     Distress to other bulldinqs and Infrastructure is
                     slope instability. creep. and landslidinq. Triese        common. Areas with slope washlcollLNium
                     fortTl3tions are mostl, the Franciscan rnelanq8.         Areas v,ithin 200 feet of an isolated landslide
                     sementin8.         Monterev       Fomlation.      Taro   less than 500 feet wide (at ITS widest point).
                     FortTl3tion. Rincon FortTl3tion. Atascadero
                     Forrr<llion. and other Cretaceous to Jurassic
                     age shales.
   Very High         Mapped landslide features.                               SIOI)88 havinq aa,'erselv orienled beddinq.
                                                                              joints. or faultinq. Wet slopes shol',ina siqns of
                                                                              creep. or sprinas. There are many occurrences
                                                                              of kno\M1 distress to buildinQs and infrasltucture
                                                                              in tile area. Hummock; topoaraplw suaqestive
                                                                              of soil creep. Areas IMthin 300 feet of a large-
                                                                              scale landslide complex or isolated \OJides that
                                                                              are qreater than 500 feet \o,ide (at their vlAdest
                                                                              point).
                                                                                -----_._-----          -
County ilnd CiUcs of San Luis Obispo                                                                     Technical Background Report
92

Landslide Hazard
In San Luis Obispo Q)lmt y, there are several geologic
forn};ltions conu11only associated with slope stability
problems. As noted on :Map 4, those geologic units
include the Franciscan, Rincon, Taro, and Monterey
formations. Of these, the Franciscan is the most.
notorious formation known for slope instability.
Numerous landslides within the FlOlllcisGlll complcx
are obsetvable along thc Highway 1 corridor from
San Luis Obispo to San Simeon. Numerous landslides
have also been mapped iu the FlOlllciscan and Toro
formations along Highway 101 on the OJcsta Grade.
Landslides in the FrancisGlll formation have iulPacted
residences, roadway facilities, pipelines, and other                                     State water line, Reservoir Canyon.
iufrastmcture iu the County. The Rincon and Toro forn1ations have a similar geologic
history of landslidiug, but arc generally not as widespread as the Franciscan. [An active
landslide has also been identified in the vicinity of Harbor Tetrace near Port San Luis
Rlrbor west of Avila Beach.]
Geologic fon11ations located in the Cotilltythat present a moderate slope stability hazard
potential include the Quaternary bedrock units such as the Paso Robles Fon11ation and
fonnations of equivalent age and composition. TI,e susceptibility of areas underlaiu by
these fornutions to slope stability iu,pacts will vary based on a variety of site specific
factors, such as slope, the orientation of beddiug planes, rainfall, characteristics of the
overlying soil, and the type and extent of proposed slope modifications. In some areas,
slopes may be stable in a natural condition, but alterations to the hillsides to acco1l11l1odate
urban development nuy came tmstable conditions that could adversely affect future
development. Prior to the initiation of new development that could be adversely affected
byslope movement, site specific evaluations are necessary to dctennine the hazard potential
and to identifyengiueering design methods to miuimize the risk of landslide-related
danuge.
Numerous large landslides are also mapped iu the ".
steep mountaiuous terrain of the Santa Lucia,' La
Panza and Caliente Mountain ranges and many.
canyons. Landslides of this type have been nupped
iu nearlyall of the formations and are generally related
to steep slopes, adverse geologic stmcture, weak or
weathered fonnations, faulting, and wet slopes.
To date, only limited geologic nuppiug has been
pcrfonned to evaluate the presence of landslides iu
the hillside areas of the Colmty. Most of the geologic
studies to date have focused on latge scale geologic
structure, fau!tiug, or other geologic issues and did
not specifically evaluate landsliding. A significant
amount of additional studies need to be perlonned to identify and evaluate landslides to
help reduce the potential for long te1111 (bmage related to slope iustability. General
guidelines for those studies are presented iu publications by CDMG (1997) and other
agenCIes.
TccJmicaJ Background Report                                                               County and Cities of S'an Luis Ohispo
                                                                                                                          93
                                    Ordinances and Regulations
                                    The Uniform Building CDde, which has been adopted by the CDuntyof San Luis Obispo
                                    with certain amendments, requires that site specific investigations be performed for
                                    development located in hillside areas. Investigations and practices typically reqnired for
                                    hillside development include the following:
                                     •   CDnduct thorough geologic! geotecluucal studies by qualified geoteclulical
                                         engineers and engineering geologists.
                                     •   Require both engineering geologists and geotechnical engineers during construction
                                         to confirm preliminary findings reported during uutial studies.
                                     •   Require certification of the proposed building site stability Ul relation to the adverse
                                         effects of rain and earthquakes prior to the issuance of buildulg permits.
                                     •   Mandate coordination between the ciyjl engineer and the project engineering geologist
                                         and geotechnical engineer during construction grnding.
                                     •   Require nlitigation of on-site hazards caused by grading that may affect adjoining,
                                         properties, including erosion and slope instability.
                                                                                                                                      ,-~,I.."
                                    Sections 22/23,05.020 et. seq. of the San Luis Obispo CDunty Land Use Ordinance and                "",
                                    CDastal Zone Land Use Ordinance, Titles 22 and 23 of the CDunty CDde, contain the                 i,t,' .
                                    CDunty's grading ordinance. This OrdUlallCe ontlines specific requirements for grading            , i.S,·'
                                    pennits, procedures for reviewing and approving grading permits, ulspectipn requirements
                                    for completed grading projects, and erosion and drninage requirements. Section 22/
                                    23.07.080 defines general requirements for identifyitlg Geologic StudyAreas (GSA) that.
                                    would require a geology report to address'landslide hazards.
                                    Arroyo Grande
                                    landslide Hazard Potential                                                                                 (
                                    A majority of the existing development in Arroyo Grande is located on gently inclined                      '
                                    alluvial valley sediments and the hilly terrain north of Bmnch Street. The potential for
                                    slope stability hazards in valley areas is low to very low. TIle potential slope instability is
                                    greatest in the hilly areas of the Gty. The potential for slope ulstability in the slopillg
                                    terrain can mostly be nlitigated by applying buildulg code requirements that provide
                                    minilllum requirements for building construction and grnding on sloping ground as tllose,
                                    areas are not known to be underlain by large, landslide ,features or notoriously..unstable,.' '
                                    formations. However, there are relatively steep hillsides ,md canyons nearthe Gt)\ and as
                                    development moves into those areas, there could be greater potential for slope stability
                                    related concerns. A thorough geologic! geotechnical study should be prepared prior to
                                    development for projects planned in those areas, General guidelines for thosc studies are
                                    presented in publications by CDMG (1997) and other agencies.
                                    Ordinances and Regulations
                                    TIle Uniform Building CDde, which has been adopted by the Oty of Arroyo Grande
                                    with certain amendments, requires that site specificulVestigations, beperfomled ,for
                                    development that is located in hillside areas. Investigations ,md practices that are typically
                                    required for hillside development include the following.
                                     •   CDnduct thorough geologic! geotechnical studies by qualified geoteclullcal engineers
                                         and engineerlllg geologists.
                                     •   Require both engineering geologists and geoteclullcal engilleers during construction
                                         to confirm preliminary fUldulgs reported dUrlllg initial studies.
                                     •   Require certification of the proposed buildulg site stability in relation to the adverse
                                         effects of raUl and earthquakes prior to the issuance of building permits.
COillJly iJnd Citics of San 1.1I1"s Obi5PO                                                             Tccil11icaJ lJackground Report
94

 •   Mandate coordination between the civil engineer and the project enginceling geologist
     and geotechnical engineer during constmction grading.
 •   Require mitigation of onsite hazards caused by grading that may affect adjoining
     properties, including erosion and slope instability.
Title 7, d,apter 1, of the Arroyo Grande Municipal o,de provides development standards
adopted by the Oty pertaining to excavation, grading, erosion, and sediment control.
1hs chapter specifics perfonmUlce standards and other requirements intended to protect
public health and safety and minimize hazards from excavation and filling activities.
Atascadero
landsDde Hazard Potential
Development in Atascadero generally has occurred in two areas: along the alluvial valley
of the Salinas River and Highway 101, and in the rclativelysteeplysloping terrain of the
Santa Lucia Mountains west of Highway 101. -TI,e primary bedrock geologic units exposcd
in the area include the Tertiary-age Santa Margarita, Vaqueros, and Montereyformations,
and vetaceous-age uunamed, Franciscan, Toro, and Atascadero formations (Dibblee,
1971,1973,1974). 11,e potential for slope instability in the alluvial valleys is low to moderate
because of fairly gentle slopes. Development in steeper hillside areas have a known history
of slope instability, and a moderate to very high hazard potential for slope instability
problems. Localized undercuning by streal11S or development could cause instability.
Appropriate geologic studies should be performed prior to development to evaluate tllls
increased level of risk.                                                                   '
The Franciscan and upper vetaceous formations are exposed along the eastem flank of
the Santa Lucia Mountains (Hatt, 1976). These fonnations are the predominate geologic
unit in the hilly southwestcm pottion of the Gty. In this area, Halt (1976) mapped 50
separate landslidcs encompassing 268 acres. 11,e Gty has reccntly made rep"irs in this
area to roadways damaged fromlandsliding. Although some of the mapped landslides
may now be relatively stable, the concentration of old and recent landslides are inclicative
of relativclyunstable slope conclitions. 111is area is considered to have a high to very high
potential for slope instability. 11lOrough geologic! geotechnical study should be prepared
prior to development for projects plarll1cd in those'are'as. General guidelines for those
studies are presented in publications by(J)MG (1997) and other agencies.
Ordinances and Regulations
The Uniform Building o,de, which has been adopted by the Gtyof Atascadero with
cettain amendments, requires that site specific investigations be performed for
development that is located in hillside areas. Investigations and practices that are typically
required for hillside development include the following.
 •   o,nduct tllOrough geologic! geotechnical studies by qualified geotechnical engineers
     and engineering geologists.
 •   Require both engineering geologists and geotechnical engineers during construction
     to confirm preliminary findings reported during initial studies.
 •   Require certification of the proposed building site in relation to stability to the "dversc
     effects of min and eatthquakes prior to the issuance of building permits.
 •   Mandate coordination between the civil engineer and the project engineering geologist
     and geotechnical engineer during constmction grading.
 •   Require mitigation of on-site hazards caused by grading that may affect adjoining
     properties, including erosion and slope instabilit)(
TccJwicaJ Background Report                                                                County and Cities of S'an Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                           95

                               Sections 9-4.138 through 9-4.146 of the Atascadero Zoning Ordinance provide
                               development standards adopted by the Gty penaining to excavation, grading, erosion,
                               and sediment control. These sections specify performance standards and other
                               requirements intended to protect public health and safety and minimize hazards from
                               excavation and filling activities. In Atascadero, any grading on slopes at or exceeding ten
                               percent must wldergo envirofllnental review pursuant to the Califomia Environmental
                               Quality Act (CEQA).
                               Grover Beach
                               Landslide Hazard Potential
                               Grover Beach is characterized by fairly gently inclined slopes with gradielm of less than
                               50 percent on slopes consisting of older alluvium and late Pleistocene dune sands. TI,e
                               potential for slope stability concems is low. Locally, there may be a potential for sh;lllow
                               slope failures in loose dune sands on areas of steep terrain. The potential for slope
                               instability in the sloping terrain ean mostly be mitigated by applying. building code'
                               requirements that provide minin11lm requirements for building construction and grading
                               on sloping ground as these areas are not known to be underlain by large landslide features
                               or notoriously unstable fOl1nations.
                                                                                                                              "};:':'
                               Ordinances and Regulations
                                                                                                                               -'.-:;-
                               TI,e Uniform Building Code, which has been adoptedbythe Gtyof Grover Beach with
                                                                                                                               ,;};:,.
                               certain amendments, requires that site specific investigations be 'performed for
                               development that is located in hillside areas. Investigations and practices that are.typically
                               required for hillside development include the following.
                                •   Conduct thorough geologic! geotecllllical stndies by qualified geotechnical engineers
                                    and engineering geologists.
                                •   Require both engineering geologists and geotechnical engineers during construction
                                    to confirm preliminary findings reported during initial studies.
                                •   Require certification of the proposed building site stability in relation to the adverse
                                    effects of rain and earthquakes prior to the issuance of building pemuts.
                                •   Mandate coordination between the civil engineer and the project engineering geologist
                                    and geotechnical engineer during construction grading.
                                •   Require mitigation of on-site hazards caused by grading that may affect adjoining'
                                    properties, inclnding erosion and slope instability.
                               Sections 8400 through 8423 of the Grover Beach Mwticipal Code provides development
                               standards adopted by the Gty penaining to excavation, grading, erosion, and sediment
                               control. These sections specify perfom1ance standards and other requirements intended
                               to protect public health and safety and mininlize hazards from excavation and filling
                               activities.
                               Morro Bay
                               Landslide Hazard Potential
                               NunlCrous studies have documented nnstable, landslide prone slopes in the Morro Bay
                               area east of Flighway 1 and nonh ofFlighway41 (Coast Laboratories, 1975; Staal, Gardner,
                               and Dunne, 1987; Eanh Systems, 1995; Fugro, 1997). Manyof tI,e landslides mapped in
                               the area are associated with the Ff<U1ciscan melange. TIleSC landslide hazards that have
                               impacted residential development and lifeline facilities and arc most prevalent on west-
                               facing slopes. Areas tln'Oughout ti,e Grywhere steep topography and geologic formations
                               prone to slope stability problems are located arc depicted on Map 4. Although some of
                               the mapped landslides may now be relatively stable, the concentration of old and recent
County and Cities of S'an Luis Obispo                                                            Tee/mica} Background Report
96

landslides are indicative of relatively unstable slope conditions. TIus area is considered to
have a lugh to very high potential for slope instahility. Thorough geologic! geoteclmical
study should be prepared prior to development for projects plmmed in those areas. General
guidelines for those studies are presented in publications by CDMG (1997) and other
agenClCS.
The potential slope instability is greatest in the hilly areas of the aty. The potential for
slope instability in the sloping terrain can mostly be mitigated by applying building code
requirements that provide minimum requirements for building construction and grading
on sloping grOlmd, as these areas arc not known to be underlain by large landslide features
or notoriously unstable formations.
 Orclinances anclllegulalions
The Uniform Building o,de, which has been adopted by the atyof Morro Bay with
certain amendments, requires that site specific investigations be, performed for
development that is located in hillside areas. Investigations and practices that arc typically
required for Illllside development include the following.               .
 •     Conduct thorough geologic! geOlecluucal studies by qualified geoteclmical engineers
       and engineering geologists.
 •     Require both engineering geologists and geotechnical engineers during construction
       to confirm preIDninary findings reported during initial studies.
 •     Require cenification of the proposed building site stability in relation to the adverse
       effects of rain and eanhquakes prior to the issuance of ,huilding pemuts... .
 e     Mandate coordination between the civil engineer and the project engineering geologist.
       and geotechnical engineer during construction grading.
 •     Require mitigation of on-site hazards caused by grading that may affect adjoining
       properties, including erosion ,md slope instability.
General Plan policies S-6.1 and S-7.1 and o,astal Plan policies 9.04 and 9.07 require that
geologymld soils repons be prepared to identify and evaluate potential adverse conditions
from grading activities in specific areas of the ary.
Paso Robles
lanclslicle Hazarcl Polrmlial
A majority of the existing development in Paso Robles is located in areas of gently
rolling hills with slope incIDlations between 50 percent to 20 percent or less. 11,e primary
bedrock geologic nuit in the area is the Paso Robles Fonnation (Dibblee, 1971, 1973;
Hart, 1976). However, the Paso Robles Formation contains localized areas of relatively
weak c1ay\mits, which are susceptible to small- to large-sized landslides. These landslides
arc not well mapped regionally, but are often identified hy site specific studies.
The SaIDlas River flood plain is also an area of extensive development in the Paso Robles
area. Because of the fairly gentle slopes, the potential for slope stability concems in this
area is generally low. The bedrock strata is locally folded and faulted and is subject to
localized undercutting by streams or development. If the bedding becomes laterally
unsupponed, there is an increased potential for instability. Appropriate geologic studies
should be peJiormed prior to development to evaluate tlus increased level of risk General
guidelines for those studies are presented in publications by CDMG and other agencies.
Orclinances ancl Regulalions
TI,e Ullform Building o,de, which has been adopted by the aty of Paso Robles with
cenain amendments, requires that site specific investigations be performed for
TecJl11J"caJ Background Report                                                           County and Cities of 5(111 Luis Obispu
                                                                                                                          97

                              developments located in hillside areas, Investigations and practices typically required for
                              hillside development include the following
                                                                                                                                   (
                               •    Conduct thorough geologic! geotechnical studies by qualified geoteclmical engineers
                                    and engineering geologists,
                               •    Require both engineering geologists and geoteclnucal engineers during construction
                                    to confirm preliminary findings reponed during initial studies,
                               •    Require cenification of the proposed building site stability in relation to the adverse
                                    effects of rain and eanhquakes prior to the issuance of building permits,
                               •    Mandate coordination between the civil engineer and the project engineering geologist
                                    and geotechnical engineer during construction grading,
                               •    Require nutigation of on-site hazards caused by grading that may affect adjoining
                                    properties, including erosion and slope instability.
                              Title 20 of the Paso Robles MWlicipal Code provides development standardnhat have' .
                              been adopted by the Gtypertaining to excavation, grading, erosion, and sediment controL
                              These sections specifyperfoll11ance standards and other requirements intended to protect
                                                                                                                                  . ~'Y:'.
                              public health and safety and mininlize hazards from excavation and filling activities,
                              City of San Luis Obispo
                              landslide Hazard Potential
                                                                                                                                  .',~~M:·
                              A n1ajority of the development in San Luis Obispo is in the valley area with a low to very
                              low potential for slope instability. However, the hillside areas to the east, north and west
                              of the Gty, as well as along the flanks of the Memos; are nnderlaillby the Frimtiscan
                              melange, which is the source of sigillicant slope instabilitY. Areas of- the Gtywith steep
                              topography and geologic fOlll1ations prone to slope stability problems are depicted on
                              Map 4, Because of the past slope stability related problems, a thorough geologic!
                              geoteclmical study should be prepared prior to development for projects planned in
                              those areas, General guidelines forthose studies are presented in publications byCDMG
                              (1997) and other agencies,
                              Ordinances and Regulations
                              The Unifonn Building Code,.which has been adopted by the Gtyof San LOO Obispo
                              with certain amendments, requires that site-specific investigati<;>nsbe perfonned for
                              development that is proposed in hillside areas, Investigations and practices that are typically
                              required for hillside development include the following
                               •    Conduct thorough geologic! geotechnical studies by qualified geoteclmical engineers
                                    and engineering geologists,
                               •    Require both engineering geologists and geoteclnucal engineers during constmcuon
                                    to confirm preliminary findings reported during initial studies.
                               e    Require certification of the proposed building site stability in relation to the adverse
                                    effects of rain and earthquakes prior to the issuance of building pennits,
                               •    Mandate coordination between the civil engineer and the project engineering geologist
                                    and geoteclmical engineer during constmction grading,
                               •    Require mitigation of on-site hazards caused by grading that may affect adjoining
                                    properties, including erosion and slope instability.
                              Subsidence
                              Hazard Description
                              One of the consequences of excessive growld water withdrawal from an aquifer that
                              lacks a rigid framewOlk is compaction of the aquifer. The water itself supports pan of
County and Cities of San Luis Obi.~}Jo                                                           'J'ecllllicai Background RDjJort
98

the load of the overlying materials and also keeps the grains of the aquifer loosely packed.
When the water is removed from the intergranular spaces, the weight of the overlying
rocks packs the grains together more closely. TIlls can not only reduce pcrmanently the
capacity of the aquifer, but also cause serious lowering, or suhsidence, of the growld
overlying the aquifer. Areas most vumerable to subsidence are those tmderlain by loose,
compressible clay-rich soils, in an area with excessive growld water withdraw"l and general
lowering of the water table.
Effects of Subsidence
Subsidence can cause many structural problems. Most seriously affected arc linear
infrasllucture facilities sensitive to slight changes in gradient, such as sewers and pipelines.
Subsidence can also result in damage and settling of buildings. Symptoms of settlement
or subsidence are cracking around door frames and windows, tilting of structures, and
popping or breaking of glass from windows.
County of San Luis Obispo
Subsidence has been documented along Los Osos Valley Road in the southem pan of
the aty of San Luis Obispo. TI,e subsidence occurred as a result of ground water
extraction from mlUucipal wells that resulted in settlement of compressible soils in the
Lagwla Lake area and eastern Los OSO$ Valley.
TI,ere are several oil field operations in the southem coastal areas, and in the eastern pan
of the u,unty. 11,ere are no known repons of subsidence in these areas. Subsidence and
associated impacts on existing buildings has been documented in the Cl!yama Valley,
however, the subsidence likely occuned as a result of collapse of arid soils in that region
following the introduction of infiltrating water. TI,e potential for collapse in arid soil
environments should be further evaluated as development occurs in the southeastem
part of the County.
Arroyo Grande
11,ere have been no known repons of subsidence in the at)' of Arroyo Grande. However,
there may be potential for future subsidence problems because much of the commlUuty
is lUlderlain by potentially compressible clay alluvium Future studies should considcrthe
potential for subsidence due to lowering ground water levels witltin the saturated alluvium
Atascadero
Alluvial deposits along the Salinas River and their tributaries have a long history of water
well use and heavy ground water e},.'traction. However, the soils and aquifer materials are
generally too coarse, and e},.'traction are relatively limited, to pose a sigillficant potential
subsidence problem TI,ere have been no lmown reports of subsidence in the aty of
Atascadero.
Grover Beach
11,ere have been no known repons of subsidence in the atyof Grover Beach.
Morro Bay
There have boenno knowll repoJ1S of subsidence in the aty of Morro Bay.
Paso Robles
Alluvial deposits along the Salinas River and their tributaries have a long Ius tory of water
well use and heavy ground water e},.'traction. However, the soils and aquifer materials are
generally too coarse, and extraction are relatively lil1llted, to pose a significant potential
Technical Bnckgrowu/ Report                                                               County ilnd Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                          99
                                  subsidence problem. 'TIlere have been no known reports of subsidence in the Oty of
                                  Paso Robles.
                                                                                                                              (
                                  City of San Luis Obispo
                                  Subsidence has been documented along Los Osos Valley Road in the southem part of
                                  the Oty of San Luis Obispo. The subsidence occurred as a result of ground water
                                  extraction from municipal wells that resulted in settlement of compressible soils in the
                                  Laguna Lake area and eastem Los Osos Valley. TIle subsidence in tlus area has since been
                                  avoided by discontinuing ground water removal activities .
                                                                            .
                                                              ~ ,,,-, ,,'.-
County alj{i Cities vi San Lui:>' Obispo                                                         Technical Backgmll/ld Report
100
               Other Hazards
 I-lealrh and safety hazards that affect residents in San Luis Obispo County arc not
limited to gcolof..,ric processes, and tlrc- and water-related hazards. 1\ variety of other
hazards, resulting prilnarily from man-made conditions) can result in pUblic safety
risks. Evaluated in this chapter are safety hazards resulting fr01l1 the usc and
transportation of hazardous Inat{'.1'iaI5, radiation [rol11 the Diablo Canyon nuclear
power plant, c!cctrolnagnctlc fields crc:Hcd by electrical translnission lines and
household appliances, structures that inay he unsafe in an earthquake, airport
operations, and dead Of dying trees.
Hazardous Materials
N[orc than 60,000 chemical substances arc manufactured in the United States, and
arc used extensively for industrial, manufacturing, cOll1tncrcial, agriculrural~ ::lud
household use. The benefits that arc derived from such extensive usc of chemicals
arc significant; however, the mismanagetncnt of these substances can cause health,
safety, and environmental il11pacts.
Hazardous materials usc in ll1anufacturing is widely known; however, hazardous
materials arc also cOlulnonly used by agricultural, comlncrcial, and service
establishments that afC located throughout San Luis qbisP? County. _Exa~lplcs of.
COlnmon businesses that rely on the usc of hazardOlis 111;ltcriab Include a\H01n()bile
service stations, hospitals and rneclical labs, dry"~le'~lIiers, water trcatlnent fadlities,
agricultural production, and a variety of light 111,l1lUfacturing uses. Households are
also a major source of hazardous 111aterial usc and hazardous waste generation,
resulting from the usc of pnints, solvents, cleancrs, pestiddcs and other silni~ar
products.
Due to the widespread usc of hazardous l11atel'ials, accidental rdc<lt-ies at user locations
are likely to occur frol11 rinK: to tilne. These types of incidents are usually slnall and
are contained quickly with linlc risk to the Ptl[)1ic>1'J),e most significant risk resulting
frOlIl an uncontrollcd release of hazardous materials is likely to result frOlll the
(ranspo1't<ltion of large (.Juantities of the:-le substances through the County ut-iing.
truck or rail transportadon. Another potential source of a hazardous luaterials .release
in San Luis Obispo County is frotn a litnited nllnlbcr of underground pipelines that
predominately carry pctrolcuI11 products. In the event of a leak or rupture, these
pipelines could result in significant health and :-;afety
imp~lcts, tiS well as environmental damage.
Effects of Hazardous Material Releases
Iviost hazardous 111aterial incidents that may OCCllr
within the County will be s111all isolated events that
can be contained (]uickly and with tnininnun impact
to health and safety. 1\ large or highly t.oxic release
of hazardous tnateri;:ds, however, may require
evacuation of the affected area, technical expertise
to control the event., and litnitations on aeces:-; to
rhe area of the release. Other short- and long-tern)
i111pacts may include surface and ground water
degradation, air pollution, fire, explosion, and health
TccfJIJicai Background R(~pOrl                                                        County and Ci{jes of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                     101
                              impacts to wildlife, livestock, and hU1l1ans. Clean-up of hazardous 111aterial releases
                               may also result in significant expenditures of public funds.
                               Hazardous Material Management Regulations                                                        (
                              The growing public concern regarding the usc and possible rnisrnanagC111cnt of
                               hazardous Inatcrials has prompted the passage of numerous federal, statc, and local
                              regulations regarding their lISC, storage, transportation, handling, procc.s::;ing, and
                              disposal. J\fany of the regulations pertaining to the usc and ~a_orage of-hazardous
                              materhls at individual businesses arc contained in the Uniform Fire Cod(\ which
                              has been lldopteJ by the County. Regulations pertaining t.o the transportation of
                              hazardous l1utcrials arc contained in the California Vehicle Code.
                              Regulations pcrtalnmg to local monitoring and control of hazardowi material use
                              by businesses arc cc>11tained in California Health and Safety Code (section 25550 et
                              sec1.). These regulations r('(Iuire businesses that usc or store hazardous materials in
                              excess of specified quanticies to provide infonnatlon regarding the type and ml10unt
                              of hazardous materials that arc used oJ1site~ and to prepare e1l1ergcncy response
                              plans that are to be implcJ11cl1ted in the event of a hazardous material release.
                              Businesses arc also inspected on a periodic hasis to ensure that handling, storage,
                              and disposal pracrices conform to regulatory rccluirements. T'hcse. regulatory
                              requirenlcnt.s afC cOlnmonly referred to in a "Business Plan." In S~n Luis Obispo
                              County, the County E:nvirotlJnental llcalth Dcparttnent has been appointed as the
                              administering agency for Business Plans. In addition to the requirctncnt t.o prepare
                              Business Plans, businesses that use:- br store specified cjuantities of substances that
                              have been listed as "acutely ha:.~ardous 111atcrials') may be- required to pfcparc -;' Risk
                              lYfanagcrnent and Prevention Program) which describes specific safety and record
                              keeping n1eaSOl"es, and potential conscclllenccs of a lnatcriab release.
                              Hazardous Material Release Response
                              To address the potemial for an uncontrolled hazardous rnat-erial release in San Luis
                              Obispo County, and to cnSUl·e that ade(luate resourccs arc available to respond to a
                              significant hazardous material release, the County Office of El11crgency Services
                              has prepared a Hdf/l!drlll.r il1d/f!Yd/.r J]lllfZ?f!IIO' RapollH Pidll (1994). The objectives
                              of this \,lal1 arc to:
                               •   Protect the public in the event of a ha:lilrdous material emergency;
                               •   Provide rapid and effective warning to dti%cns that 111:1)' be affected by a
                                   hazardous n1aterial release;
                               •   ldentify the responsibilities of local, stare, and federal agencies; and
                               •   Describe the clllergenc), organization and management sysrenls necessary to
                                                     inlplcmcnt the Plan.
                                                     In the event of a hazardous 111atcrials release in San Lrus Obispo
                                                     County that occurs off of a state highway, the fire agency of
                                                     jurisdict.ion where the release has occurred has incident command
                                                     authority. For hazardous Ill,ltcrial releases that occur on highways
                                                     or other roadways ,hat the California Highway Patrol (eIlP)
                                                     hCl5 jurisdiction over, the CHP will assume incident command
                                                     authority. Both the local fire departments and the CI-lP arc
                                                     supported by the San Luis Obispo County Environnlcntal Health
                                                     Department, which 1nay provide the only response to small
                                                     hazardous Inaterial release incidents.
Bleeder line, Farrall Road, Arroyo Grande.
Coun~v and CiU('s of San Luis ObiSpo                                                               Technical Background Reporl.
102

The California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) responds to hazardous
material incidents for the purpose of minimizing impacts to fish and wildlife. The
DFG also serves as the lead state agency in detemuning the completion of cleanup
when natural resources are threatened. TI,e US. Department of Defense and the
US. Department of Energy are responsible for hazardons material incidents that
involve their respective facilities. Hazardous material releases that occur in or that
contanunate marine waters fall ,mder the jurisdiction of the US. Coast Guard and
the CDFG. A "Ulwied CDnm1and" is used when there is more than one agency or
jnrisdiction with a management responsibility for a hazardous material" release.
Due to the common threat that a hazardous l11aterial incident could occur anywhere
in the County, the County of San Luis Obispo, all seven cities, fire departments
located throughout the County, and a variety of other agencies and jurisdiction,
have entered into a regional hazardous material cooperative agreement which
provides mutual aid response to hazardous materials emergencies. This program
has resulted in the creation of a specialized team of personnel 10 respond to hazardous
Inarerial enlergencies.
I-laving a COllI1ll0n hazardous material response team allows for the sharing of
expenses that would otherwise prohibit most jurisdictions in the County from having
similar response capabilities. TIle purpose of the response team is to "cany out the
abatement -and emergency control of hazardous conditions and stabilize the same,
until these conditions can be lumed over to the appropriate authority for further
disposal" (OES, 1994). TIle response team is comprised of firefighters from various
jurisdictions throughout the County. When a hazardous l11aterial response is required,
a primaty response vehicle is dispatcl1ed from a centralized location, with other
team members [rom other jurisdictions reporting directly to the incident location.
Response vehicles are located in strategic areas throughont the County.
Hazard Analysis
San Luis Obispo County
Due to the quantities and frequency with which hazardous l11aterials are shipped
through San Luis Obispo County, transportatiol1:'rdatcd accidents pose the' most
significant hazardous J11.1terial risk in San Luis Obispo Oliinty. Major transpcimition
rontes such as US. Highw<ly 101 and the Union Pacific Railroad are used to transport
hundreds of thousands of tons of hazardous n1aterials through the County each
year. These major north/ south transportation corridors extend through or near
many of the l11ajor incorporated and unincorporated communities of the County,
thereby exposing a significant portion of the County's popnlation to the potentially
significant effects of an accidental transportation-related release.
Major east/west highways that are located in the County, such as State Routes 41,
46, and 166, are also used by hazardous material hauling traffic. Although these
roadways have lower traffic volumes than        us.  101, they arc two-lane routes that
include potential hazards such as steep grades, reduced visibility, sharp tums, and
reluate locations.
TIle transportation of hazardons materials is not restricted to truck and rail facilities
in San Luis Obispo O"mty. Other system, that are nsed to carry hazardous n1aterials
include a network of pipelines that are predonUnatcly used to carry petroleum-
related products such as crude oil, natural gas, and fuel products. In support of the
Tec/J1Jica/ Backf.{round Report                                                   County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                 103
                              pipeline facilities, there are numerous pumping stations, production and storage
                              facilities that also have the potential to result in an uncontrolled release of hazardous
                              materials.
                              Although the most significant risk of a hazardous material release in San Luis Obispo
                              County would likely result from a transportation-related accident, a variety of
                              businesses and industrial operations that are located throughout the County use
                              and store significant quantities of hazardous materials. Releases that occur at business
                              and industrial sites can occur suddenly or result from undergrowld leaks that can go
                              undetected or nnrepOlted for an extended period of time. Areas with significant
                              subsurface contamination resulting from undetected leaks of petroleum products
                              from underground pipelines and above ground storage facilities include Avila Beach,
                              Tank Faml Road, and the Guadalupe DWles areas. Other areaS that have the potential
                              to experience hazardous material releases include areas that have been developed
                              with concentrations of light industrial and manufacturing uses. An example          or  such
                              an area is located .in the vicinity of the San Luis Obispo County Airport and Tank
                              Farm Road, where numerous small manufacturing and light industrial uses have
                              been established.
                              To mitigate the potential danger of hazardous materials, specific govcmmental agencies
                              maintain inventories of the names, locations and substances used by individual businesses
                              and other entities. Per state and federal law, the County Environmental Health Department
                              maintains lists of what materials are used at fixed facilities and where they are used. In ..
                              addition, Environmental Health and other agencies petforminspectioifs of-these facilities·
                              to ensure compliance with state and federal standards.
                              Arroyo Grande                                                                                 (
                              The most significant hazardous material-related risk in Arroyo Grande results from
                              the transportation of hazardous materials along U.S. Highway 101, which is used to
                              ship tholl,"nd of tons of hazardous materials each year. Highway 101 runs through
                              the center of Arroyo Grande and a major release of hazardous materials on this
                              roadway would have the potential to expose a significant portion of the City's
                              population to significant health and safety impacts. Another potential source of a
                              hazardous material release in Arroyo Grande is from a number of oil, fuel and
                              natural gas pipelines that are located in the City.                                   .
                              Hazardous material use by businesses that are located in the City is limited. 1nere
                              arc no particular areas where commercial, manufacturing, or industrial establishments
                              that use or store significant quantities of hazardous materials are concentrated. The
                              most significant hazardous material use and storage that occurs in and around the
                              City is from farming operations that use and store agriculture-related products such
                              as fertilizers and pesticides (Fibich, 1997).
                              Atascadero
                              The most significant hazardous material-related risk in Atascadero results from the
                              transportation of hazardous materials along U.S. Highway 101 and the Union Pacific
                              Railroad, which are used to ship thousand of tons of hazardous materials each year.
                              Highway 101 runs through the center of Atascadero and a major release of hazardous
                              materials on this roadway would have the potential to expose a significant portion
                              of the City'S population to significant health and safety inlpacts. TIle Union Railroad
                              tracks are located along the eastem portion of the City, near the Salinas River. A release
                              of hazardous material from the r,lilroad could expose a large number of people to a
County and Cflies of San Luis Obispo                                                            Technical Background Report
104

significant health and safety risk, as well as resulting in significant environmental damage.
Hazardous material use by businesses that are located in the aty is limited. There are no
particular areas where commercial, fnanufactufing, or industrial establishments that use
or store significant quantities of hazardous materials are concentrated. Some of the most
significant hazardous material use and storage that occurs in the aty is from industrial
park-type uses, manufacturing uses such as cabinet shops, and a propane distribution
tenninal (McC1in, 1997).
Grover Beach
TI,e most significant hazardous material-related risk in Grover Beach results from
the transportation of hnardous materials along the Union Pacific Railroad, which
is used to ship thousand of tons of hazardous materials each year. In 1986, nine
railroad cars derailed; three of which were carrying iso- hutane. Although their were
no leaks, 3000 residents and visitors were evacuated. The Union Pacific Railroad .tracks
are located along the westem portion of the aty, near the ocean and residential areas. A
release of hazardous material from the railroad could expose a large number of people
to a significant health and safety risk, as well as resulting in significant environmental
damage.
There are no particular areas within Grover Beach with large concentrations of industrial
or othertypesof land uses that use large quantities of hnardous materials are concentrated.
However, there is a gasoline distribution station and an industrial area located south of
Farroll Road, in Grover Beach. Perhaps the most significanuhreat to pnblic safety.from
hazardous materials results from the periodic incidents of illegally disposed hnardous
wastes that are dumped within the Oty.
Morro Bay
The potential for hazardous material transportation- related
hazards to impact the aty of Morro Bay is somewhat reduced
when compared to the inland cities of San Luis Obispo CoWltY.
Transportation-related hazardous material risks are not as
prevalent in Morro Bay because it is not located adjacent to u.s.
Highway 101 or the Union Pacific Railroad tracks. TI,e major
roadway serving the atyof Mon;o Bay is Highway 1, which is
not used to transport hazardous materials to the same extent
that I-lighway 101 and the railroad arc used.
Within the aty of Morro Bay, however, there are industrial
operations that store and use substantial quantities of hazardous
materials. The most significant of these uses is the PG&E power
plant. The Oty of Morro Bay Fire Department works
cooperatively with PG&E on an ongoing basis to address potential concerns, and repons
that there is a good relationship between the plant and the Fire Depart~ent regarding the
use and storage of hazardous materials. A prOlninem concern of the Fire Department
regarding the plant does not result from direct plant operations, but is related to the
transportation of acid material that is used in the emission control systems of the plant
through the aty (Glsscl, 1997).
Another hazardous material concern in the aty of Morro Bay is not related to the
industrial use of hazardous materials, but results from periodic incidents where
containers with unidentified contents wash up on one of the aty's beaches. When
this occurs, the aty/ County hazardous material response team is called.
Tl~dmical Background Report                                                             County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                        105
                             Other hazardous material concems pertaining to the Otyof Mon'o Bay are related to the
                             location of various petroleum indusuy facilities that are located in or near the Oty.111ese
                             facilities include several pipelines and the Estero Marine Fnel Tenninal that is located to
                            the north of the Oty.
                             Paso Robles
                            111e most significant hazardous material- related risk in Paso Robles results from the
                            transportation of hazardous materials along US. Highway 101 and the Union Pacific
                            Railroad, which are used to ship thousand of tons of hazardous materials each year.
                            Highway 101 and the railroad tracks nUl through the center of Paso Robles and a
                            large release of hazardous materials on either of these major transportation corridors
                            would have the potential to expose a significant portion of the Oty's population to
                            significant health and safety impacts, as well as resulting in significant environmental
                            damage. Another highway that runs through Paso Robles is State Route 46. This
                            east/west roadway serves as a direct route from US. Highway 101 to the Kettleman
                            Hills hazardous waste disposal facility in Kings umnty. Paso Robles possesses 19.9
                            percent of all stationary hazardous materials generators in San Luis Obispo COlUlty.
                            City of San Luis Obispo
                            The most significant hazardous material-related risk in the Otyof San Luis Obispo
                            results from the u-anspOltation of hazardous materials along US. Highway 101 and
                            the Union Pacific Railroad, which are used to ship thousand of tons of hazardous
                            materials each year. Highway 101 and the railroad tracks run through the center of
                            the City and a large release of hazardous materials on either :of·these major
                            transportation eorridors would have the potential to expose a significant portion' of
                            the Oty's population to significant health and safety inlpacts, as well as resulting in         .
                            significant environmental damage.                                                              (
                            Another hazardous material concern in the Oty is the presence of numerous
                            underground pipelines that are used to transport natural gas and oil products. An
                            accidental release of hydrocarbons from a pipeline would have the potential to
                            result in significant environmental damage, explosions, and other health and safety
                            impacts.
                            Within the Oty, there are approxir;,ately 140-150 b~sin~sses that use h;z~rdo~s
                            Imterials in sufficient quantities to require that they file a Business Plan with the
                            Fire Department in accordance with the rcqnirements of the CalifomiaBcalth and
                            Safety Code. While most of these businesses do not store large amounts of hazardous
                            materials, there are several industrial uses that use and store substantial quantities of
                            hazardous materials (Redel, 1997).
                            Radiation Hazards
                            The Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant is located about 12 miles southwest· of
                            the Oty of San Luis Obispo. The plant has two power-generating units that are
                            both pressurized water reactors. Each reactor has an electrical generating capacity
                            of about 1,100 megawatts. Unit 1 began commercial operation on May 7, 1985, and
                            Unit 2 was put online on March 13, 1986.
                            TIle electricity generating process at the power plant relies on the process of "fission,"
                            where uranium atom, are split, resulting in the creation of heat. TIus heat is used to
                            create steam, which is then used to spin a turbine and generator, which creates
                            electricity. The plant is designed to use slightly enriched uranium dioxide as a fuel.
County and CWes of San Luis Obispo                                                            TccJmic[J/ Background Report
106

                      Table 5-1: Diablo Canyon Power Plant Protective Action Zones (PAZ)
                                                and Public Education Zones (PEZ)
                                                                                                        ~~
           PAZ2
           PAZ 3                                         Pir.aia's Cove. San Luis- Bay l:states. Avila Road, San Luis Bay'Drive, See
                                                              Canyons, and Sunset Palis:ado::s,
           PAZ 4      Prefumo C ilrwon Road, Los OSO$ V.allev Road behNeen Turri Road and F oothiH B hid. extendinn out about
                      10 miles.
           PAZ5       Bn~I\'ood Park. Los OS05:, Turri Road, Los OS05 Valley Road west 01 Turri Road, Clalk Valley to tM north
                      about ten miles from the pl ..'lI"It
           PAZ 8     City of San Luis Obispo. Cal Poty. California Men's ColoOV. Camp San Luis- Obspo, Cuesta ColleQa,
                     O'COf)nEHWav, Orcutt Road north of East Corral de Piedra Creek. Edna, County Club, Crestmorrl Drive,
                     and Davenpoft Creek area.
          fEZ: 13    Nipomo Mesa south 01 Willow Roa.:l, Nipomo Valley. Santa Maria Valley north of the Santa Maria and
                     ClJjfama Rivers.
          PEZ14      U.S. 101 north of San Luis Obispo, Sama Margtllita, isolated hill areas north and east of San Luis Obispo
                     within 20 miles mthe plant.
          PEZ: 15                                                        Stato:: Route41. isolated hil! .areas north and east of Cayucos
                     and
       Source: San Luis Obispo County OES, 1007.
This fuel poses no major risk in its ururradiated state since it is of very low radioactivity.
However, after being in the core during operation of the reactor, the fuel becomes
extremely radioactive from fission by-products. These highly radioactive by-products
would be the main hazard in a nuclear power plant accident.
To control power plant operations and the potential for a release of radioactive material,
the plant is provided with multiple safety sy.;tems and barriers. TI,ese sy.;tems, however,
GUillot provide absolute certainty that a sy.;tem failure will not occur. To prepare for
potential emergency situations that might develop at the power plant, extensive
waming, reporting, and response plans have been developed. The response plan for
an emergency at the Diablo C~nyon Nuclear Power Plant is contained in a document
called the Qmnty/ Oties Nuclear Power Plant Emergency Response Pian. Updated
infonnation on the Emergency Response Plan is distributed to the public each year,
as required by federal law.
Emergency Response Plans
The area around the power plant has been divided into two types of zones for
emergency plarilling purposes: the Basic Emergency Planning Zone, and the Public
Technical Background Report                                                                                 COUJ1ty and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                            107
                                                                                                                      PAOTECTl'L{;_ACTIQJLZONES
                                                                                                                      ZONE 1: 2-MILE
                                                                                                                      ZONE 2: 6-MILE
                                                                      To Paso Robles,    Mid~Statc
                                                                      I"airgrollllds and (~alllp Roberts              ZONE 3: Avila / San Luis Bay / See
                                                                                                                      Canyon / Squire Canyon
                                                                                                                      ZONE 4: Prefumo Canyon / Los
                                                                                                                      Osos Valley
                                                                                                                      ZONE 5: Baywood / Los OS05
                                                                                                                      ZONE 6: City of Pismo Beach
                                                                                                                      ZONE 7: Indian Knob 1 Price
                                                                                                                     Canyon
                                                                                                                      ZONE 8: San Luis Obispo Area
                                                                                                                      ZONE 9: Morro Bay / Cayucos
                                                                                                                      ZONE 10: Five Cities (Southern
                                                                                                                      Portion)
.-,;                                                                                                                  ZONE 11: Orcutt Rd. /Lopez Dr. 1
                                                                                                                      Route 227
  'I'
     C                                                                                                                ZONE 12: Nipomo Northof Willow
                                                                                                                      Road                             .
          ,/
               .,<,
                                                                                                                      PUBLIC EDUCATION ZONES
                     /
                         (-,                                                                                          ZONE 13: Nipomo
                                   o                                                Pismo Bcuci\\\\l:                 ZONE 14: Cuesta Pass / Santa
                                            C'                                                                        Margarita
                                                   /
                                                      j'l f\1
                                                                                                                      ZONE 15: Route 41/ Old Creek
                                                                                                                      Road
       l)illblo CatlYUIi
 Nlldcar Power Plrmt
                               Sunlo J\-l;;;'iu$I'J
                                                                                                              To Alan lJanc()(:k
                                                                                                              College and Santa
                                                                                                              County Fairgroun{l<; in
                                                                                                              S~nta Mariu
     1"'_:}:?·····1;;·'
                ':fJ:&{:;:",-;·.   Basic Emergency Planning Zone
              !!II);I              Public Education Zone                                   n     o
                                                                                                   III     11
                        II!l       Protective Action Zone Number                               ~
                                                                                              ()
                                                                                                 -~
                                                                                                    2    4
      ~                            Major Evacuation Routes
                                                                                                 MJLES
                                   Note: Varying shades are ONLY to help
                                            !Iv serarate zones.
                                                         Emergency Plmmer, p.
   CouJJtyand Cities of Sim Luis Obispo                                                                                        TecJmicaJ Background Report
  108

Education Zone. The Basic Emergency Planning Zone is roughly a 14-mile circle aronnd
the power plant. Since it is unlikely that the entire Basic Emergency PlaIming Zone would
be affected by a powcr plant emergency, it has been divided into 12 smaller subzones
called Protectivc Action Zones. These zones are depicted on the figure on the following
                                                                                                j;IN~J'k~1~rg~(;'?,
page and are described in Table 5-1. The Public Education Zone extends out from the
power plaIn approximately 20 miles and has been divided into three zones. It is lUllikely
that people in a Public Education Zone would need to take protective actions in the             ;;'/ li~6"~:,~~~,:'_1'~~~6)~~_-~_G
event of a power plant emergency.                                                               f - SIREN 3TO',5,MINUTtS<'--,c-,
                                                                                                i'¥l@,;;o~~Mbl~T$ii2b'i!
Two basic factors would detemnne what, if any, emergency response actions would be              )AM,;-.1.400-AM9~_:98,t:FM_;fo.R~
                                                                                                i -' , '- -INFQRMATiOR'(X5"?-' .
required in any of the Protective Action Zones: the amount of radioactive material that
is released, and the speed and direction of the wind. Based on the nature and severity of       \;-,-:_;~0:~k~:;~;g$~~;~t8n~-~~Y~::
                                                                                                  " MARIN§CHAUNE,W
the emergency, a variety of wanTIng and response plans could be implemented. Several
of these platming programs are described below.
Many of the programs described below are overseen and required by state and federal
agencies. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) provides regulatory
guidelines on what local agencies' emergency plans must contain. FEMA requires the
county and other local agencies to demonstrate the adequacy of the plans through drills
and exercises on an alillual or hi-annual basis.
In addition toFEMA, agencies such as the Nuclear RegulatOlyCommission (NRG and
state Departmcnt of Health Services (DRS) provide oversight and guidance on many
health rdated isslles. These issues including standards for monitoring potential radiological,
releases, and providing policies and guidance on protective guidelines such as issuing
Potassium Iodine (often rden-ed to by its chemical component identifier "KI") for
emergency workers or the public (KI can block radioactive iodine from being absorbed
into the thyroid gland). Local agencies must relyon state ,md federal policies and guidelines
dealing with issues such as public dimibution of KI when plaIunng emergencies at nuclear
power plants. Local agencies will continue to monitor developments in this area.
Radiological Waste Transportation
In order to be prepared for the possibility of a transportation accident involving hazardous
substances, all seven incorporated cities, all otherfire agencies in theconnty, and a number
of conntyagencies participate in the Regionalllizardous Materials (Haz M,t) Response
Team TI,e lliz Mat Response Team is jointly made up of every fire department in the
county, as well as the Connty Environmental Health Department, and' has firefighters
trained to the highest level of hazardous material respOllse, including incidents involving
radiological materials .
While the transportation of radiological waste is regulated by the federal govelllIllent,
local agencies would need to receive specialized training aIld eqwpment before large
quantities or high levels of such material were moved through the area. In lieu of local
agencies, federal or state agencies should provide response teams during periods when
such material is being moved. In other areas of the COWltry, the US. DepaIlment of
Energy has provided sllch training to local agencies. Similar training would be needed
for response agencies in tlus area. Federal agencies generally work with local govemments
 to plan and prepare for transp0l1s of radiological and similar wastes.
 Emergency Alert System
Formerly known as the Emergency Broadcast System, the Emergency Alert System is a
 network of radio stations that would broadcast infonnation about the power plant
emergency. Infonnation that would be provided may include announcing the Protective
 TccfmicaJ Background Report                                                            County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                             109

                             Action Zones that are affected by the emergency and describing what actions residents
                             should take.
                             Early Warning Siren System
                             If a power plant emergency becomes serious enough to warrant evacuation of one or
                             more Protective Action Zones, or it is decided that residems should take shelter, Early
                             Warning Sitens will be activated. These sitens create a loud steady tone fOrlmee to five
                             minutes, and alert residents to nrne in to the Emergency Alert System· for more
                             information. In addition to providing warnings regarding the Diablo Canyon power
                             plant, the sirens can be used to provide warnings about other emergencies, such as
                             hazardous n'"~terial incidents, dam failure, or tsunami. Sitens are tested on an annual
                             and quarterly basis.
                             Evacuation
                             If it is determined that certain Protective Action Zone areas should be evacuated,
                             the Early Warning Sirens in that zone would be activated and specific information
                             about the evacuation would be provided by the Emergency Alert System radio
                             stations. In the event of an evacuation, residents would be directed to go to the
                             home of a person outside of the affected area, or to go to a specified reception
                             center that would be operated by the Red Cross. Reception centers would be
                             located at Gm1p Roberts to the north, and the Santa Barbara County Fairgrounds
                             in Santa Maria to the south. Plans for providing public transp~rtation to the
                             evacuation centers have been developed, and include specific collection points
                             where bus transportation would be provided.                                .
                             Sheltering
                             Sheltering means staying inside with all doors, windows, and ventilation systems
                             closed. Sheltering reduces exposure to radioactive material and reduces the chances
                             of breathing in or receiving body surface contamination from radioactive material.
                             Taking shelter in a wooden house reduces exposure approximately 10 percent. A
                             brick or concrete structure reduces exposure by approximately 40 percent, and a
                             large office or industrial building can reduce exposure by up to 80 percent.
                             School Evacuation
                             Public, private, and parochial schools within the Basic Emergency Planning Zone
                             have developed emergency plans that would be implemented in the event of a
                             power plant emergency. As a precaution, public school officials may decide to
                             close their schools and move students to an Evacuation Center for School OUldren
                             before any public action is required. If an evacuation of a specific Protective Action
                             Zone is ordered wIllie schools are in session, public school children in that zone will be
                             evacuated. Evacuation Centers for School 01ildren would be located at the Mid-State
                             Fairgrounds in Paso Robles, and at Allan Hancock College in Santa Maria.
                             Power Plant Emergencies
                             Emergency situations that might occur at the Diablo Canyon power plant can be
                             described using emergency classification levels that were developed by the federal
                             government. At each level, PG&E must inunediately notify local, state, and federal
                             officials, who would in1plement appropriate emergency response actions. Under the
                             adopted classification system, not all emergencies mean a release of radioactive =1terial
                             has occurred or is expected. The four levels of emergency are described below.
County and CWes of SaIJ Luis ObiSpo                                                          Tcc1micai Background Report
110

               Table 5-2: Examples of Magnetic Fields at Distances from Appliance Surfaces
        SOlJrce: Calttomia Dept. oj Heatth Services 1002
Notification of Unusual Event
This classification is declared for an abnonnal condition at the plant) that indiciltes a
potential degradation of the level of safety at the plant. No rclcasc~ of radioactjvc
material rC(luiring offshe 111oniroring arc expected unless further degradation of
safety systen1S occurs.
Alert
An alert would be declared for an actual or potential substantial degradation of the
level of safety at the plant. TIus wonld prepare ctncrgcn~y l;crS()nl~d to respond -i-[
necessary, Any radioactive releases would be t:.xpcctcd to be llmitcd to a small fraction
of the EP i\ Protective Action C;uidclinc exposure level, but would not be expected
to require protective action beyond the plant boundary. E,lrly warning sirens would
not likely be activated and news reports would provide lnfortl1alion abom the tiituation.
Or-her official anions that luay take place include the possible closure to rv1ontan~1 dc
Oro State Park and the closure of ccnain public schools.
Site Area Emergency
i\ she ~tr(',a emcrgcncy would be declared in the excnt of an actual or likely faYlt'Jtc of
plant funcrlons that arc needed for puhlic safety. If a radioactive release occurred) it
would not be expected ro require protective 111caSlIres farrher than one-half !Tule frOID
the plant. If evacuarion O[ sheltering is rccOlnmcndcd for the public in any Protective
Action Zone, sirens would be sounded and the Emergency Alert Sysrcln would be
acdvared t'O provide further information.
TccJmiral Background Report                                                         County and Olirs of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                  111
                            General Emergency
                            A general cll1crgency would bc_ declared if vcry abnormal plant conditions caused or
                            might lead to actual Of imminent core degradation Of 1ndting, with potential for loss of
                            containrnent integrity. Sirens -would be sounded, the Emergency Alert Systctn would be
                            activated} and thc Protective Action Zones,closest to the plant would likely be evacuated.
                            Evacuation or sheltering in other zones within the Basic Emergency Planning Zone may
                            also be l'ce]uircd.
                            Electromagnetic Fields
                            The 11108t COfm11011 type of electricity that is used in the United States is aitcrn;.uing
                            current (Ae), where the current docs not flow steadily in one direction but moves back
                            and forth at a rate of 60 times per second, \'Vhci:cvcr there is electric cuttent, there arc
                            also electric and 111,lgneric fields which atc created by t.he c.lectrk charges. Electric fields
                            arise frol11 the amount of the charge, and 111agnctic fields result fr01TI the mOl"1oo of
                            the chilfge.
                            Elecrric fidds arc measured in rerm of volts per meter (V In1) or kilovolts (1000 volts)
                            per meter (kV 1m). The earth has a natural staric electric fidd of about 120 to ISO V I
                            m at ground !eye!. Natural static electric fields occurring beneath clouds and dnring
                            dust stor111S can be significantly 1110re intense. Almost all household appliances creatc
                            an electric field dct1.ycd frOID the yoltagc on the appliance eyen when not in usc, if the
                            appliance is connected to an electrical supply. Electrical field5 may be effectively shielded
                            or blocked by objects such as carth~_trey,s, or buildings.
                            1'vlagnctic field intensity is measured in units i'cferred tn a- HGauss" (rhY1nes with
                            "n10usc"). Values arc also reported in lTlilliCauss (0.001 Gauss = 1 111G). The
                            earth has a narural static magnetic field of approximately (LOS Gauss or 500 I11G at
                            lniddlc latitudes. Unlike electric fi('lds~ Inagnctic fields cannot be blocked by
                            structures.
                            l~lectric and magnetic fields are created by high voltage electric transmission lines,
                            distribution lines that bring electricity into stnH.:tllfcS, and from all comn'lon
                            household appliances that usc 'electricity. The strength of electric and magnetic fields
                            that arc produced by the translnission and nRC of electricity: dilninish (li]~ckly. as the
                            distance to the source of the fidd increases. Table 5-2 indicate's hm,v fl:lpidly the stn:ngrh
                            of magnetic fields from comll10n household appliances dissipates as distance is increased
                            fro111 the sOllrce.
                                                                        Other common sources of magnetic fields arc
                                                                        cellular phones, computers) and appliance
                                                                        transfonners. Electric and m,urnctic fields
                                                                                                             "
                                                                        associated 'with the usc of electricity differ from
                                                                        other types of clecrrolnagnctic energy such as
                                                                        x-rays and rnicrowaycs. For exatnple~ x-rays
                                                                        have so much energy that they can "ionize" or
                                                                        break up molecules such as the DNA that makes
                                                                        up Inunan genetic material. Tvlicrowll\,cs afe
                                                                        absorbed by \vater in tissuc, and by doing so,
                                                                        the water and tissue is heated. Radio frequency
                                                                        fields from radio and television translnitters arc
                                                                        another step "weaker" than microwaves.
                                                                        All-hough they alternale tnillions of limcs per
County and CWrs of San Luis Obispo                                                               Trchnicnl Background Report
112
                                                                                                           2    (/")
                                                                                                         , 0 w                  2l
                                                               ,.,.
                                                                                                           iil ~
                                                                                                           III -'
                                                                                                           ::;;
                                                                                                                                '"
                                                                                                                               .Ql
                                                                                                                               LL
                                                                                                           Ii)
                                                                                                           Z
                                                                                               .:'
                                                                                                           ~
                                                                                                           I-
                                               •
                                               ~
                                               .,.,II
                                                                            ,.'
                                    ,...,
                                           :>
                                           ..:
                                           3   .
                                               .,
                                                                   .'
                           ...... ,       "9
                                           ~
                                               .'.
                                           ~
                                           "'5
                                            ~
                                               .
                                               ."
                                               .'
                                               ."
                                               .    '                   ......
                                           "   II
                .
        ..~·····A··
                                               .-.-
                                           .:
                                           ::1
         ~      .. :                           II
                                               .'
        ;        -III                          .-                                        "
                                                                                               .."     .
   ~   'to
   ::> : ........... .
   0:
   c' :1'C!
   (;; 'fGJ           ."
   oc ~                ~
   ~      .            ~
   §                   ~
                                                                     ~                                        A
                                                                      "
                                                                     ro.:.                                    d
                                                                      -IT
                                                                     .~
                                                                                 •
                                                                                 '."
                                                                    "l· 'c"      5 ""' "" oS"D                                  ;.."
                                                            ~
                                                                                 J; :5 "
                                                                                                                       :::      :>'
                                                                                                                       '"~ ;:.j"-l
                                                           '0               Il.            ~       ~
                                                           !'J J:,
                                                                                 z: .:::   J;
                                                                                                  ",',
                                                            '"0,
                                                           UJ :;;
                                                                     To
                                                                           I     "'-
                                                                                 ir;
                                                                                     '0
                                                                                           ~       ,~
                                                                                                   "'                  "" "';;:J"
                                                                                                                       (;':
                                                      .,"            ...                     I
                                                                                                           ~~""'"'" "'":..'"
                                                           "Il               III
                                                      \.OJ
                                                                                                                                '""
                                                                                                                                ;q
                                                      '"
                                                      \.OJ
                                                      ...J
                                                                                                                       ;.,:
                                                                                                                       t<: ":!
                                                                                                                     .. ,: ...
Tedmical Background Report                                                    County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                                 113

                              second compared to electric fields that altemate 60 times per second, radio frequency
                              fields lack the energy to ionize molecules, and can only heat body tissue when a subject
                              is very close to the source. Electric and magnetic fields, by contrast, do not have enough
                              energy to break chemical bonds or to hcat body tissues.
                              Because electric ,md magnetic frequency fields that are tL,uallypresent in the environment
                              do not ionize molecules or heat tissues, it was previously believed that they have no
                              effect on biological systems. In the mid· 1970s, however, a variety of laboratory studies
                              demonstrated that biological changes can be produced by these weak fields.
                              Cl!rrent scientific research has focused on exposure to electromagnetic fields (EJv!}j
                              rather than electric fields. Although preliminary studies have raised the possibility
                              of emotional, behavioral, and reproductive effects, the greatest public concem
                              has arisen because of media reports about epidemiological studies showing a
                              statistical association of magnetic fields with cancer. Epidemiological studiesrclate
                              the occurrence of disease in human populations to exposures suspected of being
                              causes of disease. The epidemiological stndies have yielded some results supporting
                              a relation between cancer occurrence and exposure to magnetic fields, and some
                              studies have found no relation.
                              In late 1990, the California Office of Health and Environmental Assessment
                              prepared a report entitled "EIM/lllllioN of!iJc Po!e!l!/~;/ C;l'lItlOgmicity of
                              E/ec!!"OI'IM.t;!le!ic rlc/dJ' which reviewed epidemiological and laboratory studies.
                              The report concluded the because efuncertainties regarding the basic nature of ..
                              the interaction between EMF and biologic processes, it would be inappropriate to
                              classify EMF as a carcinogen in the same way that chemical carcinogens are
                              classified. In early 1991, the EPA's Science Advisory Board reviewed the reports
                              and concluded that there is insufficient data to determine a cause and effect
                              relationship and that more research is needed.
                              In January 1991, the California Public Utilities Conunission (CPUe) began an
                              investigation of its role in mitigating health effects, if any, of EMFs from utility
                              facilities and power lines .. ln .. November 1993, the CPUC issued interim decision
                              93·11·01, which, in part, stated: "it is not appropriate to adopt,anyspecificnumerical
                              standard in association with EMF until we have a firm scientific basis for adopting any
                              particular value." 111is decision also included requirements for developing design
                              guidelines for utilities to use in reducing EMF from new and upgraded facilities at no
                              or low cost. No or low cost is defined as being less than four percent of the total cost
                              of a budgeted project.
                              Due to their high voltage and high EMF exposure potential, electric transmission and
                              distribution lines are commonly identified as an EMF exposure source. The intensity
                              of electromagnetic fields created by power lines is dependent upon the line voltage,
                              the height above the ground or the depth below the ground, electrical phasing
                              configuration, and the distance from the line.
                              The Pacific Gas and Electric Company reports that for distribution lines of 21,000
                              volts (21 kV)and less, the magnetic field strength under the line would be 2·36
                              mG. At a distance of 50 feet, the field strength drops to 1·6 mG, and at 100 feet, it
                              drops further to 1·2 mG (PG&E, 1994). The EPA reports that a person standing
                              u;'der a typical 230 kV power transmission line is likely to be at least 20 or more
                              feet away from the line, depending on its height above the ground. Under these
CouIltyand Cities of San Luis ObiSpo                                                            Tee/mical Background Report
114

 conditions, the magnetic fidd under fhe line is probably less that 120 mG. One hundred
 feet away, the 111ugnetic field strength drops to about 15 lnG, and 300 feet away the
 field is probably less than 2 mG. The actual strength of t.he Inagnctic field will vary
 depending on the current moving Through the line~ as magnetic fields will be higher
 during tln1C5 of peak electricity usage.
 Based on a graph of dft/ri{" field strengths provided froll1 the Southern California
 Edison COlnpany, and not scientific research data, the California l)cpartment of
'Education has adopted linlits for locating school sires near high voltage- power
 tramanission line caSClnents (I'vIcrrltt, 1994). The adopted setbacks arc listed below:
       100 feet from the edge of casement for 50-133 kV lines;
  •    150 feet from the edge of casement for 220-230 kV lines; and
  •   350 feet from the edge of casement for 500-550 k V lines .
 Throughout San Luis Obispo County, there is a network of power transll1ission
 lines as well as a l1Ulnbcr of substations and switching stations. There ate also 1:\vo
 major power generating facilities, including the natural gas burning facility in the
 City of l'vlorro Bay and the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant. High voltage
 transmission Jines that Clnan;1te from these plants arc also located throughout the
 County. The prior figure depicts the location of Inajor electric power lines and
 facilities lhat are located in San Luis Obispo County.
 At this rime, the evidence of potential health hazards froln the delivery and usage·
 of dectric power is incomplete and inconclusive. A substantial aJ110unt of research
 has been conducted; howc\,cr, Inorc is needed to ~Hlswcr the many questions and
 uncertainries that must be resolved to formulate sound public policy. Until the
 necessary infonnation is available to tnake infonncd decisions about exposure to
 Ei\IFs, individuals and the County and cities may ·wish t.o consider adopting a
 "prudent avoidance" strategy. Prudent avoidHnce Ineans adopting measures to avoid
 EivIF exposures when it is reasonable, practical, relatively inexpensive, and simple to
 do so. For individuals, this tnay 111can not using electric blankets, tnoving the computer
 lTIonitor further away fron) the user, and avolding,the . use of electric appliances when
 manllal powered appliances arc also available. For jurisdictions, this may mean adopting
 new developl11ent standards that Inininlizcs EIv1F exposure ncar sensitive areas (e.g.
 schools, playgrounds, and hospitals), minilnizing the creation of new EIvlF fields ill
 areas ·with exist.ing high exposures, inforn1ing citizens of projccled E£vlF strengths
 Juring the design or environmental review phases for new ~mbstations> transmission
 and distribution lines, and limiting public exposure to EtlFs in siting new substations
 and transmission/distribution lines whe,n practical alternatives exist.
 Structural Hazards
 In a strong earthquake, generally of RichtlT InagnituJe 5 or Inore, llny type of structure
 may experience 50111e level of damage resulting fr0111 ground shaking. This damage
 may range frotn Jninor cosmclic darnage, slich as cracked plaster, 10 c01npletc structural
 failure and collapse. J f a structure is inadelJuatc1y designed or construcfed to withstand
 thc forces of earthquake caused ground shaking, the level of damage that may be
 suffered is likely t.o he high. After each Inajor can hquake, itnportant lessons arc learned
 regarding rhe ability of structures to resist the effeers of groundshakjng, ~\nd updated
 building codes incorporate these lessons as new construction requirements. As a result,
 modern building techniques incorporate l1urlll'fOUS design and constrllction tncthods
 TecJJ/1icaJ Back.ground Report                                                         County and eWes of Siln Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                      115

                                                         to help buildings and other structures resist thc forces of
                                                         carthquake caused ground shaking.
                                                         It is generally not economically or structurally feasible to build
                                                         a totally earthquake-proof structure. '1'herefor<.', there is a certain
                                                         level of earthquake-related damage risk associated with all
                                                         structures. The level of risk that is considered w be acceptable
                                                         by rhe public is t)'pic"U\' determined by thc cost of providing
                                                         additional protection, the importance that the structure be able
                                                         to resist dalnage and remain functional after a strong
                                                         earthquake, and the probability that a structure will fail during
                                                         an e.arthquake. For these reasons, buildings used for fire and
                                                         police stations, schools, hospitals, and other ncritlcal" uses, arc
                                                         generally designed and construct.ed to withstand higher levels
                                                         of ground shaking than «non-critical" stTunures.
                                                         The performance of a structure in an earthquake will be
                                                         influenced by lnany f<lctors; however, st.ructures with similar
                                                         construction Inaterials and building techniques generally exhibit
                                                         similar response characteristics. Factors that can influence
                                                         building performance in an earthquake can inc.lude site specific
                                                         geologic conditions; t.he shape of the building and other
                                                         structural design characteristics; the Inagnitude and duration
                            of strong shaking and other cai:th~l':i~ike 'characteristics;' 'building 'i11aterial; -and
                            construct.ion quality. Certain ·types of building 111<lterials and constructlOn techniques'
                            have demonstrated the ability to resist strong ground 1not10n better than other types
                            of building technklues and materials. Listed below is a brief sUI11Jnary of SOlne of the
                            earthquake response characteristics that afC typically associated with different types of
                            building construction tnatcrials.
                            Wood Frame Buildings
                            SInal! onc- and two-story wood fnune structures generally wifhstand the, effect.s of
                            ground shaking (Iuite well,. These' buildings rarely collapse, prilllarily because of their
                            flexibility and light weight. Large wood frame buildings of twO stories, or tnorc, may
                            be badly dan1agcd during an earthquake, hut usually do not collapse. Unfortun~ltdy,
                            wood frame buildings arc prone to damage by fires that often occllr after a large
                            carrhcluakc.
                            Steel Frame Buildings
                            These structures are vc.ry flexible and will usually survive ground shaking well. 1\5 in all
                            t.ypes of sUuctllrcs, defects in construction such as poorly welded srfllctural1l1Clnbcrs
                            can result in increased levels of dalnagc.
                            Reinforced Masonry Buildings
                            \X!hcn properly designed and constructed, reinforced lnasonry structures call survive
                            the effeers of ground shaking quite well. Ho\\,ever, these types of strllctures are brittle,
                            and in strong cluakcs may crack and have a higher potential for collapse than wood and
                            steel fralne. structures. Improper concrere 111ix, structure design, or inadc(luatc
                            rcinforccll1ent. will subst.antially increase ,"he potential for structural failure.
                            Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
                            These types of strUCt.ures consist of buildings made of unreinforccd concrete and brick,
County 3m} eWes of San Luis ()lJjspo                                                               Technical Background Report
116

hollow concrete blocks, clay tiles, and adobe. Buildings constmcted of these materials
are heavyand brittle, and typically provide little eatthquake resistance. In small eanhquakes,
unreinforced buildings can crack, and in strong earthquakes, they have a tendency to
collapse. These types of stmctures pose the greatest stmctural risk to life and safety of all
general building types.
Non-stmctural items and building components can also influence the amount of damage
that buildings suffer during an eatthquake. Unreinforced parapets, chimneys, facades,
signs, and building appendages can all be shaken loose, creating a serious risk to life and
property.
As described above, unreinforced masomybuildings generally perform poorly in strong
eanhquakes, and have a high potential to suffer e>.1:ensive damage. Due to the public
safety risks that are posed by unreinforced masonry buildings, the California legislature
passed Senate Bill 547 (Government Code section 8875 et seq.). TIus legislation went
into effect January 1,1987, and required all cities and cmillties located in Seisntic Zone 4
(this includes San Luis Obispo County) to conduct an inventoty of potentially hazardous
stmctures, including unreinforced masonry buildings. After the survey was completed,
jurisdictions were required to develop a program to ntitigate potentially hazardous
stmctureS. All proposed nutigation programs were required to be reponed to the
appropriate legislative body of the city or cmillty and filed with the Seisnuc Safety
Commission. SB 547 requires the inventory and establishment of a mitigation program
that, at minimum, includes notification to the legal owner that the building is considered
to be one of a general type that historically has little resistance to'eanhquake relatedloads.
County of San Luis Obispo
To comply with the requirements of SB 547, the Collinyof San Luis Obispo adopted
the Uniform CAlde for Building Conservation as pan of Title 19 (Building and
Construction Ordinance) of the County Code. Surveys that were conducted to
identify potentially unsafe unreinforced masonry buildings identified about 80
structures that will require modifications to meet specified eanhqualte resistatlCe structural
standards. Identified structures that require seisnuc retrofit are generally located in various
areas, mosdy urhan. TIle County's ordinance implementing SB 547 requires the owners
of identified unreinforced buildings to demolish or complete modifications to the stmcture
prior to 1997 to 2000, depending upon the building's use and number of occupants.
Arroyo Grande
To comply with the requirements of SB 547, the Oty of Arroyo Grande adopted
the U!tifonn Code for Building Conservation. Surveys that were conducted to locate
potentially unsafe unreinforced masonry buildings identified very few structures
that would have required modifications to meet specified eanhquake resistance
stmctural standards. Most of the buildings identified as unreinforced masonry
buildings were located in the Village Area. The Oty worked closely with propeny
owners, and through voluntary measures, minimum earthquake resistance
improvemeIlts were made to all but one building.
Atascadero
To comply with the requirements of SB 547, the City of Atascadero adopted
Ordinance No. 226, which amended Title 8 of the Atascadero Municipal Code to include
the requirements of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation. Surveys that were
conducted to identify potentially unsafe llilreinforced maSOllty buildings identified 20
Technical RlckgroiJlld Report                                                            County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                         117
                               structures that will require modifications to meet specified earthquake resistance structural
                               standards. "The Oty's ordinance implementing SB 547 requires the owners of identified
                               unreinforced buildings to demolish or complete retrofits to the structure prior to the
                               year 1996. However, at the time this report was produced, the Oty's ordinance
                               implementing SB 547 was being revised in order to extend the retrofit deadline.
                               Grover Beach
                               To comply with the requirements of SB 547, the Oty of Grover Beach adopted
                               ordinance number 95-5 (Municipal Code section 8103) which adopted the
                               requirements of the Uniform CDde for Building CDnservation. Surveys that were
                               conducted to identify potentially unsafe unreinforced masonry buildings originally
                              identified 19 structures that required modifications to meet specified earthquake
                               resistance structural standards. These structures are located on Grand Avenue. TI,e
                               Oty's ordinance implementing SB 547 does not have a deadline date.
                               Morro Bay
                               To comply with the requirements of SB 547, the Oty of Morro Bay Municipal
                               CDde section 14.18 adopts the requirements of the Uniform CDde for Building
                               CDnservation. Surveys conducted to identify potentially unsafe unreinforced
                               masonry buildings identified 15 structures that would require modifications to meet
                               specified earthqual<e resistance strucmral standards. TI,ese structures are.generally located
                               in the downtown area (Morro Bay Boulevard and Main Street). Four of the buildings
                               were retrofitted in 1992-93 and all building owners were served with an·orderto comply
                               with the Oty's Murucipal CDde sectiori 14.18 in 1991. In 1996, the OtyCDuncil aniended
                               section 14.18 of the Municipal CDde to provide for voluntary compliance in accordance
                               with Califomia and SafetyCDdes sections 19160-19169.
                               Paso Robles
                               To complywith the requirements of SB 547, the Otyof Paso Robles adopted Ordinance
                               No. 696 which adopted the requirements of the Unifom1 CDde for Building CDnservation.
                               Surveys that were conducted to identify potentially unsafe unreinforced masonry buildings
                               identified [structures that will require modifications to meet specified earthquake resistance
                               structural standards. Identified structures that require seismic retrofit are generally located
                               in the downtown area. The Oty's ordinance implementing SB 547iequires the owners
                               of identified unreinforced buildings to demolish or complete modifications.
                               City of San Luis Obispo
                               To comply with the requirements of SB 547, the Otyof San Luis Obispo adopted
                               Ordinance No. 1287 which adopted the requirements of the Uniform CDde for Building
                               CDnservation. Smveys that were conducted to identify potentially unsafe unreinforced
                               masonry buildings identified 127 structures that will require modifications to meet specified
                               earthquake resistance structural standards. 67 percent of the identified structures that
                               require seistruc retrofit are generally located in the downtown area. Ordinance No. 1323
                               requires the owners of identified unreinforced buildings to demolish or complete
                               modifications to the structure prior to the year 2017. In the interim, propenyowners are
                               required to complete partial strengthening as a condition of reroofing the building.
                               Airport Hazards
                               San Luis Obispo has three airports, San Luis Obispo, Paso Robles and Oceano. In rural
                               areas, there are numerous private landing strips. Each of the three operating aitports has
                               designated hazard zones extending from the end of each active runway Safety hazards
                               associated with the CDunty's airports are principally related to the risk of an aircraft
County and CitiL'S of San Luis ObiSpo                                                              Teclmical Background Report
118

accident and arc addressed by each airport's land llse plan adopted in c0111pliancc with
Section 21675 of the California Public Utilities Code. Noise occurring at these airports, is
addtc5scd in the Noise Elclnent.                                            '     .      -
San Luis Obispo
This is the largest airporT in the County, pnwiding conuTIufcr and private service to the
region. Three major airlines operate commuter s('.lyice (flying 15 to 35 scat propeller
planes) to Los Angeles, San Francisco and Sacra111ento. Other slnaller c01TIpanics also
provide regular and charter service. The airport is located south of the City of San Luis
Obi,po ill the Edna Valley. The area to the eaot of the airport i, undeveloped property (at.
various times large projects have been proposed for this area) an(~ yjneyards. Surroundir~g
the airport is the indusrrial and commercial area kno~yn as the ".AiqJort _Area'-', of the
COUBfy. This area has long been under consideration for annexation to the City and will
continue to develop. l\lost aircraft risk would be to properties to the west and northeast
of rhe Hirport.
Paso Robles
The second largct-it airport in the County is located in the northeast portion of the City of
Paso Roble,. ncar the Califorlli" Youth /l.ulhority f"eilily. As well '" that facility, this
municipal airport is ncar low and medium density t:~si~lcntial lISCS in the Jardine Road
area to the cast. Areas north and south of the ~lirrort arc rda~ivdy undeveloped. The
airport is used primarily by private aircraft, although 011 occasiol1 (usually because of fog)
flights will re-route to Paso RobleB frotl1 San Luis Obispo. The airport also has an active
sky diving business (15 to 20 flighrs per week). There have been occasion"l conflicts (real
or perceived) between aircraft and jlU11jXrs. The aitlJon is abo used extensively by I)lat'c
fire fighring aircraft during wildland fire seasoll.
Oceano
The smilIlcsr of the three airports, Ckcano is rnostly used for private aircraft. The airport
is located south of the cOlnmunity of Oceano. It has a single runway which has row of
crop fidds to the cast; and a residential area and the Pacific Ocean to the west.
Hazardous Trees
I\-laturc frees can he an integral pan of a COmnllll1it)\often providillga dhtinctive appcaGtncc
and helping to establish and define t"he character of the comITIuniry. Exmnples of how trees
can help to (kfine the identity of a conll1lltllity can be seen in several locations in San l . uis
Obispo County. These examples include the j\Ioluerey pine rrccl) of Cmnbria, eucalyptus
trees of the Nip01110 area, and the oak lTees of rhe Paso Robles area. To help preserve trees
from indiscriminate or unnecessary removal, the Count)' of San Luis ()bispo Land Use
 Tcclmical Background Report                                                               County and Cities o{San Lllis Obispo
                                                                                                                          119
                                                                         Ordinance (scuion 22.05.0(0) specifics conditions
<..;3 1                                                                  \vherc a permit is re(llured to be obtained prior to
                                                                         the removal of certain trees within urb~U1 and village
                                                                         areas. One of the criteria for rernoving a uce is when
                                                                         it i:-; "dead) diseased beyond rCclanl<ltiol1) or
                                                                         hazardous."
                                                                         ,A condition that is threatening the health of the
                                                                         1\'1011 terey pine trees in the Call1bria are~l is the pine
                                                                         pitch canker. This disease, native to 1Y1exico and. the
                                                                         southeastern United States, was first found in
                                                                         California in 1986. Since then, it has been found. in
                                                                         16 counties, and is spread by insects, 1"he usc of
                                                                         contaminated tools, anu the transport of infected
                               wood. The pine pitch canker is considered to be a significant thtcat to the continued
                               survival of the r"fontercy pine cCOS},stell1. J'vlonrcrey pine trees were once coml11on along
                               the California coast approximately 11 /JOO years ago, but changing weather conditions,
                               anu 1110re recently, devdopll1cnt pressure has limited the occurrence of native lYfonterey
                               pine trces. Large native stands of the trees arc now only found in the Ano Nuevo,
                               I\Jontcrcy, and Cambria areas.
                               If a tree becomes infected with the pine pitch GU1kcr, the disease can spread quickly, and
                               can fcslllt in the rapid death of the tree. If an infected or d<;ad tree is not pr<Jlx'rly
                               ren1oved, it not only becomes a thrC<lt 'to' ~·pread the disease, but'can also re;ult. in a s~fety
                               threat, as a large dead tree is a- fu"c hazard as well as presenting the potential to become
                               uprooted anu to fall during a ston11. The proper and thud), rC1110val of dead trees from
                               the Call1bria area has recently presented problems, particularly when the dead trce(s) is
                               located on a vacant lot, or ;1 lot with an absentee owncr. This can become a problem
                               because trees that arc infected with the pine pitch canker can die so rapidly, the property
                               owncr(s) Inay not be aware that a problem exists.
                               Radon Hazards
                               Radon is a naturally occurring g~ls that is produced by the breakdown of tu'aniUIl1 in soil,
                               rock, and water. Radon cannot be detected by. sight.,'ta~tc,
                                                                                       ,          (';! smell,
                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                              at~(nt i's ·csti~nated to
                               cause between 7,000 and 30,000 lung cancer deaths per year. The Blast common source
                               of exposure to radon is from the accmnulanon of the gas inside structures. The Surgeon
                               General and EPA 1'<:':(Omn1Cl1(\ testing for radon, and reducing radon in homes that have
                               high levels. EPA usc, a continuous exposure level of 4.0 pCi/L (picoCuries per liter of
                               air) as a guidance level at which rClnedbl action is recolTIll1cmkd. Based on indoor
                                                            radon data from the EPJ\!State Residential Radon Survey of
                                                            California conducted during 1989-90, the .lvcrage indoor
        ,(~1.""X                                            radon level for the 15 residences surveyed il~ San Luis Obispo
        rj,/"1J""i 'L'T
        ))ff;;!,{,,:                                        COtllltr \Va' 2.7 pUlL.
              -c { j\  ft.-
                   'it/,                                    Radon ent.ers a Structure because the air pressure inside the
                                                            building i~ tlswilly lower than the air pressure in the soil around
                                                            the building foundation. Because of this difference in pressure,
                                                            radon can be drawn into a structure through foundation cracks
                                                            and other openings. Two factors that contrihute to a SlnlCturc)s
                                                            indoor radon levels arc the geology the strUCTUre is founded
                                                            on and the construction of rhe stuctLU:e. Stlicturc-s founded
                                                            on uraniw11 sourceS Of geologic formations -with high
County and Cit ics of San Luis Ohispo                                                                   TcclmiC<:li J3;,/ckgro[Jnd Report
120

equivalent uranium (e U) concentrations are at a higher risk of exhibiting elevated indoor
mdon levels. Gener,tlly, Mesozoic granitic rocks, Tertiarysedimentaryrocks derived from
them, and Teltiarymarine sedimentary rocks tend to exhibit increased eU concentmtions.
Also soils with high permeability allow movement of radon gas to a greater extent than
low penneability soils. The construction of a structure also affects the indoor radon
level. Structnres that are well sealed but allow infiltration through the foundation are
more likely to exhibit higher indoor radon levels than structures with a sealed fowldation.
Structures that arc built partly below grade, or sllucU,res that are cut into a hillslope, arc
more likely to exhibit higher radon levels than structures built with slab-an-grade or
raised floor systems.
Nwnerous techniques exist to limit the infiltration of radon into new construction.
Preventing or sealing cracks that may develop in the foundation slab will help prevent
radon from entering the structnre. For existing bnildings, methods to reduce radon
exposnre usnally include the installation of fans and exhaust systems designed to expel
r"don gas and improve the circulation of air throughout the structure.
 Technical Background Report                                                            County and Cities of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                        121
                                                                             zz~
  J.IOdJ(/ pUfJoAhpeg ['!J!WP;~L          ods{qO ,S'!f11lJRS JO sam:) PUl! A1{Ino:J
                                 ,_c. --.
)
               References
Anderson, J,G., 1984, Synthesis of seismicity from geologic structure, for seismic-risk
studies: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 69, p. 135-158.
Anderson,]. G., 1984, Synthesis of seismicity and gelogic data in Califomia: U.S. Geological
Survey Open-File Report 84-424, 186 p.
Anderson, RS., 1990, Evolution of the northem Santa Quz Momltains by advection of
crust past a San Andreas fault bend: Science, v. 249, p. 397-401.
Anoyo Gmnde, Otyof, 1996, Memo from Teny Fibich to Scon Spierling, December.
Anoyo Grande, atyof, 1997, Personal contact, Teny Fibich, ArroyO Gmnde Fire
Department.
Asquith, D.O., 1975, Letter regarding San Luis Obispo Comlty Seismic Safety Element,'
1 p.
Asquith, D.O., 1997, Review of potentially problematic faults in San Luis Obispo Cotll1ty,
prepared for Fugro West, Inc., and the O:mntyof San Luis Obispo.
Atascadero, Otyof, 1993, Office of Emergency Services (Police Department), Otyof .
Atascadero Dam Failure Plan, 19 p.
Atascadero, Otyof, 1995, Draft Arnapoa/Tecorida Master Drainage Study, April.
Atascadero, Otyof, 1997, Personal contact, Milte McCain.
Blake, T.F. (1995), Prelin1inary Fault Data for EQFAULT and FISKSP.
Bolt, B.A, and Miller, RD., 1975, Catalog of ear,thquakes in northem Califomia and
adjoining areas, 1 January 1910-31 December 1972, Seism~graphic Stations, University
of Califomia: Berkeley, Uuiversityof Califomia, 567 p:
Gtlifomia Department of .H:ealth Services, 1992, Ekruiuw.d.rnagnetidickh~==
;)lld possible effeClLOllJruman health.                                   ' .
Califomia Department of Water Resources, 1974. Inundation Map for Whale Rock
Dam, Califomia, Scale 1:24,000.
Califomia Depattment of Forestry and Fire Protection, 1984, San Luis Obispo Cotll1ty
Fire Hazard Severity.
Califomia Department of Forestry, 1997, Personal contact, Ben Stewart.
C1lifomia Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG), 1996, Califomia Fault Pammeters,
Califomia Division Mines and Geology, Intemet Site.
C1lifomia Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG), 1997, Guidelines for Evaluating
and Mitigating Seismic Hazards in Califomia: Dept. of O:mservation, Division of Mines
and Geology, Special Publication 117.
Tecbnical Background Report                                                           County (1m] Cities of San Luis ObiSpo
                                                                                                                       123
                            Califomia Public Utilities Conunission, 1993, Decision 93-11-013, November 2.
                            Califomia ResoW'ces Agency, 1996, CalifDmia's I Zone.
                            Central Coast Engineering, (no date), Inundation Map of 01Orro Reservoir, San Luis
                            Obispo O:mnty, Califomia, Scale 1:12,000.
                            Central Coast Laboratories, Inc., 1972, Preliminary soil and geological investigation of
                            Tmet 424, Heritage Ranch, Lake Nacimiento, Califomia: unpublished consultant's report,
                            March 29, 1972.
                            Central Coast Laboratories, Inc., 1975, "Geology-Subzonation of Zone F;' £eismic..Saf'l:t}'
                            Element for tbe City of Morro Bay.
                            Oark, D.G., Hall, N.T., HWlt, TD., and Lenis, WR., 1988, Style and timing of slip on tbe
                            San Miguelito fault, San Luis Obispo County, Califomia: Geological Society of America,
                            Cordilleran Section, Abstracts, with Programs, v. 20, no. 3, p_ 150.
                            Oark, D.G., 1990, Late Quatemarytectonic deformation in the Casmalia range, coastal
                            south-central Califomia: in Lettis, WR, Hanson, K.L., Kelson, K.I., and Wesling, J,R,
                            cds., Neotectonics of sonth-central coastal C'llifomia: Friends of the Pleistocene, Pacific
                            Cell 1990 Fall Field Trip Guidebook, p_ 349-383.
                            Oark, D.G., Slemmons, D.B., C,skey, S.J., and dePolo, D.M, 1994, Seismotectonic
                            framework of coastal central Califomia, in Alterrnan, LB., McMullen, RB:, Ouff, L.S:,
                            and Slemmons, D.B., eds., Seismotectonics of the Ccntml Califomia Coast Ranges: Boulder,
                            Colomdo, Geological Society of America Special Paper 292, p. 9-30.
                            Oark, MM., and 12 others, 1984, Preliminary slip-mte table and map of late Quatemary
                            faults of Califomia: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 84-106, 12 p.
                            Compton, RR, 1966, Granitic and metamorphic rocks of the Salinian block, Califom.ia
                            Coast Ranges, in Bailey, E.R, ed., Geology of northem Califomia: Califomia Division
                            of Mines and Geology Bulletin 190, p. 277-287.
                            Qawford, ED., 1971, Petrolewn potdI;~ial of Santa Maria province, Califorria,m G-am,
                            I.R, ed., Future PetrolewnProvinces of the United States - Their Geology and Potential:
                            American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir 15, volume 1, p. 316-328.
                            Qouch, J., Bachman, S.B., and Shay, J.T., 1984, Post-Miocene compressional tectonics
                            along the central Califomia margin, in Qouch,]., and Bachman, S.B., eds., Tectonics and
                            sedimentation along the Califomia margin: Pacific Section of Society of Economic
                            Paleontologists and Minemlogists, v. 38, p. 37-54.
                            Cununings, D., and Johnson, T.A., 1994, Shallow g~ologic structure, offshore Point
                            Arguello to Santa Maria River, central Califomia, in Altenllan, LB., McMullen, RB., Ouff,
                            L.S., and Slenullons, D.B., eds., Seismotectonics of the Ccntml C1lifomia Coast Ranges:
                            Geological Society of America Special Paper 292, p. 211-222.
                            Dehlinger, P., and Bolt, B.A., 1987, Earthqual<es and associates tectonics in a part of
                            coastal centml C1lifomia: Seismological Society of America Bulletin, v. 77, p. 2056-2073.
                            Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1977, Guidelines for
                            evaluating and luitigating seismic hazards in Califomia, Special Publication 117.
County and CWes of San Luis Obispo                                                           Technical Background Report
124

Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, I-kadquarters Sacramento, Official Map:
Fire hazards severity zones in state responsibility areas, office map on file in Fire Prevention
Bureau.
Department of Navigation and Ocean Development, 1977, "A>sessment and Atlas of
Shoreline Erosion Along the Q,]j£omia o,ast."
Dibblee, T.W., Jr., 1971, Geologic m1ps of Addaida, Bryson, Bradley, Parkfield, Paso
Robles, "Reef Ridge," and San Miguel quadrangles, Q,]j£omia: US. Geological Survey,
Open-File Map, Scale 1:62,500.
Dibblee, TW., Jr., 1972a, Geologic map of the McPherson Peak quadrangle, Q,]j£omia:
US. Geol. SUlvey, Open-File Map, Scale 1:62,500.
Dibblee, TW., Jr., 1972b, Geologic maps of the Pozo, Ll Panza, and part of tl,e Branch
MOUlltain quadrangles, Q,lifomia US. Geological Survey Open-File Map, Scale 1:62,500.
Dibblee, TW.,Jr., 1972c, The Rinconada fault in the southern o,ast Ranges, Q,]j£omia,
and its significance: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Pacific Section, Annual
Meeting, Bakersfield, C,]j£omia, March, 1972, expanded abstract, 15 figs.
Dibblee, T:W., Jr., 1973, Regional Geologic Map of San Andreas and Related Faults in
Q,rrizo Plain, Temblor, Q,liente, and La Panza Range and Vicinity, Q,]j£omia: US.
Geological Survey Miscellaneous Geologic Investigations Map I-757, Scale 1:125,000.:;., .
                                                                  . "."     -         -.- i  ,.
Dibblee, TW., Jr., 1974, Geologic map of the San Luis Obispo 15-minute Quadrangle,
Q,]j£omia: US. Geological Survey Open File Report 74-223.
Dibblee, TW., Jr., 1976, The Rinconada and related faults in the southern o,ast Ranges,
Q,]j£omia, and their tectonic significance: US. Geological Stuvey Professional Paper 981,
55 p.
Earth Systems o,nsultants, 1995, Landslide investigation for the Paneyand Nevis
Landslides, Morro Bay, Cwomia, and Estero Llndslide; Q,yucos, Q,]j£omia: tU1pnblished
consultant's report, prepared for Engineering Development Associates, August 24, revised
September 29, 16 p. with plates.
EllswOlth, WL., 1990, Earthquake history, 1769-1989 in RE. Wallace, cd., TIle San Andreas,
Fault System: US. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1515, p. 153-187.
Federal Emergency Management Agency, 1981, 1982, 1984, 1985, Flood insurance rate
maps for San Luis Obispo o,=ty, incorporated and U1tincorporated areas.
Fugro West,Inc., 1997, Whale Rock Transmission Main Vuhlerability Assessment, Q,yucos
to San Luis Obispo, Q,]j£omia: =publi,hed consultant's report, preparedforthe Gtyof
San Luis Obispo.
Griggs, G., and Savoy, L., 1985, "Living with the Q,lifomia o,ast," sponsored by the
National Audubon Society.
Grover Gty, 1996, Written correspondence from Sandra M Bierdzinski, AlCP, October.
Guptil, PD., I-kath, E.G., and Brogan, G.E., 1981, Surface fault traces and historical
earthquake effects near Los Alamos Valley, Santa Barbara County, Q,lifomia: U.S.
Geological Survey Open-File Report 81-271, 56 p.
Technical Background Report                                                                 County imd Cities of San Luis Obi::.po
                                                                                                                            125

                              Hall, CA., Jr., 1973a, Geologyof the Arroyo Grande Quadrangle, Califomia: C,lifomia
                              Division of Mines and Geology Map Sheet 24.
                              H,ll, CA., Jr., 1973b, Geologic Map of the Morro Bay South and Port San Luis
                              Quadrangles, San Luis Obispo GlUntY, Califomia, US. Geological Survey Miscellaneous
                              Field Studies Map MF-511, Scale 1:24,000.
                              Hall, CA., Jr., 1975, San Simeon-Hosgri fault system, coastal Califom.ia: economic and
                              environmental iruplications: Science, v. 190, no. 4221, p. 1291-1294.
                              Hall, CA., Jr., 1981, San Luis Obispo transform fault and middle Miocene rotation of
                              the westem Transverse Ranges, Califomia: Joumal of Geophysical Research, v. 86, no.
                              B2,p.1015-1031.
                              Hall, CA., Jr., and CDrbato, CE., 1967, Stratigraphy and structure of Mesozoic and
                              Cenozoic rocks, Nipomo Quadrangle, southem CDast Ranges, Califomia: Geological
                              Society of America, Bulletin, v. 78, p. 559-582.
                              Hall, CA., 1974, Geologic Map of the Cambria Region, San Luis Obispo CDunty,
                              Califomia, US. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Ficld Studies M.p MF-599, Scale
                              1:24,000,2 Sheets.
                              Hall, CA., Jr., and Prior, S.w., 1975, Geologic map of the Cayucos-San Luis Obispo
                              region, San Luis Obispo CDunty, CWfomia: US. Geological Survey Miscellaneous Field
                              Studies Map MF-686, Scale 1:24,000, 2. sh~elS.                                    .
                              Hall, CA., Jr., Emst, w.G., Prior, S.w., and Wiese, J.R, 1979, Geologic map of the San
                              Luis Obispo-San Sirueon region, C.alifomia. US. Geological SurveyM1p MF-1097.
                              Hall, N.T., Hwlt, T.D., and Vaughan, P.R., 1994, Holocene behavior of the San Sirueon
                              fault zone, south-central coastal Califomia, in Altennan, LB. McMullen, R.B., Ouff, L.S.,
                              and Slel1ll1lons, D.B., eds., Seismotectonics of the Central Califomia CDast Ranges:
                              Geological Society of America Special Paper 292, p. 167-190.
                              I-Ianson, K.L., and Lettis, w.R., 1994, Estimated Pleistocene slip-ratdorthe San Sirueon
                              fault zone, south-central coastal Califomia, in Altennan, LB., McMullen, R.B., Ouff, L.S.,
                              and Slenml0ns, D.B., cds., Seismotectonics of the Central Califomia CDast R.1nges:
                              Geological Society of America Special Paper 292, p. 133-150.
                              Harding, TP., 1976, Tectonic significance and hydrocarbon trapping consequences of
                              sequential folding synchronous with San Andreas faulting, San Joaquin Valley, Califom.ia:
                              American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 60, p. 356-378.
                              Hart, E.W., 1976, Basic geology of the Santa Margarita area, San Luis ObispoCDwlty,
                              Califomia: Califom.ia Division of Mines and Geology Bulletin 199,45 p.
                              Elart, E.W., 1985, Rinconada fault (Espinosa and San Marcos segments), Monterey and
                              San Luis Obispo counties: Califom.ia Division of Mines and Geology Fault Evaluation
                              Report FER-175, 11 p.
                              Hart E.W., Bry.U1t, w.A., Manson, M w., and Kahle, J.E., 1986, Sunmlary report: Fault
                              evaluation program, 1984-1985 area (sonthem CDast Ranges region and other areas):
                              Califol11ia Division of Mines and Geology Open-File Report 86-3 SF, 8 p., 1 table, 1
                              plate.
COUJ}ty iJnd CWes of San Luis Obispo                                                           Tcc/micaJ Background Report
126
Hauksson, E., and 17 others, 1988, The 1987 Whittier Narrows earthquake in the Los
Angeles Metropolitarl area, C,lifol11ia: Science, v.239, p. 1409-1412.
Hilemen,J.A, Allen, C R, and Nordquist,].M, 1973, Seismicity of the southern California
region, 1 January 1931 to 31 December 1972: Pasadena, C.,jjfol11ia region, 1 Jarmary
1931 to 31 December 1972: Pasadena, California Institute of TechnologySeismologieal
bbomtory, 487 p.
Hill, DP., Eaton, J.P., and Jones, L.M., 1990, Seismicilyof the San Andre,,, fault system:
1980-1986, in Wallace, RE., cd., 'The San Andreas fault system: u.s. Geological Survey
Professional Paper 1515, p. 115-150.
Houston,JR, and Garcia, A W, 1978, Type 16 flood insurance study: Tsunamipredictions
for the west coast of the continental United States: u.s. Anny Engineer Waterways
Experiment Stations Hydraulics Laboratory, P.O. Box 631, Vicksburg, Miss., 39180,
Unclassified, unpublished report.                                            '     '       .
Hunt Research Cotporation, 1990, Draft fire ckp;lrtment U1aslerpla!l~ilI.tas£adem,
May.
Jennings, CW, 1958, Geologic map of the San Luis Obispo sheet: California Division
of Mines and Geology, Scale 1:250,000.
Jennings, CW, 1977, Geologic map of C,lifomia: California Division of Mines and
Geology, 1 map, Scale 1:750,000.                               " " ' .j
Jermings, CW, 1994, Fault activity map of California ,md adjacent areas: Califomia Division
of Mines and Geology, Geologic Map No.6, Scale 1:750,000.
Kilboul11e, R T., and Mualchin, L., 1980a, Geology for Plarming: Guadalupe and Point
Sal 7.5 Minute Quadrarlgles, Santa Barbara and San Luis Obispo Counties, C,lifornia:
C,lifornia Division of Mines and Geology, Open File Report 80- 5 SF, 49 p.
Kilboul11e, RT., and Maulchin, L., 1980b, Geology for Planning, Cayucos md Cypress
Mountain 7 1h' Minute Quadrarlgles, Sm Luis Obispo County, California, California
Division of Mines and Geology Open-File Report 80-6 SF, 48 p. with Plates.
Krammes, K.F., md Curran, J.F., 1959, Correlation section 12 across Santa Maria basin
from Cretaceous outcrop in Sauta Ynez Mountains northerly to Franciscan outcrop
north of Smta Maria River, C,lifomia: American Association of Petroleunl Geologists,
Pacific Section, Map scales 1:12,000 md 1:48,000.
Lettis, WR, md Hall, NT., 1994, Los Osos fault zone, Sarl Luis Obispo County, Califol11ia,
in Altel111aIl, LB., McMullen, RB., duff, L.S., and Slemmons, DB., cds., Seismotectonics
of the Central C,lifomia Coast Ranges: Geological Society of America Special' Paper
292, p. 73·102.
Lenis, WR, Kelson, K.L, Wesling,J,R, Angell, M, I-Ianson, K.L., arld Ball, N.T., 1994,
Quaternary dcfomtation of the Sarl Luis Range, San Luis Obispo County, C,lifornia, in
Altel11tan, LB., McMullen, RB., duff, L.S., and Slcmmons, DB., eds., Seismotectonics
of the Centf"l C.,jjfornia Coast Ranges: Geological Society of Anlerica Special Paper
292, p. 111-132.
Tt~clJ(JjcaJ Background Report                                                       County and Cities of San Luis ObiSpo
                                                                                                                     127

                              Levin, HL., 1986, Contemporary Physical Geology, 2nd Edition, Saunders College
                              Publishing.
                                                                                                                            (
                              Lien.kaemper,].J., 1996, Unpnblished slip rate tables for northem Califomia.
                              Manson, M., 1985, San Simeon fault zone and Cambl1a fault, San Luis Obispo County,
                              California: Califom.ia Division of Mines and Geology Fault Evaluation Report FER-
                              170.
                              McOean, H, 1994, Geologic Map of the Lopez Mountain Quadrangle, San Luis Obispo
                              Colmty, Califolnia, U.S. Geological Survey Map GQ-1723, Scale 1:24,000.
                              McOean, H, 1995, Geologic Map of the Tar Spring Ridge Quadrangle, San Luis Obispo
                              County, Califomia, U.S. Geological Survey Map MF-2298, Scale 1:24,000.
                              Merritt, R, 1994, Electromagnericl.ields· policJl-planniug--alliLJitigation.
                              Mimam, L. Jolm, 1974, Immdation Map of Righetti Dam No. 743, San Luis Obispo
                              County, Califomia, Scale 1:24,000.
                              Morro Bay, atyof, 1997, Personal contact, Robert Cassell, Morro Bay Fire Department.
                              Morro Bay, aty of, 1997, Personal contact, Jeff Jones, Mon·o Bay Fire Department.
                              Mualchin, L., and Jones, AL., 1992, Peak acceleration from maxmmm cred.ible:e;mhquakes
                              in Califomia (rock ,md stiff-soil sites), prepared for intemal use by Cutrans, Califomia
                              Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology Open-File Report 9201.
                                                                                                                            (
                              Namson, ].S., and Davis, T.L., 1988, A structural transect of the westem Transverse
                              Ranges, Califomia: implications for lithospheric kinematics and seismic ri,k evaluation:
                              Geology, v. 16, p. 675-679.
                              Namson, ].S., and Davis, T.L., 1990, Late Cenozoic fold and thrust belt of the southem
                              Coast Ranges and S:mta M~ria basin, Califomia: American Association of Petroleum
                              Geologists Bulletin, v. 74, p. 467-492.
                              Niemi, T.M., and Hall, N.T., 1992, Late Holocene slip rate and reelmence of great
                              earthquakes on the San Andreas fault in northem Califomia: Geology, v. 20, no. 3, p. 196-
                              198.
                              Nitchman, S.P., 1988, Tectonic geomotphologyand neotectonics of the San Luis Range,
                              S,m Luis Obispo County, Califomia [M.S. thesis]: Reno, University of Nevada, 120 p.
                              Nitclunan, S.P., and Slemmons, D.B., 1987, Late Pleistocene flexural-slip fault faulting
                              possibly triggered by crustal unloading, Pismo Beach, central-coastal C-ilifomia: Geological
                              Society of An1erica Abstracts with Programs, v. 19, no. 6. p. 437.
                              Nitchman, S.P., and Slemmons, D.B., 1994, TIle Wilmar Avenue fault: A late Quatemary
                              reverse fault near Pismo Beach, Califomia, in Altem1an, LB., McMullen, RB., Ouff, L.S.,
                              and Slemmons, D.B., cds., Seismotectonics of the Central Califomia O,ast Ranges:
                              Geological Society of America Special Paper 292, p. 103-110.
                              Norris, RM and Webb, R w., 1990, Geology of Califomia, 2nd Edition, John Wiley &
                              Sons, USA
County and Cities of San Luis Obj~po                                                           Tcclmical Background RDfJort
128

Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 1973, Section 2.5, Gcology and Seismology, Final
Safety Analysis Report, Units 1 and 2, Diablo Canyon Site: U.S. Atomic Energy
Collli1ussion Docket Nos. 50-275 and 50-323.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 1988, Final Report of the Diablo Cmyon Long-
term seismic progmm:       u.s. Nuclear Regulatory Conmlission docket nos. 50-275 and
50-23.
Pacific Gas and Elecll;c Company, 1994, PG&E Magnetic field levels around homes.
Page, B.M, 1970, Sur-Nacinuento fault zone of Califomia- continental margin tectonics:
Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 81, p. 2825-2834.
Paso Robles, Gtyof, 1997, Personal contact, Doug Hemp, Department of Emergency
Services.
Prentice, C, Nienu, T.N., and Hall, H1~, (1991), Quatemarytectonicsof the northern
San Andreas fault, San Fmncisco Peninsula, Point Reyes, and Point Arena, Califomia
[field trip guide): California Division of Mines and Geology Special Publication, v. 109,
p.25-34.
San Luis Obispo, Gty of, 1996, Written correspondence from Page Dougherty.
San Luis Obispo, Gtyof, 1997, Personal contact, Dave fucdel, San Luis Obispo Fire
Department.                                                   '. ',' "'. '
San Luis Obispo, County of, 1976, Safety Element.
San Luis Obispo, County of, 1992, Office of Emergency Services, Threat assessment
infoffi1ation excerpts from the San Luis Obispo county emergency operations pIan.
San Luis Obispo, Cotmtyof, 1994, Office of Emergency Services, Excerpts from San
I Mis Obispo Co.lJUtyllazardous materials response plan.
San Luis Obispo, County of, 1997, Office ofE;;;~rgenq Services, Saal Luis Obispo
County Planner.                                            . .,' ". ," .          . ... '
San Luis Obispo, County of, (no date), Office of Emergency Services, Inundation Map
of San Antonio and Nacinuento Dams, San Luis Obispo and MontereyCDunry, Califomia,
2 sheets, Scale 1:24,000.
S,m Luis Obispo, Countyof, 1974, Engineering Department, Immdation Map for Tenninal
Dam, San Luis Obispo County, California, Scale 1:24,000.
San Luis Obispo, (".Duntyof, Plaaming and Building Department, Official Fire Response
Times Map for A.reas served by Gtlifomia Department of Forestry and Fire Protection,
County Fire Protection Services.
Shaw, ].H, and Suppe, J., 1994a, Active faulting and growth faulting in the eastem Santa
Barbam Qmmel, C-ilifomia: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 78, p 700-721.
Shaw, ].H, and Suppe,]., 1994b, Earthquake hazards of active blindthlUst faults wlder
the central Los Angeles basin, California: Journal of Geophysical Research (Subnntted
for publication),
TvcJmicaJ Background Report                                                         COUllty and Cities of San Luis ObiSpo
                                                                                                                     129
                              Sieh, K.E., and Jahns, RH, 1984, Holocene activity of the San Andreas fault at Wallace
                              Creek, Califomia: Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 95, p. 883-896.
                              Smith, T. and Olishohn, L., 1998, How Earthquakes are Measured, DMG Note 32,
                              adapted from 8/97 Edition for the www.
                              Staal, Gardner & Dunne, Inc., 1987, Geoteclmical Study, Phase III, Laurel Avenue Landslide,
                              Morro Bay, San Luis Obispo enunty, Califomia: unpublished consultant's report, prepared
                              for the Otyof Morro Bay.
                              Stein, RS., 1985, Evidence for surface folding and subsUlface fault slip from geodetic
                              elevation changes associated with the 1983 Coalinga, Califomia, earthquake, in Rymer,
                              ].M., and Ellsworth, w'L., cds, Mechanics of the May 2, 1983, enalinga earthquake: u.s.
                              Geological Survey Open-File Report 85-33, p. 225-253.
                              Steritz, ].W., and Luyendyk, B.P., 1994, Hosgri fault zone, offshore Santa Maria Basin,
                              Califomia, in Alterman, LB., McMullen, RB., Ouff, L.S., and Slemmons, D.B., eds.,
                              Seismotectonics of the central C'1lifomia Coast Ranges: Geological Society of America
                              Special Paper 292, p. 191-210.
                              Suppe,]., 1983, Geometty and kinematics of fault-bend folding: American Joumal of
                              Science, v. 283, p. 648-671.
                              Toppozada, T.R, Parke, D.L., and Higgins, CT., 1978,.SeismicityofCalifomia, 1900-
                              1931: GMomia Division of Mines and GeologySpecialReport 135, 39 p.                        .
                              Toppozada, T.R, Real, CR, and Parke, D.L., 1981, Preparation of isoseismal maps and
                              SlUllmaty of reponed effects for pre-1900 Califomia eanhquakes: Califomia Division
                              of Mines and Geology Open-File Report 81-11 SAC, 182 p.
                              Treiman, ].A, 1989, Los Osos Fault Zone: Califomia Division of Mines and Geology,
                              Fault Evaluation Report FER-200.
                              U.S. Am,y Engineering District, San Francisco, 1975, InUl1dation Map of Salinas Darn,
                              San Luis Obispo and MontereyenUl1ties, Califomia, Scale 1:24,000,6 sheets.....
                              Vedder,].G. and Repenning, CA, 1976, Geologic Map of the Cuyama and New GIyama
                              Quadrangles, San Luis Obispo CoUlltY, Califomia, U.s.G.s. Mi,cellaneous Investigation
                              Series map F-876, scale 1:24,000.
                              Vedder, ].G., and Brown, RD., 1968, Structural and stratigraphic relations along the
                              Nacimiento fault in the southelll Santa Lucia Rlnge and San Rafael MOUl1tains, Cilifomia,
                              in Dickenson, w'R, and Grantz, A, eds., Proceedings of conference on geologic problems
                              of San Andreas fault system: Stanford, Califomia, Stanford University Publications,
                              Geological Science, v. 11, p. 242-259.              .
                              Vedder, ].G., Howell D.G., and McLean H, 1986a, Geologic Map of La Panza and
                              Cllifomia Valley quadrangles, Califo11lia: USGS Open-File Repon86-637, Scale 1:24,000.
                              Vedder, ].G., Howell D.G., and McLean H, 1986b, Geologic Map of parts of Lopez
                              Mountain, Santa Margarita Lake and Pozo SUlllinit quadrangles, Califomia: USGS Open-
                              File Report 86-635, Scale 1:24,000.
County and Cities of San Luis Obispo                                                           TccJmical Background Report
130
  Vedder,].G., Howell, D.G., and McClean, H, 1986c, Geologic Map of Branch Mountain
  Quadrangle and Pan of Cllimineas Ranch Quadrangle, Gilifomia, USGS Open-Pile
  Repon 86-633, Scale 1:24,000.
  Vedder, ].G., Howell D.G., Mclean, H, and WIley, T.]., 1988, Geologic map of Los
  Mochos Hills and Glldwell Mesa quadrangles and pan of Tar Spring Ridge Quadrangle,
  Gilifomia: USGS Open-Pile Repon 88-253, Scale 1:24,000.
  Vedder, ].G., Howell D.G., and McLean H, 1989, Geologic map of Cllimney Cmyon
  Quadrangle and pan of Huasna Peak Quadrangle, Colifomia: USGS Open-Pile Repon
  89-161, Scale 1:24,000.
  Weber, G.E., 1983, Geologic investigation of the marine terraces of the San Simeon
  region and Pleistocene activity of the San Simeon fault zone, San Luis Obispo County,
  Gilifomia: US. Geological Survey Technical Repon, 66 p.
  Wells, D.L., and Coppersmith, K.]., 1994, New empirical relationships anlong magnitnde,
  mpture length, mpture widdl, mpture arca, and surface displacement: Seismological Society
  of America Bulletin, v. 84, no. 4, p. 974-1002.
  Wentwonh, CM, and Zoback, MD., 1989, TI,e style of Late Cenozoic defOlmation at
  the eastem front of the Gilifomia Coast Ranges: Tectonics, v.8, p. 237-246.        .'
  Wesnousky, S.G., 1986, Eanhquakes, Quatemaryfaults, and.se,i~!nic,hazard in Gilifomia:
  Joumal of Geophysical Research, v. 91, no. B12, p. 12587-12631.                   ... ..
  WIlcox, R.E., I-Iarding, T.P., and Sed)\ D.R., 1973, Basic wrench tectonics: American
( Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 57, p. 74-96.
  Woodring, WP., and Bramlette, M.N., 1950, Geology and paleontology of the Santa
  Maria district, Gllifomia: US. Geological Survey Professional Paper 222, 185 p.
  Working Group on Gllifomia Eanhqual<e Probabilities, 1988, Probabilities of large
  eanhquakes occurring in Gilifomia on the San Andreas Pault: US. Geological Survey
  Open-Pile Repon 88- 398, 62 p.
  Working Group on C1lifomia Earthquake Probabilities, 1990, Probabilities of large
  eanhquakes in the San Prancisco Bay Region, Califomia: US. Geological Survey Grcular
  1053,51 p.
  Working Group on Colifomia Eanhquake Probabilities, 1995, Seismic Hazards in Southem
  Califomia: Probable Eanhqual,es, 1994 to 2024: Bulletin of the Seismological Society of
  Anlerica, Vo!' 85, No.2, pp. 379-439.
  Yerkes, R.F., 1985, Geologic and seismologic sening, in Ziony, lE., ed., Evaluating
  eanhquake hazards in the Los Angeles region- An eanh-science perspective: U.S.
  Geological Survey Professional Paper 1360, p. 25-41.
  Ziony,].!., and Yerkes, R.F., 1985, Evaluating canhquake and surface-faulting potential, in
  Ziony, Jr., cd., Evaluating Eanhquake hazards in the Los Angeles region- An eanh-
  science perspective: US. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1360, p. 43-91.
  Zoback, MD., and 12 others, 1987, New evidence on the state of stress of the San
  Andreas fault system: Science, v. 238, p. 1105-1111.
  Technical Background Report                                                          County iJTJd eWes of San Luis Obispo
                                                                                                                      131
