


























































































































                                                                  CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
2.0 Land Use Element
2.1     GENERAL LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DESIGN
Objectives
A. Maintain and enhance the “small town” character and quality of life in the community by
    maintaining the Central Business District as the geographical center of the community,
    through special design guidelines and streetscape improvements.
Policies, Standards
    1. Maintain and enhance Wasco’s physical diversity, visual qualities and small town
        characteristics.
    2. Strive to keep Wasco separate and distinct from nearby communities.
    3. Maintain the core area 7th Street corridor as the City’s geographic center.
    4. Maintain the Central Business District (bounded by the BNSF Railroad to the east, 6 th
        Street to the north, 8th Street to the south and Griffith Avenue to the west)) and the 7 th
        Street corridor as Wasco’s traditional medical, professional, government and cultural
        center. New uses and services should be directed to the CBD and the 7 th Street Corridor
        to the extent practicable. The CBD shall be expanded in proportion to the expansion of
        the community.
    5. Schools and parks shall be used as central features of neighborhoods. Neighborhoods
        shall be connected to these central features, shopping and service areas, and to other
        neighborhoods by Minor Collectors.
    6. Maintain the City’s high level of circulation level of service, increase connectivity of
        neighborhoods, and minimize division of the community caused by major transportation
        facilities (e.g., railroads, highways and arterials). The City shall use a hierarchy of streets
        including Local Roads, Minor Collectors, Collectors and Arterials to facilitate such
        circulation.
    7. Infill shall be encouraged on unused or underutilized parcels. Street standards shall be
        used that are appropriate for neighborhood scale and planned traffic levels.
    8. Improve the aesthetics along the BNSF Railroad gateway into downtown.
    9. Encourage larger lot residential in peripheral areas as a density transition to agricultural
        land (Estate and Rural Residential designations).
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                       2.0 - 1

                                                                CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
B. Ensure that the community grows in an orderly manner to minimize infrastructure costs, to
    ensure that growth occurs in a contiguous manner, public facilities are provided in a timely
    manner, and to ensure that agricultural lands are preserved.
    1. Prominent physical natural or man-made features shall be used as growth phasing lines.
        Such features are to be used as the “hard edges” for urban development.
    2. Provide for orderly growth and development patterns through the designation of
        growth boundaries to be phased over time. Development shall only be permitted in the
        Urban Development Boundary. The Urban Development Boundary may be expanded
        upon the following findings:
            a. That at least 80 percent of the residential area within the Urban Development
                Boundary has been developed, or that undeveloped land within the Urban
                Development Boundary provides less than a ten-year supply of residential,
                commercial, industrial or public land uses; and that at least 60 percent of an
                individual land use (e.g., low density residential, estate residential, community
                commercial, etc.) has been developed. This finding is not required for Highway
                Commercial uses intended to serve the commercial needs of travelers
                throughout the city.
            b. That adequate infrastructure exists in the expansion area, or will exist upon
                development.
            c. That the Urban Development Boundary expansion area is substantially
                contiguous to existing development in the community.
            d. That the expansion area is not larger than the area necessary to provide an
                adequate ten-year supply of residential, commercial, public and industrial land
                uses, plus a 30 percent vacancy factor.
            e. That the expansion area includes properties that are planned for the
                development of public facilities including, but not limited to, water facilities,
                school sites, or for the development of highway orientated commercial uses.
    3. Areas annexed to the City shall be within the Urban Development Boundary and shall be
        substantially contiguous to the existing City Limits. “Substantially contiguous” shall
        mean that at least 20 percent of the annexed parcel’s perimeter is contiguous to
        existing City limits. This finding shall not apply to public facilities owned by the City or
        other public agencies that require services to be provided by the City.
    4. Development to the south and west is preferred.
    5. Encourage the removal of lands under Williamson Act contract to accommodate growth
        in the appropriate development phase.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                   2.0 - 2

                                                                                         CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
C. Ensure that development is compatible with the operation of Kern County Airport.
     (Reference Table 2-1 and Table 2-2.)
     1. All land uses and intensities shall be in accordance with airport compatibility criteria
         indicated on the Kern County Airport Land Use Compatibility Table.
     2. Zones may also apply elsewhere if an airport has atypical operational procedures or
         specialized aircraft activities.
                                                                Table 2-1
                                                     Compatibility Criteria
                                  Kern County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
                                                       Maximum Densities
                                                                                   Maximum Densities              Required Open
                                                                                   Residential1     Other Uses    Land 3
  Zone    Location                            Impact Elements                      (du/ gross acre)
                                                                                                    (people/gross
                                                                                                    acre)2
   A      Runway Protection Zone or                High risk
                                                                                              0            10      All Remaining
          within Building Restriction Line         High noise levels
   B1     Approach/Departure Zone and              Substantial risk — aircraft
          Adjacent to Runway                        commonly below 400 ft. AGL
                                                                                            0.1            60           30%
                                                    or within 1,000 ft. of runway
                                               Substantial noise
   B2     Extended Approach/Departure          Significant risk — aircraft
          zone                                      commonly below 800 ft. AGL              0.5            60           30%
                                               Significant noise
   C      Common Airport Environs              Limited risk — aircraft at or
                                                    below 1,000 ft. AGL                      15            150          15%
                                               Frequent noise intrusion
   D      Other Airport Environs               Negligible risk                                                          No
                                               Potential for annoyance from            No Limit        No Limit
                                                                                                                   Requirements
                                                    overflights
1. Clustering of units is encouraged as a means of meeting the Required Open Land requirements.
2. People per acre at any one time, including employees, customers and visitors.
3. Open land requirements are intended to be applied with respect to the entire zone.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                                                2.0 - 3

                                                                                                  CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                       Table 2-2
                                                              Compatibility Criteria
                                       Kern County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
                                                            Land Use Compatibility
                                  Additional Criteria                                                             Examples
Zone
      Prohibited Uses1                       Other Development Conditions         Normally Acceptable Uses 2          Uses Not Normally Acceptable 3
  A    All structures except ones            Dedication of aviation              Aircraft tiedown apron             Heavy poles, signs, large
            with location set by                    easement                       Pastures, field crops,                 trees, etc.
            aeronautical function                                                       vineyards
       Assemblages of people                                                      Automobile parking
       Objects exceeding FAR part
            77 height limits
       Hazards to flight
  B1   Schools, day care centers,            Locate structures maximum               Uses in Zone A                 Residential subdivisions
 and        libraries                               distance from extended             Any agricultural use except       Intensive retail uses
  B2   Hospitals, nursing homes                    runway centerline                   ones attracting bird flocks    Intensive manufacturing or
       Highly noise-sensitive uses  Dedication of avigation                      Warehousing, truck                     food processing uses
            (e.g. amphitheaters)                    easement                            terminals                      Offices with more than two
       Storage of highly flammable                                                Two-story offices                      stories
            materials7                                                             Single-family homes on an  Hotels and motels
       Hazards to flight                                                               existing lot
  C    Schools                               Dedication of over-flight           Uses in Zone B                     Large shopping malls
       Hospitals, nursing homes                    easement for residential       Parks, playgrounds                 Theaters, auditoriums
       Hazards to flight                           uses                           Most retail uses                   Large sports stadiums
                                                                                   Duplexes and medium-               Hi-rise office buildings with
                                                                                        density apartments                 more than four stories
                                                                                   Two-story motels
  D.       Hazards to flight                 Deed notice required for            All except ones hazardous to 
                                                    residential development             flight
1. May be modified by airport-specific policies or decision of local governing body with appropriate findings.
2. Within the B1 and B2 zones, only aviation fuels other aviation-related materials, and up to 2,000 gallons of nonaviation materials.
3. These uses typically do not meet the density and other development conditions listed. They should be allowed only if a major community
     objective is served by their location in this zone and no feasible alternative location exists.
       3. Residential parcels should not contain more than the indicated number of dwelling units
              per gross acre. Clustering of units is encouraged as a means of meeting the Required
              Open Land requirements.
       4. A land use should not attract more than the indicated number of people per acre at any
              time. This figure should include all individuals who may be on the property (e.g.,
              employees, customers/visitors, etc.). These densities are intended as general planning
              guidelines to aid in determining the acceptability of proposed land uses. Special short-
              term events related to aviation (e.g., air shows), as well as non-aviation special events,
              shall be exempt from the maximum density criteria.
       5. Open land requirements are intended to be applied with respect to the entire zone.
       6. The restrictions and standards contained in the Airport Land Use Compatibility Table
              may be superceded by Airport-specific policies or a decision of the City Council upon
              recommendation of the Planning Commission where a finding is made that the policy or
              decision will not result in an increase in risks to property or persons, or where other
              community needs or benefits to the community substantially outweigh the increased
              risks. Such findings shall be based upon substantial evidence in the record.
   City of Wasco General Plan                                                                                                                2.0 - 4

                                                                 CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
    7. Uses that do not meet the density and other development conditions may be allowed
        only if a major community objective is served by their location in this zone and no
        feasible alternative location exists, and the findings in Policy C.6 are made.
2.2     RESIDENTIAL LAND USE
Objectives
A. Designate and allow for the development of a wide range of residential housing types in the
    City including housing for middle and upper income families to meet the needs of all
    residents.
Policies, Standards
    1. The following residential density designations shall be used:
        a. Rural Residential (0 – 2 dwelling units/gross acre). The Rural Residential land use
            category provides for a land use pattern characterized by residential development
            with lot sizes ranging from a minimum of 20,000 square feet to a maximum of 2.5
            acres. The usual development pattern found in such areas is standard subdivision
            development with lot sizes generally between 20,000 square feet to 2.5 acres. All
            residential developments above 1 unit per acre need not be served by City sewer
            and water services if adequate private services can be provided. This designation
            should be used on areas where there are permanent edges, or where higher
            densities may conflict with safety objectives. Farm animals may be permitted on
            lots which are at least one acre in size and which are not abutted by higher density
            residential land uses.
        b. Estate Residential (2 - 4.5 dwelling units/gross acre). The Estate Residential land use
            is intended to promote larger lot homes.
        c. Low Density Residential (3.5 - 7.5 dwelling units/gross acre). The low density
            residential category provides for a land use pattern and development of
            predominantly single-family homes as permitted in the R-1 zone district. This
            designation also provides for innovative designs, which utilize clustering, duplexes or
            half-plexes on corner lots, zero lot line, or planned development features. Lot sizes
            generally range from 6,000-10,000 square feet.
        d. Medium Density Residential (7.6 - 15.0 dwelling units/gross acre). This land use
            category provides for a land use pattern characterized predominantly by small scale
            multiple family residential developments. The typical residential pattern includes
            duplexes and larger scale, low rise, high-amenity apartments. Areas designated
            medium-high density residential are to be integrated throughout the community
            adjacent to transportation, community services and commercial developments. To
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                   2.0 - 5

                                                                 CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
            avoid inappropriate concentration of these facilities, such developments shall be
            limited to 25 contiguous units when integrated into a single-family neighborhood
            and to 50 contiguous units when developed as a freestanding development.
            Additional requirements include:
                1. Such facilities should be dispersed throughout the community and not
                    concentrated in any one neighborhood.
                2. Such facilities should be located adjacent to park facilities where possible.
                3. They shall be limited in total size to 50 contiguous units.
        e. High Density Residential (15.1 - 24.0 dwelling units/gross acre). The High Density
            Residential land use category provides for the highest residential densities permitted
            in the City. It is intended that this category utilize innovative site planning, provide
            on-site recreational amenities, and be located near major community facilities,
            business centers, and streets of at least Collector capacity. Projects in excess of 25
            units or with a density in excess of 24 units per gross acre shall require a Conditional
            Use Permit. Such developments shall use high-quality architectural design features,
            intensified landscaping, adequate open space, adequate parking, and adequate on-
            site recreational facilities. Additional policies related to High Density Residential
            developments include:
                1. Such facilities should be dispersed throughout the community and not
                    concentrated in any one neighborhood.
                2. Such facilities should not be located within ¼ mile of a school facility.
                3. They shall be limited in total size to 100 units.
    2. Each residential category indicates a range of density deemed reasonable and desirable
        for areas within the Planning Area. The maximum density indicated defines the number
        of units per gross acre within a given area. Residential development must provide at
        least the minimum number of units per gross acre indicated in the General Plan, unless
        a Conditional Use Permit has been granted. This requirement is intended to encourage
        the location of certain residential product types and densities consistent with adjacent
        land uses, access, public services, and environmental concerns.
2.3     COMMERCIAL LAND USE
Objectives
A. Ensure the provision of adequate commercial shopping opportunities and office space
    locations to meet anticipated needs.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                    2.0 - 6

                                                                CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Policies, Standards
    1. Establish the following commercial land use designations:
        a. Neighborhood Commercial. The Neighborhood Commercial land use designation
            provides for a 5-10 acre cluster of commercial establishments.                  Typical
            Neighborhood Commercial centers will have a grocery store, drug store, fast food
            pads, and smaller shops which serve the everyday convenience goods and personal
            service needs of a defined neighborhood. The service radius of a Neighborhood
            Commercial use is generally 1 mile. Neighborhood Commercial sites should be
            located at or near the intersection of Collector and/or arterial streets with a
            minimum of overlap with other existing or planned Neighborhood Commercial uses.
            Only one Neighborhood Commercial development may be permitted at any one
            intersection. Such developments should also be directly accessible from adjacent
            residential developments.
        b. Community Retail Commercial. The Community Retail Commercial land use
            designation provides for a 10-acre or larger cluster of commercial establishments
            serving needs similar to the Neighborhood Commercial centers, but also includes
            larger-scale general merchandise, variety, and specialty stores. The Community
            Retail Commercial center generally serves a market area with a service radius of two
            miles, and may also provide central shopping for smaller surrounding communities.
            Due to its central location and accessibility, the Highway 46 commercial area would
            function as the Community Retail Commercial center. Such facilities should be to
            minimize cross-town traffic. Community Retail Commercial uses should be located
            along major traffic ways in consolidated centers that utilize common access and
            parking for commercial uses. Strip commercial uses are to be discouraged.
            Adequate pedestrian links to residential areas shall be required.
        c. Highway Commercial. This designation provides for localized concentrations of uses
            catering to the traveling public including service stations, hotels, restaurants, or
            other visitor-serving uses. Highway Commercial nodes may be located on one
            corner of major intersections outside of the contiguous community, including the
            intersection of Kimberlina and State Highway 43. Such Highway Commercial nodes
            shall be limited in size to three total acres unless it can be demonstrated that a
            greater amount will not have an adverse impact on existing or planned commercial
            facilities in the community. Because of the growing importance of the intersection of
            Kimberlina Road and State Route 43, Highway Commercial development may occur
            on all four corners of the intersection and need not be limited to three acres in size.
        d. Service Commercial. This designation provides for commercial areas for non-retail
            commercial uses that provide services to consumers. Such uses may have
            characteristics that require isolation or separation from residential or other
            commercial uses. Typical uses may be body shops, car repair garages, contractors
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                   2.0 - 7
                                                                  CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
            yards, etc. This commercial designation may be applied along arterial streets and
            highway corridors to provide commercial support for nearby Community and CBD
            Commercial uses as well as industrial areas.
        e. Central Business District (CBD) Commercial. This designation provides the City with
            a mixed-use activity area in the downtown area, including retail, office, service,
            public and institutional and special residential uses. It is intended to provide for a
            wide range of uses and to promote the reuse of downtown buildings. CBD
            Commercial designation should be used in the downtown area in order to attract
            and accommodate commercial, financial, office, governmental and limited
            residential uses. Rehabilitation of existing structures to accommodate residential
            and office facilities on upper floors in the CBD Commercial district is encouraged.
            Conversion of existing residential units is encouraged adjacent to the downtown to
            provide for smaller scale office space.
        f. Professional Office. This designation provides for office development, which
            includes medical, dental, law, or other professional offices. Applicable zones may
            include general office, office conversion, etc. Professional Office land uses should be
            designated which allow construction of new office unified centers, the
            redevelopment of existing areas to office use, and the conversion of older homes to
            offices along major streets. Where homes are converted to offices, the area should
            be a logical extension of existing or planned office/commercial uses, and the lot
            should be of adequate size to accommodate parking in the rear of the structure or
            outside of the front yard landscape setback. An office conversion zone should be
            developed to establish standards for conversion of existing residential structures.
            Office uses should be located in and adjacent to the downtown and near medical
            facilities. Small scale office uses are permitted in the Community, Neighborhood and
            Central Business districts. Access shall be improved to support proposed
            development. Development shall be compatible with adjoining residential
            neighborhoods.
Objectives
B. Provide for the compatible integration of residential and commercial uses.
Policies, Standards
    1. Development standards for the interface between commercial or office uses and
        residential uses shall be as follows:
        a. A landscaped setback of at least ten feet wide containing deciduous and evergreen
            trees maybe required to be planted and maintained along the property line between
            commercial or office uses and residential zoned and developed properties that have
            a common property line.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                   2.0 - 8
                                                                CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
        b. A masonry wall six feet in height may be required to be erected along the property
            line where commercial and office uses have a common property line with
            residentially zoned and developed properties.
        c. A masonry wall three and one-half feet in height or a landscape berm may be
            required to be erected along the front setback line, parallel to, and ten feet from the
            local street abutting residentially zoned and developed properties.
        d. All commercial loading and storage areas shall be screened from view of adjoining
            residential property by a combination of landscape planting and a masonry wall.
            Loading areas shall be enclosed and be located so that there are no noise impacts to
            adjacent residential properties. All storage shall be within an enclosed structure.
        e. Roof-mounted and detached mechanical equipment shall be acoustically baffled to
            prevent noise from the equipment from exceeding 65 dB (A) measured at the
            nearest residential property line.
    2. In order to encourage the integration of Neighborhood and Community Commercial
        uses into neighborhoods, designs should de-emphasize the usage of walls as buffers
        where they create barriers to pedestrian access. Continuous block walls shall be
        discouraged and offsets, landscaping pockets and openings shall be encouraged.
    3. In order to promote non-vehicular modes of transportation, and to limit the
        unnecessary usage of Collectors and Arterials for vehicular access, commercial
        development shall provide direct pedestrian and vehicular access to adjoining
        residential areas through Minor Collectors, Local Streets and/or through pedestrian
        access points.
2.4     INDUSTRIAL LAND USE
Objectives
A. Promote industrial sites which are functional, have adequate public services, and have
    access to major streets and railroads.
Policies, Standards
    1. Establish the following industrial land use designations:
        a. Light Industrial. This category establishes Light Industrial areas where uses such as
            fabricating, assembly, research and development, electronics, low intensity
            warehousing and other such similar industrial uses are appropriate. All work,
            materials, and equipment storage is generally conducted indoors. Light Industrial is
            appropriate as a buffer between Heavy Industrial and non-industrial uses and where
            the site is visible from residential areas or major streets. Special landscaping,
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                    2.0 - 9
                                                                CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
            enclosures and other site development standards should be used. Industrial park
            development is intended on larger parcels to create distinct districts of industrial,
            office, and support uses. The industrial park area shall have high quality landscaping,
            architectural designs, and general site development requirements.
        b. Heavy Industrial. Heavy Industrial allows for a range of activities including
            manufacturing, wholesale distribution, large storage areas and other non-hazardous
            industrial uses. Areas developed under this designation should be located with
            direct access to major streets or railroads.
    2. Promote a mix of industrial uses that provide the City with a sound, diverse industrial
        base, and which is consistent with the City’s infrastructure constraints.
    3. Locate industry with access to major streets, truck routes, and rail service.
    4. Industrial development should not create significant off-site circulation, noise, dust,
        odor, visual, and hazardous materials impacts that cannot be adequately mitigated.
    5. Provide adequate land for a wide range of industrial uses. Larger scale uses
        (warehousing) and higher intensity uses not compatible with residential development
        should be located outside of the industrial park, either easterly of the community, or
        along SH 99. In order to increase the capture rate of industries in the community, such
        areas should be master planned to expedite processing of applications, and aggressively
        marketed (along with the industrial park) to targeted industries.
    6. Major streets which pass through industrial areas and serve as entrances to the City,
        shall receive special design treatment to reduce aesthetic impacts and traffic concerns.
        Design standards for industrially zoned parcels shall be as set forth in the City of Wasco
        Zoning Ordinance.
    7. Provide for the use and re-use of small light industrial properties in or near the
        downtown for service commercial uses to complement adjacent commercial, office and
        residential land uses.
    8. Expansion of existing non-conforming uses in the industrial areas shall be discouraged.
2.5     PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL LAND USE
Objective
A. Provide sites for adequate public facilities to serve projected growth.
Policies, Standards
    1. Establish the following public facility land uses:
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                  2.0 - 10

                                                              CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
        a. Public Buildings and Grounds. This designation indicates areas owned and
           maintained by public or institutional agencies such as the city, schools, hospitals,
           and other special districts.
        b. Schools-Elementary and Middle. Coordinate school location and site design with
           the school districts to ensure that adequate facilities and sites are available.
           Elementary and Middle school sites should be located at Collector/Collector, Minor
           Collector/Collector, or Minor Collector/Minor Collector street intersections that
           have good pedestrian and bicycle connections to the surrounding neighborhood.
           Such sites may be identified, reserved and acquired consistent with California
           Government Code Sections 66479-66482, or other means. Schools should abut
           neighborhood parks with adjacent development backing or siding onto the school.
           Pedestrian and bicycle access should be provided. Intermediate or Junior High
           Schools should be located in residential areas with a central location for surrounding
           area elementary schools at Collector/Collector or Collector/local street
           intersections. Additional local street frontage is desired for transition to adjacent
           residential areas. These schools should be located so that there are future expansion
           opportunities.
        c. Schools-High School. High Schools should be located at Arterial/Collector or
           Arterial/Arterial intersection with additional frontage on at least one other street.
           These sites should be located to provide for future expansion, and should be located
           as community growth anchors or centers. Additional high schools should be
           distributed around the community.
        d. General School Siting Requirements:
           1. New commercial development should be discouraged within a minimum of 1/4-
               mile of school sites. The shortest pedestrian access point between a commercial
               and school site shall be at least ¼ mile.
           2. The City, school districts and Parks District shall encourage joint use of school
               multi-purpose facilities and open space.
           3. The school districts shall be encouraged to coordinate their school location,
               facility construction and phasing with the City’s Urban Development Boundary
               and policies, development guidelines and the City’s Capital Improvement Plan to
               ensure that school facilities are located in areas where there are planned and
               programmed streets, sewerage, storm drainage systems and other necessary
               infrastructure.
           4. It is the policy of the City that adequate school facilities be available to serve
               new development. In implementing this policy both the City and school districts
               recognize that State law provides that the provision of school facilities is the
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                2.0 - 11

                                                                CHAPTER 2.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
               exclusive responsibility of the State and the respective school districts. However,
               since the potential may still exist that sources of financing, including statutory
               developer fees, state and local school bond monies and other state funds will be
               inadequate, the City shall work with the school districts to identify opportunities
               for joint funding of recreation and community facilities at school sites.
        e. Parks and Open Space. This designation determines areas of permanent open
           spaces, parks and/or areas precluded from major development. Standards shall be
           established in the Recreation Element for Community Parks of 20-60 acres each
           (including integrated school facilities and usable storm drainage facilities) which
           have a service radius of 1 ½ miles and are provided at a rate of three acres per
           thousand persons; Neighborhood Parks of 5-10 acres each (including integrated
           school facilities and usable storm drainage facilities) which have a service radius of ¾
           mile at a rate of 2.5 acres per thousand persons; and, mini parks up to 2 acres in size
           at a rate of 0.5 acres per thousand persons. Facilities for each park type shall be
           consistent with the Wasco Recreation and Parks District Development Standards.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                 2.0 - 12

                                      CHAPTER 3.0 CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
3.0 Conservation and Open Space Element
3.1     NATURAL RESOURCES
Objectives
A. Protect natural resources including groundwater, soils, and air quality, to meet the needs of
    present and future generations.
B. Ensure that environmental hazards including potential flooding and impacts from agricultural
    practices are adequately addressed in the development process within the City and the Wasco
    Planning Area.
Policies, Standards
    1. Protect areas of natural groundwater recharge from land uses and disposal method, which
        would degrade groundwater quality. Promote activities, which combine stormwater
        control, and water recharges.
    2. Expand programs that enhance groundwater recharge in order to maintain the
        groundwater supply, including the installation of detention ponds in new growth areas.
    3. No urban level development shall be approved in the City unless the development is, or will
        be served by the City sewer system, except in the Rural Residential zone.
    4. Water conservation methods shall be continued.
    5. To assist the City in meeting the clean air quality requirements of the federal and state
        Clean Air Acts, the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District will be consulted
        to provide community planning guidance to help reduce potential air quality impacts.
    6. Promote biological diversity and the use of plant species compatible with the bio-region.
    7. If street trees are removed, they shall be replaced with tree species specified on the City’s
        Street Tree Master Plan at a three to one ratio.
    8. New construction activities shall comply with the PM-10 control measures as set forth by
        the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District’s Guide for Assessing and
        Mitigating Air Quality Impacts.
    9. To protect human health, the City groundwater resources will be monitored on a regular
        basis to test for bacteriological and toxic chemical components.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                       3.0 - 1

                                                            CHAPTER 4.0 AGRICULTURAL ELEMENT
4.0 Agricultural Element
4.1     AGRICULTURE
Objectives
A. Encourage the preservation of prime farmland and farmland of statewide importance, while
    giving consideration to other compatible beneficial uses, such as groundwater storage and
    recharge facilities, surface mining operations, riparian habitat, and public recreation.
    Reclamation of agricultural lands to other uses, however, is discouraged wherever
    agricultural reclamation is feasible.
B. To provide a "greenbelt" around the City's perimeter to maintain the physical separation
    between the City and nearby communities, and to maintain the scenic beauty surrounding
    the City. The City should also establish "hard" edge growth phasing boundaries such as
    roadways, railroad right-of-ways, irrigation ditches, etc. to protect agriculture.
Policies, Standards
    1. Agricultural production areas shall be preserved as an important economic activity.
    2. New residential development should be substantially contiguous to existing
        development. Development should not occur unless at least 35 percent of a parcel is
        contiguous to existing urban development.
    3. Extension of urban improvements and services, including water, sewer lines and storm
        drain facilities, into agricultural areas shall be managed as a means to direct the location
        and timing of new urban development.
    4. Agricultural lands will be additionally protected from urban encroachment by limiting
        the extension of service facilities, particularly sewers.
    5. New residential or suburban subdivisions are prohibited in the agricultural designated
        areas.
    6. All commercial and industrial uses are prohibited in agricultural areas except those
        directly related to and incidental to the agricultural operation conducted on the land.
    7. Land uses permitted in the agricultural area shall be limited to those directly related to
        the production of agricultural crops on the land.
    8. The City shall consider the placement of certain agricultural related land uses in
        agricultural areas, by means of conditional use permits, which uses may be incompatible
        with urban sites by reason of hazard or nuisance to concentrations of people. Findings
        for approval shall include, but are not limited to:
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                    4.0 - 1
                                                           CHAPTER 4.0 AGRICULTURAL ELEMENT
           The use is directly related to agricultural land use (cultivation of agricultural plants
            or the raising of animals); and,
           Will not diminish nor prevent agricultural use on site or on adjoining agricultural
            lands; and,
           The use has some hazard or nuisance aspect which precludes it from being placed in
            an urban area; and,
           The use can be developed in the area without significant reduction of cultivation,
            growth, and harvesting of the indigenous agricultural products.
    9. In accord with agricultural zoning designations, packing operations for the purpose of
        culling and cleaning the agricultural products brought from the fields may be permitted
        in agricultural areas with conditional land use permits. Wine distilling and processing
        activities which involve cooking, fermenting, bottling, and similar wine distilling and
        processing activities, other than those engaged in by farm persons for the purpose of
        legal on-site sale of agricultural products, may be permitted by conditional use permits
        in the agricultural areas of this plan.
    10. The development of residential land uses on parcels of property created by land
        divisions in agriculturally designated areas shall be limited. Such requirement shall be
        assured by appropriate means.
    11. The division of land in an agricultural area for the purpose of providing homesites for
        persons not engaged in agricultural activities is prohibited.
    12. The City will support taxation laws which have the effect of supporting the continuation
        of agricultural land use. However, the City shall encourage the non-renewal or
        cancellation of agricultural preserves which are inconsistent with its adopted growth
        phasing policies. The City shall give notice to owners of property in the next successive
        growth phase regarding the City's growth phasing plans.
    13. The City shall regulate land use, encourage and cooperate with appropriate agencies to
        conserve, study, and improve soils. Prime soils shall be preserved outside of designated
        urban areas where they can be used for viable agricultural production.
    14. Growth phasing lines are the principal method of agricultural preservation. Growth
        phasing requirements on Policy 4.1.2, 2.1.2 and 2.1.3 shall be used to preserve
        agricultural land in the community.
    15. The City shall encourage the establishment of permanent Ag Preserves, "Super
        Williamson Act" preserves, or other such mechanism for property generally located
        westerly of Schofield Avenue, easterly of Root Avenue, northerly of McCombs Avenue
        and southerly of Kimberlina Road.
    16. Animal confinement facilities including dairies shall be prohibited within two miles of
        the City's Sphere of Influence.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                       4.0 - 2

                                                            CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
5.0 Circulation Element
5.1     STREET SYSTEM
Goal 1
Provide for the safe and efficient circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the
community.
Policies, Standards
General Circulation and Street System
1. Streets shall be designed in accordance with projected traffic volumes and city-adopted
    level of service standards. Oversized streets shall be discouraged.
2. Connectivity shall be encouraged and provided which permits vehicular and non-vehicular
    circulation within a neighborhood without exclusive reliance on perimeter collectors and
    arterials.
3. The right-of-way for the circulation system shall be developed and dedicated to the
    appropriate extent when development or division of property occurs.
4. Street widening and right-of-way acquisition in existing developed areas shall be
    undertaken when required for obvious safety reasons, such as trends towards higher
    accident rates or marked decline in overall levels of service.
5. Established truck routes shall be maintained. New truck routes should be limited to arterials
    and collectors.
6. Minor Collectors shall be used to provide connectivity within neighborhoods as shown in
    Figure 5-1. These streets shall have offsets, and/or other traffic calming features to
    discourage through traffic. They should also be designed to avoid four way intersections
    when possible.
7. Minor Collector streets shall provide access to traffic generating land uses such as schools,
    hospitals, shopping and recreation areas.
8. Arterials shall be designated to provide cross-town, through-town, and inter-city traffic.
    Access to abutting land uses shall be limited, where possible, to facilitate traffic flow and
    reduce potential traffic conflicts and hazards. They shall not be located adjacent to sensitive
    land uses nor shall they bisect neighborhoods.
9. Local streets shall be designated to limit high speed and through traffic.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                  5.0 - 1
                                                           CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                            Figure 5-1
                          Minor Collector and Overall Circulation Plan
                (Illustrative Only, Refer to Policies for Precise Requirements)
City of Wasco General Plan                                                            5.0 - 2
                                                                                                          CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
       10. Direct access (driveways) of residential developments to Arterials shall be prohibited.
             Direct access to Collector streets with projected traffic volumes at full build-out in excess of
             2,000 average daily trips, shall also be prohibited.
       11. Overnight truck (tractor-trailer) parking shall be prohibited in residential areas, or other
             areas that are deemed inappropriate.
       12. Traffic calming features may be used in accordance with Table 5-1. Passive traffic calming
             features such as road curvature and width, narrowings, street offsets and other built-in
             features are preferred over roadway obstructions such as speed humps or tables, chicanes,
             barriers, diverters, or traffic islands.
                                                                                Table 5-1
                                                       Permitted Traffic Calming Measures
                                                             Functional Classifications                                                      Subdivision Streets
                                    Interstates                                                                                            Minor
                                                                                        Minor                            Collector                                           Other
                                     Freeways        Arterials      Collectors                       Local Roads                          Collector     Local Streets
                                                                                     Collectors                           Streets                                         Restrictions
                                   Expressways                                                                                             Streets
Volume Control
Measures
                                                                                                      Only on an                                          >500 vpd
Full Closure
                                                       Not Recommended                                 exception            Not Recommended              >25% non-
Half Closure
                                                                                                         basis                                           local traffic
Diagonal Diverter                                                                                     <5,000 vpd                                          >500 vpd
Median Barriers                                        Not Recommended                                >25% non-             Not Recommended              >25% non-
Forced Turn Islands                                                                                   local traffic                                      local traffic
Vertical Speed
Control Measures
                                                                                                                                                                            Not on
                                                                                                      Only on an                                                            primary
                                                                                                                                 Daily volumes <3,000 vpd
Speed Humps                                            Not Recommended                                 exception                                                          emergency
                                                                                                                                  Posted speed <30 mph
                                                                                                         basis                                                           routes or bus
                                                                                                                                                                             routes
                                                                                                                                                                            Not on
Speed Tables
                                                                                                                Daily volumes <5,000 vpd                                    primary
Raised Crosswalks                               Not Recommended
                                                                                                                  Posted speed <35 mph                                    emergency
Raised Intersections
                                                                                                                                                                             routes
Horizontal Speed
Control Measures
                                                                                                                                                                            Not on
                                                                                                                                                                            primary
                                                                                                  Combined approaches - daily volumes <5,000 vpd
Mini-traffic Circles                            Not Recommended                                                                                                           emergency
                                                                                                                  Posted speed <35 mph
                                                                                                                                                                         routes or bus
                                                                                                                                                                             routes
Roundabouts                             Not Recommended                      Combined approaches - daily volumes <5,000 vpd Posted speed <35 mph
Lateral Shifts                          Not Recommended                             Daily volumes <10,000 vpd                Posted speed <35 mph
Chicanes                                Not Recommended                             Daily volumes <5,000 vpd                 Posted speed <35 mph
                                                                                                                                         Daily volumes <5,000 vpd
Realigned Intersections                                                 Not Recommended
                                                                                                                                           Posted speed <35 mph
Narrowings
Bulbouts
                                                                                                                Daily volumes <1000 vpd
Two-Lane Chokers                                Not Recommended
                                                                                                                  Posted speed <35 mph
Center Islands
Combined Measures                       Not Recommended                                     Subject to limitations of component measures
Note:                Subject to Approval by City Engineer
       City of Wasco General Plan                                                                                                                                      5.0 - 3
                                                               CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
13. A level of service of "C" is established for the City, except in the Central Business District and
    7th Street corridor from Palm to State Highway 43 where a level of service of "D" is
    acceptable due to established land uses.
14. Minor Collectors and Local streets shall not carry an unreasonable level of through traffic. If
    it is determined that a Local street or Minor Collector is carrying an unacceptable level of
    through traffic, the City may take appropriate means to reduce traffic through creation of
    one-way traffic flow, installation of traffic diversion devices, and/or any other means
    deemed to be acceptable under the Vehicle Code of the State of California. For the
    purposes of this policy an unreasonable level of traffic may be deemed to exist when traffic
    exists that is 25 percent in excess of the volume that would be expected from land uses
    directly served by these streets.
Arterial Streets
15. Arterial streets shall be built at a typical separation of one (1) mile with a typical right-of-
    way of 110 feet as shown in Figure 5-1 and 5-2.
16. Arterial Street Standards
    a. Driveway access to major activity centers shall be located away from adjacent
         intersections of a collector or arterial streets in a manner to avoid traffic conflicts.
    b. The distance between driveways along commercially developed arterials shall be limited
         in order to provide adequate ingress/egress and merging and weaving operations.
    c. Where possible driveways to major activity centers shall be located on adjacent
         collector streets rather than on arterial streets.
    d. Driveways along arterials to single-family residential property shall be prohibited; these
         properties shall receive access from local streets, Minor Collectors, or low volume
         Collectors.
    e. If driveways must be provided near intersections for facilities (such as service stations)
         these driveways shall not be serviced by median breaks and shall be located no less than
         far enough from the intersecting right-of-way in order to provide safe traffic operations.
    f. Driveway consolidation shall be encouraged through joint access easements along
         Arterials where the above standards are exceeded.
    g. Median breaks shall provide access to collector streets and to major activity centers and
         shall not be located less than an adequate distance away from adjacent intersections of
         an Arterial or Collector Street.
    h. Arterial streets shall include landscaping in accordance with Figure 5-2.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                        5.0 - 4
                                                             CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
    i.  To insure that the transportation system is so planned to minimize social and economic
        disruptions to the neighborhoods, Arterial streets shall skirt residential areas.
Collector Streets
17. Collector streets shall be built at a typical separation of one mile (typically between
    adjacent arterial streets), with a typical right-of-way of 86 to 104 feet as shown in Figures 5-
    1 and Figure 5-2.
18. Collector Street Standards
    a. Driveway access to major activity centers shall be located an adequate distance from
        adjacent Collector or Arterial street intersections.
    b. The distance between driveways and intersecting local streets shall be limited in order
        to provide adequate ingress and egress..
    c. Driveways to residential property along Collectors shall be consolidated whenever
        possible.
    d. If driveways must be provided near intersections for facilities (such as service stations)
        these driveways shall not be serviced by median breaks and shall be located far enough
        from the intersecting right-of-way in order to provide safe traffic operations.
    e. Medians on Collectors shall be raised concrete where left turn control is needed or
        painted median or two-way left turn pockets where otherwise appropriate.
    f. Collectors shall include landscaping in conformance with Figure 5-2.
19. Streets shall be designed for a level of traffic that will not cause a detrimental impact on
    adjacent land uses.
20. Unnecessary cross-traffic conflicts shall be eliminated to improve the traffic flow along
    arterial and collector thoroughfares. Raised medians shall be installed as required to
    restrict unsafe turning movements.
21. Collector streets shall be up to four lanes for through traffic and may include an optional
    median for left turn access to local streets and adjacent land uses. On street parking may
    be provided where street capacity does not require left turns or four through lanes.
22. Arterials and collectors in areas of existing development shall be built to standards
    consistent with a policy of reducing impacts on adjacent properties.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                   5.0 - 5
                                          CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                              Figure 5-2
                           Street Standards
City of Wasco General Plan                                           5.0 - 6
                                                             CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
23. Where possible, arterials and collectors should form 4-leg, right-angle intersections; jog,
    offset and skewed intersections of major streets in near proximity shall be avoided where
    possible.
24. Sidewalks, paths and appropriate crosswalks shall be located in order to facilitate access to
    all schools and other areas with significant pedestrian traffic. Whenever feasible,
    pedestrian paths shall be developed to allow for unobstructed pedestrian flow from within
    a neighborhood.
25. Where arterial and collector streets are required, residential development shall be oriented
    away (side-on or rear-on) from such streets, and properly buffered so that the traffic
    carrying capacity of the street will be preserved and the residential environment be
    protected from the adverse characteristics of the street.
26. Adequate access shall be provided to high intensity land use areas such as employment
    centers, shopping areas, and recreation facilities.
27. Due to the traffic congestion which results from numerous points of ingress and egress
    along commercial streets, future commercial developments or modifications to existing
    developments shall be master planned with limited points of ingress and egress onto a
    major street.
28. Ingress and egress to shopping centers shall be carefully designed in order to promote
    traffic safety. Left-hand movements into and out of commercial areas shall be minimized
    and existing points of ingress and egress shall be consolidated whenever possible.
Minor Collectors
29. Minor Collectors shall be used to provide access within a neighborhood, to major activity
    centers in a safe and efficient manner as shown in Figure 5-1.
30. Minor Collectors Standards
    a. Minor collectors shall be designed to connect neighborhoods and neighborhood access
        to schools, parks or other facilities without exclusive reliance on arterials or collectors as
        shown in Figure 5-1.
    b. Minor collectors shall be built as a 56- to 62-foot local street, in accordance with Figure
        5-2.
    c. Offsets shall be provided at least every 1,320 lineal feet of roadway, with such offsets
        between 125 to 200 feet. Streets shall be designed with gentle curves to achieve a 25
        mph design speed. Other traffic calming features shall be provided in accordance with
        Table 5-1, if necessary to achieve the desired design speed.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                      5.0 - 7
                                                             CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Local Streets
31. Local Streets shall be designed in accordance with adopted standards with right-of-way
    widths in conformance with Figure 5-2.
    a. 54-foot local streets may be used in cul-de-sacs or on local streets that will have traffic
        that does not exceed 750 ADT.
    b. Narrower streets without improved curbs and gutters may be used in Rural Residential
        areas with densities of no greater than one unit per acre if approved by the City
        Engineer in conformance with Figure 5-3.
    c. 58 to 62 foot wide streets shall be used for all other Local applications.
    d. All local streets shall provide for a parkway strip of at least 6.5 feet between the
        sidewalk and curb.
    e. Local street lengths should be short, preferably not exceeding 500 feet, or they shall be
        designed with gentle curves and changes in grade to break the sight line of the road into
        smaller visual elements.
    f. Traffic calming features such as curb extensions, traffic circles and medians may be used
        to encourage slower traffic speeds, in accordance with Table 5-1, in order to limit traffic
        speeds to 20 mph or less.
    g. Local streets shall be designed to limit and slow through traffic by narrower roadways,
        short lengths and other geometric configurations.
    h. Low volume streets shall be aligned to form three-way intersections when possible, in
        order to create inherent right-of-way assignment and to reduce accidents without the
        use of traffic controls.
    i.  A low volume street that intersects an arterial should be aligned with another street to
        form a four-way intersection. Local streets that intersect a collector should provide for
        an offset. These streets should be designed so that they can easily be regulated by a
        stop sign or other traffic control device, if necessary.
    j.  Curb cuts for driveways to individual residential lots shall be prohibited along arterial
        streets. Curb cuts shall be limited to intersections with other streets or access drives to
        parking areas for commercial, civic or multifamily uses. Clear sight triangles shall be
        maintained at intersections, unless controlled by traffic signal devices.
    k. A majority of streets should be curved or terminate so that that no street vista is longer
        than 500 feet.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                   5.0 - 8
                                                           CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
    l.  Pedestrian accessibility from adjacent residential neighborhoods shall be provided by
        the usage of through-block connections or other accessibility methods. These street
        linkages may include access roads, open ended cul de sacs, pedestrian paths, or other
        such facilities for pedestrian and bike access, and emergency access, where necessary.
        Such a linkage shall be made to abutting Collector or Arterials no less frequently than
        every 600 feet.
32. The Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or other applicable City codes and ordinances
    shall be amended to include standards to address the policies and objectives of the
    Circulation Element.
                                             Figure 5-3
                                      Rural Residential Street
5.2     PARKING AND ONSITE CIRCULATION
Goal 1
Provide for adequate parking.
Policies, Standards
1. Parking standards will be evaluated to ensure that parking requirements are satisfied within
    walking distance of development, and so that arterial streets do not separate parking from
    the parking demand generator.
2. Discourage the proliferation of surface parking as a general interim land use, particularly
    where sound residential, commercial, or industrial buildings would be demolished pending
    other development.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                               5.0 - 9
                                                           CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
3. Soften the impact of expansive parking areas in all land use designations through
    landscaping and tree plantings as prescribed in the City Zoning Ordinance.
4. Maintain street tree lines and landscaped buffers between parking surfaces and street right-
    of-ways.
5. Facilitate and encourage adequate parking throughout the community including all
    commercial areas.
6. Restrict the long-term automobile parking in the downtown area to those city parking lots
    behind the 7th Street retail corridor.
7. All new development (except as designated in the Downtown Overlay District) shall provide
    adequate on-site parking for the on-site uses.
5.3     PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE MODES
Goal 1
Assure expanded mobility for pedestrians.
Policies, Standards
1. In existing developed areas where sidewalks do not exist, the City shall continue to support
    existing programs and pursue new programs for sidewalk construction. Bicycle accidents
    shall continue to be monitored and bicycle paths and lanes shall be established upon need.
2. Promote safe, aesthetic, and pleasant space for pedestrians.
3. Widen sidewalks above the minimum established Improvement Standards where intensive
    commercial, recreation, or institutional activity is present and where residential densities
    are high.
4. Partially or wholly close certain streets and/or alleys which are not required for traffic,
    these streets can be used for pedestrian circulation open space use and density control.
5. Promote convenient and safe pedestrian crossings.
6. The Historic Downtown Overlay District shall be considered an intensive pedestrian
    atmosphere, with pedestrian linkages to the Amtrak Multi-Modal Transit Station and City
    parking lots.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                              5.0 - 10
                                                            CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
7. Pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided on local streets and Minor Collectors to
    enable pedestrians to have access through a neighborhood, to shopping areas, to transit
    stops, schools and other such facilities.
8. Locate sidewalks, pedestrian paths, and appropriate crosswalks to facilitate access to all
    schools and other areas with significant pedestrian traffic. Whenever feasible, pedestrian
    paths shall be developed to allow for unobstructed pedestrian flow from within a
    neighborhood.
9. Require, where security walls or fences are proposed for residential developments along
    Arterial or Collector streets, that pedestrian access be provided between the arterial or
    collector and the subdivision to allow access to transit vehicles operating on an arterial or
    collector street.
10. Promote safe, convenient, and accessible pedestrian access ways within the community.
11. Require construction of minimum four foot wide sidewalks. The placement of the sidewalk
    shall be in accordance with adopted standards.
12. Encourage the inclusion of green belts and common open space for pedestrian use within
    the residential development areas.
13. Require pedestrian facilities along all streets except for certain situations, such as industrial
    and rural residential areas, where there is no demonstrated need for pedestrians.
Goal 2
Develop and maintain an integrated Bicycle Access Plan for Wasco.
Policies, Standards
1. Require that Collector streets which are identified to function as links for the bicycle
    transportation system be provided with Class II bikeways (bike lanes) or show an alternative
    route. Arterial streets shall provide for a Class I or Class II bike routes. In such cases, the
    City shall accommodate cyclists on these identified streets by widening the street or
    eliminating on-street parking wherever possible.
2. Establish an effective program including financing for construction of and maintaining
    bicycle paths and sidewalks in the City of Wasco.
3. Design bicycle and pedestrian paths so that interaction with vehicular traffic is minimized.
4. Require the provisions for safe bicycle circulation in all new developments, including bicycle
    parking facilities and internal bicycle and pedestrian routes.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                   5.0 - 11
                                                              CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
5. Promote for the safe and convenient use of the bicycle as a means of transportation and
    recreation.
6. Expand and improve bikeways in accordance with State standards, incorporating bicycle
    trails within the Belt Park system and the parks.
7. Utilize available bicycle facility funding for projects in Wasco.
8. Prevent bicycle accidents through promoting bicycle safety education and improved traffic
    enforcement related to bicycle use.
9. Promote adequate and secure bicycle storage facilities at all public facility locations
    throughout the City.
10. Include facilities for bicycle users in governmental, commercial, and residential, and open
    space recreational developments.
5.4     TRANSIT AND RAIL
Goal 1
Reduce vehicle miles traveled by providing transit and rail options.
Policies, Standards
1. Promote choices among modes of travel and give priority to each mode when and where it
    is most appropriate. Encourage utilization of the Wasco Amtrak Multi-Modal Transit
    Station.
2. Promote incentives for the use of transit, carpools and vanpools.
3. Improve the speed and efficiency of mass transit in the City and enhance the current status
    of the existing rail system including passenger service.
4. Improve pedestrian and handicapped access to Amtrak Multi-Modal Transit Station.
5. Promote private taxi service to meet the needs of the City and keep fares reasonable.
6. The transportation facilities are interdependent, and efforts shall be made to ensure an
    efficient system by coordination of local and regional efforts. The regional and local transit
    links must be closely related and synchronized to provide maximum efficiency and transfers.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                               5.0 - 12
                                                          CHAPTER 5.0 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
7. Coordinate the City's dial-a-ride system with Amtrak and North Kern Regional Transit
    services.
8. Where security walls or fences are proposed for residential developments along arterial or
    collector streets, pedestrian access will be provided between the arterial and collector and
    the subdivision to allow access to transit vehicles operating on the arterial or collector
    street.
9. Arterials and collectors will be designed to allow transit vehicles to pull out of traffic. This
    policy may be implemented with either a continuous parking lane with bus stops, or with
    special bus pull-out lanes.
10. Give a high priority to public transportation systems which are responsive to the needs of
    the commuter, aged, handicapped and disadvantaged.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                 5.0 - 13
                                                                CHAPTER 7.0 SAFETY ELEMENT
7.0 Safety Element
7.1     EMERGENCY PLANNING
Objectives
A. Reduce the potential for loss of life and property resulting from natural and manmade
    hazards to a minimum.
B. Coordinate responses in the event of a local or regional natural or manmade disaster.
Policies, Standards
    1. The City will maintain its emergency preparedness, including evacuation procedures, to
        address potential natural and manmade hazards. These procedures shall be developed
        in coordination with Kern County’s emergency operations plans.
    2. All new buildings shall conform to state standards set forth in the Dangerous Building
        Code contained in the most current edition of the Uniform Building Code.
    3. The City of Wasco shall conduct joint training exercises between local fire and law
        enforcement personnel to develop coordinated action in fire suppression, traffic and
        crowd control.
    4. The City shall coordinate fire protection services with Kern County and neighboring
        communities, including consideration of mutual aid and instant aid agreements.
    5. During major disasters, the primary coordinating official on behalf of the City shall be
        the City Manager.
    6. The City shall establish a network of streets that permits emergency vehicle access to
        any individual property that is no more than one minute from designated Arterial,
        Collector or Minor Collection roadway.
7.2     FIRE PROTECTION
Objective
A. An effective and well-trained Fire Department that will protect the community from fire
    dangers.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                               7.0 - 1

                                                                  CHAPTER 7.0 SAFETY ELEMENT
Policies, Standards
    1. The standard of one fire company for every 10,000 residents shall be used to evaluate
        fire protection services.
    2. The City’s fire service response goal shall be six minutes from “tone-out” to arrival on
        scene.
    3. The City shall maintain a reliable water supply system that meets the fire protection
        needs of the community.
    4. The City shall enforce the municipal code as it pertains to the abatement of fire hazards
        related to existing buildings, structures, and weed control.
    5. The City shall support local, state and federal programs designed to inform and educate
        the public concerning fire prevention and suppression.
    6. The City will coordinate with Kern County in the provision of fire protection services to
        ensure the maximum level of protection for all residences, commercial establishments
        and industries within the planning area.
    7. The City will encourage the installation of private fire alarms and fire suppression
        systems.
    8. The City will encourage local and regional educational institutions to develop fire
        prevention and suppression.
    9. The City will encourage the community to become involved in promoting state and
        federal fire protection programs in school and civic functions.
7.3     FLOODING
Objective
A. Protect the lives and property of residents from the hazards of flooding.
Policies, Standards
    1. Consistent with Federal standards, the City shall plan for storm drainage facilities
        sufficient to address a 100-year flood event and require adequate storm drainage
        facilities to prevent flooding within the community.
    2. The City will maintain the storm drain master plan for the City, including planned growth
        areas and require that development conform to it.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                 7.0 - 2

                                                                    CHAPTER 7.0 SAFETY ELEMENT
    3. Development proposals shall be analyzed according to the Storm Drain Collection
        System Study and Master Plan. Development not within an existing Master Plan
        watershed area may be included in the boundaries of an adjacent area and subject to a
        revision of facilities and cost allocation thereof.
7.4     PUBLIC SAFETY STANDARD
Objective
A. Adopt and implement safety standards for varying hazards.
B.      The standard of one officer per 1,000 residents shall be used to evaluate police
        protection services.
Policies, Standards
1.      Any new residential subdivision or residential project that requires discretionary
        approval shall participate in the provision of funding to maintain police services as
        established by the City Council. The election to implement the Police Services Tax shall
        be completed prior to the transfer of any of the parcels in the subdivision from the
        subdivider to any person.
2.      Environmental Impact Reports should be required on all projects in areas of extreme
        hazard as defined herein (a project is defined within the California Environmental
        Quality Act).
3.      It is the policy of the City to require that water supply systems be related to the size and
        configuration of land developments. Standards as set forth in the current subdivision
        ordinance shall be maintained and improved as necessary.
4.      Development proposals shall take into consideration required fire standards,
        particularly in regard to critical facilities.
5.      It is the policy of the City to enforce policies and objectives of the 1974 Housing and
        Community Development Act in order to insure safe and decent housing for low- and
        moderate-income families.
6.      It is the policy of the City to maintain adequate street width and connectivity in the
        circulation system to enable prompt response to calls for services.
7.      The street network shall be designed so that it does not pose undue hazards due to
        excessive vehicle speeds, excessive through traffic in residential neighborhoods or street
        design on substantial excess of future needs.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                    7.0 - 3
                                                                    CHAPTER 8.0 NOISE ELEMENT
8.0 Noise Element
8.1     PROJECT EVALUATION
Objectives
A. To protect the citizens of the City from the harmful and annoying effects of exposure to
    excessive noise.
B. To protect the economic base of the City by preventing incompatible land uses from
    encroaching upon existing or planned noise-producing uses.
C. To preserve the tranquility of residential areas by preventing noise producing uses from
    encroaching upon existing or planned noise-sensitive uses.
D. To educate the citizens of the City concerning the effects of exposure to excessive noise
    and the methods available for minimizing such exposure.
E. To emphasize the reduction of noise impacts through careful site planning and project
    design, giving second preference to the use of noise barriers and/or structural features
    to buildings containing noise-sensitive land uses.
Policies, Standards
    1. Areas shall be recognized as noise impacted if exposed to existing or projected future noise
        levels at the exterior of buildings which exceed 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL).
    2. Noise sensitive land uses should be discouraged in noise impacted areas unless effective
        mitigation measures are incorporated into the specific design of such projects to reduce
        exterior noise levels to 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL) or less and 45 dB Ldn (or CNEL) or less within
        interior living spaces. Noise sensitive land uses includes hospitals, residences, schools,
        churches, and other uses of a similar nature as determined by the Planning Director.
    3. Industrial, commercial or other noise generating land uses (including roadways, railroads,
        and airports) should be discouraged if resulting noise levels will exceed 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL)
        at the boundary areas of planned or zoned noise sensitive land uses.
    4. The City shall enforce applicable State Noise Insulation Standards (California Administrative
        Code, Title 24) and Uniform Building Code (UBC noise requirements).
    5. New equipment and vehicles purchased by the City should comply with noise level
        performance standards consistent with the best available noise reduction technology.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                     8.0 - 1
                                                                     CHAPTER 8.0 NOISE ELEMENT
    6. The preferred method of noise control used is thoughtful site design. Secondarily, noise
        control should be achieved through the use of artificial noise barriers. Site and building
        design guidelines may include:
        a. Noise sensitive land uses should not front onto the primary noise source. Where this is
            not possible, the narrow portion of the building should face the primary noise source,
            and the interior layout should locate the most sensitive areas away from the noise
            source by placing garages, storage facilities, carports or other such areas nearest the
            noise source.
        b. Site design should permit noise to pass around or through a development. This can be
            achieved by placing the narrow or convex portion of the structure toward the primary
            noise source.
        c. Commercial and industrial structures should be designed so that any noise generated
            from the interior of the building is focused away from noise sensitive land uses:
        d. Two-story residential construction should be avoided, where possible immediately
            adjacent to arterials or collectors unless an adequate combination of noise attenuation
            procedures are used.
        e. When possible, residential cul-de-sacs should be perpendicular to adjacent arterials or
            collectors.
        f. Loading and unloading activities for commercial uses should be conducted in an
            enclosed loading dock, preferably with a positive seal between the loading dock and
            trucks.
    7. The City shall review all relevant development plans, programs and proposals to ensure
        their conformance with the policy framework outlined in this Noise Element.
    8. Prior to the approval of a proposed development in a noise impacted area, or the
        development of an industrial, commercial or other noise generating land use in or near an
        area containing existing or planned noise sensitive land uses, an acoustical analysis may be
        required if all of the following findings are made:
        a. The existing or projected future noise exposure at the exterior of buildings which will
            contain noise sensitive uses or within proposed outdoor activity areas (patios, decks,
            backyards, pool areas, recreation areas, etc.) exceeds 65 dB Ldn (or CNEL).
        b. Interior residential noise levels resulting from offsite noise are estimated to exceed 45
            dBA.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                    8.0 - 2
                                                                   CHAPTER 8.0 NOISE ELEMENT
        c. Estimated or projected noise levels cannot be reduced to the noise exposure limitations
            specified in this Noise Element by the application of Standard Noise Reduction
            Methods.
    When noise studies are necessary they should:
        a. Be the responsibility of the applicant.
        b. Be prepared by an individual or firm with demonstrable experience in the fields of
            environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
        c. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and
            locations to adequately describe local conditions.
        d. Include estimated noise levels in terms of dB Ldn (or CNEL) for existing and projected
            future (10-30 year hence) conditions, with a comparison made to the adopted policies
            of the Noise Element.
        e. Include recommendations for appropriate mitigation measures to achieve compliance
            with the adopted policies and standards of the Noise Element,
        f. Include estimates of noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have
            been implemented. If compliance with the adopted standards and policies of the Noise
            Element will not be achieved, a rationale for acceptance of the project must be
            provided.
        g. The acoustical analysis should be prepared as early in the project review or permitting
            process as possible, so that noise mitigation measures may be an integral part of the
            project design rather than an afterthought.
9. All land uses shall conform with the airport compatibility guidelines to minimize the impact of
    airport operation on noise sensitive land uses.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                  8.0 - 3
                                                                CHAPTER 9.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
9.0 Air Quality Element
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The San Joaquin Valley Air Basin has been designated as non-attainment for ozone and fine
particulate matter (PM10 and PM 2.5). To alleviate these air quality impacts and attain state
and federal air quality standards the Assembly of the State of California passed Assembly Bill
(AB) 170 which required cities and counties located in the San Joaquin Valley Air Basin to
amend appropriate elements of general plans to include data, analysis, comprehensive goals,
policies and feasible implementation strategies to improve air quality.
The role of local governments in achieving the required attainment goals for air quality as set by
Federal and State law is critical because, through their General Plans, local agencies have the
authority to set policies as it relates to development. Therefore, it is critical that local
governments amend their general plans to include policies to improve air quality.
To assist local governments in developing appropriate general plan policies for compliance with
AB 170, the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District developed an Air Quality Guidelines
for General Plans document, which includes approximately 75 recommended policies and
measures to implement each of the recommended policies. The policies and implementation
measures contained in the Guide were developed after analysis and comments from cities and
counties and are aimed at meeting the following objectives:
         Determine and mitigate project level and cumulative air quality impacts under the
         California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
         Integrate land use plans, transportation plans and air quality plans.
         Plan land uses in ways that support a multimodal transportation system.
         Take local action to support programs that reduce congestion and vehicle trips.
         Plan land uses to minimize public exposure to toxic air pollutant emissions from
         industrial and other sources.
         Reduce particulate emissions from sources under local jurisdiction.
         Support for District and public utility programs to reduce emissions from emergency
         consumption and area sources (water heaters, barbecues, etc).
Many of the policies included in the Guide are well accepted planning principles, such as
incorporating a comprehensive transportation system into the design of the community that
supports walking, bicycling and transit in addition to the automobile, which have secondary air
quality benefits. Studies show that communities that comprehensively plan an area so that land
uses are supportive of walking, bicycling and transit can achieve long range trip reductions of
8% to 10% on a regional level and more than 20% on a project basis. This is compared to
standard suburban development patterns and assumes that new development will be served by
an efficient transit system.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                  9.0 - 1
                                                                      CHAPTER 9.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
The City of Wasco has prepared this Air Quality Element to provide a comprehensive set of
goals, objectives, policies and action items to satisfy the requirements of AB 170. The policies
and action items contained in this Element were adapted for the City of Wasco from the
recommended policies from the Air Quality Guidelines for General Plans document. In addition
to general plans including a comprehensive set of goals, policies and implementation strategies
to improve air quality, AB 170 also requires that general plans include the following
information:
         A report describing local air quality conditions including air quality monitoring data,
         emission inventories, lists of significant source categories, attainment status and
         designations, and applicable state and federal air quality plans and transportation plans.
         A summary of local, district, state, and federal policies, programs, and regulations that
         may improve air quality in the city.
This additional information as required by AB 170 is included in Appendix A.
GOALS, OBJECTIVES, POLICIES AND ACTION ITEMS
9.1      COMMUNICATION, COOPERATION AND COORDINATION
Goal 1
Effective communication, cooperation, and coordination in developing and operating community and
regional air quality programs.
Objectives
A.       To accurately determine and fairly mitigate the local and regional air quality impacts of projects
         proposed in the City of Wasco.
B.       To coordinate local air quality programs with regional programs and those of neighboring
         jurisdictions.
C.       To integrate land use planning, transportation planning and air quality planning to make the
         most efficient use of public resources and to create a healthier and more livable community.
D.       To educate the public on the impact of individual transportation, lifestyle and land use decisions
         on air quality.
E.       For public facilities and operations to provide a model for the private sector in implementing air
         quality programs.
Policies, Standards
    1. The City of Wasco shall determine a project’s immediate and cumulative air quality impacts
         using analysis methods and significance thresholds recommended by the District.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                            9.0 - 2

                                                                       CHAPTER 9.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
         Action 1a        Ensure that development projects are submitted to the District’s CEQA division
                          for CEQA comments and review of air quality analysis, as applicable, including all
                          relevant information to facilitate review by the District.
         Action 1b        Train staff planners preparing CEQA documents on how to use the Guide for
                          Assessing and Mitigating Air Quality Impacts.
    2. The City of Wasco shall ensure that air quality impacts identified during CEQA review are
         consistently and fairly mitigated.
         Action 2a        Consult with the District regarding proposed mitigation measures.
         Action 2b        Coordinate with the District and the project applicants to encourage innovative
                          mitigation measures to reduce air quality impacts.
    3. The City of Wasco shall ensure all air quality mitigation measures are feasible and
         implementable.
    4. The City of Wasco shall support cost-effective multi-use modeling and geographic information
         technology.
    5. The City of Wasco shall consider air quality when planning the land uses and transportation
         systems to accommodate the expected growth in the community.
         Action 5a        Develop coordinated land use and transportation plans to meet federal, state
                          and local air quality requirements.
         Action 5b        Ensure that land uses proposed in general plan updates and general plan
                          amendments are supported by a multi-modal transportation system and that
                          the land uses themselves support the development of the transportation
                          system.
    6. All City submittals of transportation improvement projects to be included in the regional
         transportation plans shall be consistent with the air quality goals and policies of the General
         Plan.
         Action 6a        Analyze projects for consistency. Examples of inconsistent projects are a road
                          widening project that does not consider transit, bicycling and pedestrian needs
                          along the route or an intersection signalization project that does not involve the
                          installation of signal actuators that can be activated by bicyclists or pedestrians.
    7. The City of Wasco shall work with transit providers and developers to encourage the
         construction of low income housing developments that use transit-oriented and pedestrian-
         oriented design principles.
    8. The City of Wasco shall work with Caltrans to provide safe pedestrian and bicycle connections
         between neighborhoods and shopping areas.
    9. The City of Wasco shall work to improve the public’s understanding of the land use,
         transportation and air quality link.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                              9.0 - 3

                                                                       CHAPTER 9.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
    10. City fleet vehicle operators shall replace or convert conventional fuel vehicles with clean fuel
         vehicles as rapidly as feasible.
         Action 10a       Budget for clean fuel vehicles in the long range capital expenditure plans.
         Action 10b       Participate in the San Joaquin Valley Clean Cities Coalition to identify fleet
                          vehicle purchase opportunities and shared infrastructure investment
                          opportunities.
         Action 10c       Incorporate infrastructure to facilitate the conversion to and use of clean fuel
                          vehicles. For example, locate L/CNG refueling stations for clean fuel vehicles in
                          convenient and multiple locations to enable convenient and easy refuel of
                          vehicles.
9.2      CONGESTION MANAGEMENT/TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES
Goal 1:
Reduce traffic congestion and vehicle trips.
Objectives
A.       To ensure that new development provides the facilities and programs that improve the
         effectiveness of transportation control measures and congestion management programs.
Policies, Standards
    1. The City of Wasco shall consider measures to increase the capacity of the existing road network
         prior to constructing more capacity (additional lanes, new freeways etc.).
         Action 1a        Measures that will be considered in local transportation plans and capital
                          improvement plans that may increase the capacity and reduce congestion on
                          existing roads include the following:
                               Modify intersections using turn restriction, channelization, etc. where
                                   necessary and feasible.
                               Construct bus turnouts to remove buses from traveled lanes during
                                   passenger loading and unloading.
    2, The City of Wasco shall encourage the development of state of the art communication
         infrastructure linked to the rest of the world.
9.3      FUGITIVE DUST/PM 10
Goal 1
Reduce particulate emissions from sources under the jurisdiction of the City.
Objectives
A.       To reduce emissions of PM10 and other particulates with local control potential.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                               9.0 - 4

                                                                     CHAPTER 9.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
Policies, Standards
    1. The City of Wasco shall work with the District to reduce particulate emissions from construction,
         grading, excavation and demolition to the maximum extent feasible.
         Action 1a        The City of Wasco shall include as conditions of approval, compliance with
                          Regulation VIII, Fugitive PM10 Prohibitions and the City of Wasco’s Best
                          Available Control Measures.
    2. The City of Wasco shall require access roads, driveways and parking areas serving new
         commercial and industrial development to be constructed with materials that minimize
         particulate emissions and are appropriate to the scale and intensity of use.
    3. The City of Wasco shall reduce PM10 emissions from City maintained roads to the maximum
         extent feasible.
         Action 2a        The City of Wasco shall include as conditions of approval, compliance with
                          Regulation VIII, Fugitive PM10 Prohibitions and the City of Wasco’s Best
                          Available Control Measures.
9.4      ENERGY
Goal 1
Reduce emissions related to energy consumption and area sources.
Objectives
A.       To encourage the use of energy conservation features and low-emission equipment for all new
         residential and commercial construction.
Policies, Standards
    1. The City of Wasco shall cooperate with the local building industry, utilities and the District to
         promote enhanced energy conservation standards for new construction.
    2. The City of Wasco shall encourage new residential, commercial and industrial development to
         reduce air quality impacts from area sources and from energy consumption.
9.5      LAND USE, TRANSPORTATION, AND AIR QUALITY
Goal 1
Reduce motor vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled and increase average vehicle ridership.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                            9.0 - 5

                                                                      CHAPTER 9.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
Objectives
A.       To create a land use pattern that will encourage people to walk, bicycle or use public transit for
         a significant number of their daily trips.
B.       To create a land use pattern that will minimize public exposure to hazardous air pollutants from
         new development.
C.       To plan development in a way that makes the most efficient use of land and thereby causes the
         least possible impacts to the environment.
D.       To promote site designs that encourage walking, cycling and transit use.
E.       To develop innovative transportation systems that incorporate alternative transportation modes
         into the system designs.
Policies, Standards
    1. The City of Wasco shall consider air quality and mobility when reviewing any proposed change
         to the land use pattern of the community.
    2. The City of Wasco shall require a health risk assessment be performed to assess potential risks
         to sensitive receptors, as applicable.
    3. The City of Wasco shall encourage projects proposing pedestrian or transit-oriented designs
         (TOD) at suitable locations.
         Action 2a         Develop Transit/Pedestrian-Oriented Design Guidelines.
         Action 2b         Identify and designate appropriate sites for this development pattern during
                           general plan updates and when developers propose general plan amendments.
    4. The City of Wasco shall work to preserve and enhance existing neighborhoods and commercial
         districts having transit and pedestrian-oriented designs.
         Action 3a         Pursue redevelopment projects to improve the image of pedestrian-oriented
                           neighborhoods and shopping districts (pedestrian amenities, street trees, transit
                           facilities, etc.)
    5. The City of Wasco shall encourage higher housing densities in areas served by the full range of
         urban services.
    6. The City of Wasco shall plan for a multi-modal transportation system that meets the mobility
         needs of the community and improves air quality.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                           9.0 - 6
                                                                       CHAPTER 9.0 AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
         Action 5a        Ensure that updates to the Circulation Element and submittals of regional
                          transportation improvement projects to the Regional Transportation Planning
                          Agency reflect designs and facilities that support a multi-modal system.
         Action 5b        Coordinate with transportation providers and other applicable agencies.
    7. The City of Wasco shall ensure to the extent feasible that pedestrian, bicycle and automobile
         connections are maintained in existing neighborhoods affected by transportation and other
         development projects.
         Action 6a        Include maintenance or improvement requirements for pedestrian, bicycle and
                          automobile connections as part of the development standards of the
                          Subdivision Ordinance.
    8. The City of Wasco shall ensure that upgrades to existing roads (widening, curb and gutter etc.)
         include bicycle and pedestrian improvements in their plans and implementation where
         appropriate and to the maximum extent feasible.
         Action 7a        Update Public Works improvement standards to incorporate bikeways as
                          feasible.
City of Wasco General Plan                                                                          9.0 - 7
