Circulation Elemen
Circulation Element
                                    Circulation, as it is used in this General Plan, refers to the many ways people and goods
                                    move from place to place in Elk Grove and the region.
                                    Circulation in Elk Grove includes:
                                        •	 Motor vehicles, including cars and trucks
                                        •	 Trains, for both freight and passenger traffic
                                           (on “heavy” and “light” rail lines)
                                        •	 Public transit
                                        •	Bicycles
                                        •	 Pedestrian travel
   Bike paths and sidewalks form        •	 Air travel
   an important part of the city’s
  transportation system, although
 cars are the most common form of   All of these forms of transportation are part of the overall circulation system; because
               transport            motor vehicle traffic plays a major role in the creation of air pollution, which affects Elk
                                    Grove and the region, those modes of transport and movement which reduce reliance
                                    on motor vehicles are also part of the City’s efforts to improve local and regional air
                                    quality. Please see the Conservation/Air Quality Element for additional discussion of air
                                    quality goals, policies, and actions.
                                    This Circulation Element is based on several basic concepts:
                                        •	Although the City will seek to encourage other modes of travel, it is assumed
                                           that the majority of travel and transport of goods within Elk Grove will occur in
                                           automobiles and trucks. The land use pattern in Elk Grove, which is primarily low-
                                           density in nature (particularly in residential areas), poses significant challenges
                                           with regard to establishing public transit, bicycle, or walking as the preferred
                                           method of travel for most residents.
                                        •	 Efficient and convenient vehicle transportation—including parking—is and will remain
                                           a vital part of the success of the city’s retail and office areas. The City’s efforts to
                                           encourage other modes of transportation will therefore focus on incentives to reduce
                                           vehicle use, rather than disincentives which would make driving and parking less
                                           convenient, more costly, or both.
  Most major east-west roadways in
 Elk Grove have at-grade crossings
                                        •	The roadway system is a major component of the “feel” of a community. Wider
   with the railways that traverse
   the city. Traffic backups at the        roadways are generally more “urban,” while narrow roadways typically call to mind
    crossings can be substantial.          more rural areas. The City will use its master plan of future roadways to help
                                           maintain rural character in those portions of Elk Grove planned for low-intensity
                                           uses, but will encourage development of roadways to provide safe and efficient
                                           traffic movement in the more urban areas of the city.
                                        •	Past practices (prior to the incorporation of Elk Grove) led to significant traffic
                                           issues due to the piece-meal construction of needed roadway improvements.
                                           The City’s policy is to require full improvements to roadways in a single phase,
                                           eliminating the so-called “zipper street” phenomenon which caused roadways to
                                           be alternately wide, then narrow, then wide again.
CI-2	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Circulation Element
    •	Some incentives to encourage use of alternative methods of transportation are
       beyond the scope of the City of Elk Grove (e.g., state and federal taxation policies
       affecting the price of gasoline) and are therefore not addressed in this General
       Plan. This Circulation Element focuses on those efforts the City can reasonably
       expect to achieve, rather than making broad policy statements on issues outside
       the City’s purview.
LIGHT RAIL
Light rail has operated in the Sacramento region since 1987. The system has expanded
since then, and is currently planned to be extended into Elk Grove in the near future.
                                                                                                    Light rail train service is
                                                                                                proposed to be extended into
Of note to the Elk Grove General Plan is the current emphasis (reflected in the planning         Elk Grove in the near future
of new routes and service) on transporting workers from outlying areas to Sacramento.
The City views light rail as an important part of the overall transit plan for Elk Grove, and
supports the use of light rail to transport workers to locations inside Elk Grove (such as
proposed office development area at Kammerer Road), and to serve the proposed retail
development at Hwy 99/Kammerer Road.
AIR TRAVEL
Although no airports exist within the current (2004) city limits, two general aviation
airports exist in the planning area: Elk Grove Airport and Franklin Field.
Although these airports are not located in Elk Grove, they affect land uses within the city
(see the Background Report for more information on safety zones surrounding these
                                                                                                   Aerial photo of Elk Grove
facilities), and they provide an opportunity for general aviation uses near the city.           Airport. Grant Line Road is at
                                                                                               the upper left in this photo; view
The Circulation policies and programs in this Element implement the following Goals of                is to the northeast.
the City of Elk Grove:
The following policies and action items implement these Goals.
CIRCULATION POLICIES: GENERAL
CI-1	 Circulation planning for all modes of travel (vehicle, transit, bicycle, pedestrian,
         etc.) shall be coordinated with efforts to reduce air pollution.
Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
Focused Goal 1-3: A balanced and efficient transportation system
                                                                                                   Franklin Field is located
Focused Goal 1-9: A pattern of land use which enhances the community character of             approximately 5 miles south of Elk
Elk Grove, provides employment and shopping opportunities to serve residents and                Grove, adjacent to the Sheriff’s
the region, which provides for use of transit, and which protects Elk Grove’s unique                   detention facility.
historical and natural features
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	             CI-3

Circulation Element
                                   Guiding Goal 3: Protection of the Natural Environment
                                   Focused Goal 3-1: Development which recognizes environmental constraints and is
                                   designed and operated to minimize impacts on the environment
                                   Guiding Goal 5: Preservation of the Rural Character of Elk Grove
                                   Focused Goal 5-1: Retention of those areas identified for 2-acre and larger lots on the
                                   Land Use Map as a rural area through land use and infrastructure controls
                                   Focused Goal 5-2: Maintenance of those features that provide the character of Elk
                                   Grove’s rural areas, including: oak trees, small local roadways, animal keeping and
                                   raising, equestrians, agriculture, and limited commercial opportunities
                                 CI-2	 The City shall coordinate and participate with the City of Sacramento, Sacramento
                                         County and Caltrans on roadway improvements that are shared by the jurisdictions
                                         in order to improve operations. This may include joint transportation planning
                                         efforts, roadway construction and funding.
                                 Please see the Public Facilities and Finance Element of this General Plan for additional
                                 policies related to the provision of required roadway and other circulation improvements.
                                 CIRCULATION POLICIES: ALTERNATIVE
                                 TRANSPORTATION
                                 CI-3	      The City’s efforts to encourage alternative modes of transportation will
                                            therefore focus on incentives to reduce vehicle use, rather than disincentives
                                            (which are generally intended to make driving and parking less convenient,
                                            more costly, or both). Incentives may include:
                                            •	 Preferential carpool and vanpool parking,
                                            •	 Bus turnouts, and
                                            •	 Pedestrian-friendly project designs
                                 CI-4	      Specific Plans, Special Planning Areas, and development projects shall be
                                            designed to promote pedestrian movement through direct, safe, and pleasant
                                            routes that connect destinations inside and outside the plan or project area.
                                 CI-5	      The City shall encourage the use of transportation alternatives that reduce the
                                            use of personal motor vehicles.
                                 	          CI-5-Action 1 Funding for development, operations, and maintenance of
                                            facilities for mass transit, bicycle, pedestrian modes of transportation shall be
                                            given appropriate priority in the City’s budgeting process.
                                 	          CI-5-Action 2 Implement policies and actions in the Conservation/Air Quality
                                            Element which seek to encourage non-vehicle transportation alternatives in
                                            Elk Grove.
CI-4	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Circulation Element
	         CI-5-Action 3 The City will support positive incentives such as carpool and
          vanpool parking, bus turnouts, and pedestrian-friendly project designs to
          promote the use of transportation alternatives.
	         CI-5-Action 4 The City shall participate in the preparation and implementation
          of a Congestion Management Plan (CMP) consistent with legal requirements
          which gives priority to air quality goals, alternatives to automobile travel, and
          the development of demand reduction measures over additional road capacity.
	         CI-5-Action 5 The City shall develop and implement Pedestrian and Bikeway
          Master Plans to provide safe and convenient pedestrian and on- and off-street
          bicycle facilities throughout the City.
CI-6	     The City shall require that transit service is provided in all areas of Elk Grove,
          including rural areas, so that transit dependent residents of those areas are not
          cut off from community services, events, and activities.
	         CI-6-Action 1 The City shall require that RT or any other local or regional transit
          agency serving Elk Grove include bus service to the rural areas of Elk Grove.
CI-7	     The City shall encourage an approach to public transit service in Elk Grove which
          will provide the opportunity for workers living in other areas of Sacramento
          County to use all forms of public transit—including bus rapid transit and light
          rail—to travel to jobs in Elk Grove, as well as for Elk Grove workers to use public
          transit to commute to jobs outside the city.
Please see the Parks, Open Space, and Trails Element of this General Plan for additional
policies related to the creation of a citywide trails system.
CIRCULATION POLICIES: LIGHT RAIL SERVICE
CI-8	     The City shall encourage the extension of bus rapid transit and/or light rail
          service to the planned office and retail areas north of Kammerer Road and
          west of Hwy 99.
CI-9	     Light rail service in Elk Grove should be designed to serve major employment
          centers and the regional mall at Kammerer Road/Hwy 99. The City of Elk
          Grove encourages the development of light rail which will bring workers and
          shoppers to Elk Grove, while also serving as part of a coordinated, regional
          transportation network. The City’s preferred route for light rail service is shown
          in Figure CI-1.
	         CI-9-Action 1 Using the City’s preferred alignment, work with Regional Transit
          to select a final alignment for the extension of bus rapid transit and/or light rail
          into Elk Grove, and to develop final station and/or park-and-ride locations along
          the entire transit corridor in Elk Grove. As necessary, update this Circulation
          Element to reflect the final alignment.
	         CI-9-Action 2 The City shall require irrevocable offers of dedication of rights-
          of-way and station sites along the City’s preferred light rail alignment. Offers
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CI-5

Circulation Element
Figure CI-1: Desired Light Rail Route
                                             of dedication shall be required as part of the approval of any tentative map or
                                             other discretionary approvals as appropriate.
                                      CIRCULATION POLICIES: ROADWAYS
                                      CI-10	 The City shall implement the roadway master plan shown in Figure CI-2. The
                                             following policies apply to selected roadways:
                                             •	 The City shall use the latest version of Caltrans’ “Transportation Concept
                                                Report” for I-5 and Hwy 99 to determine the planned width of these freeways.
                                             •	“Expanded right-of-way” indicates roadways on which sufficient width is
                                                provided for a middle two-way turn lane and/or expanded turn pockets at
                                                roadway intersections.
                                             •	The City may make improvements to roadways in the Rural Area, when
                                                warranted, consistent with the provisions of the Rural Roads Improvement
                                                Policy.
                                             •	Improvements to Grant Line Road shall consider regional planning
                                                activities and projects (e.g., the Capital SouthEast Connector) and should
                                                be considered after effects to the Rural Area have been identified. To the
                                                extent feasible, these effects shall be addressed as part of facility design.
CI-6	     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Circulation Element
         	 CI-10-Action 1 Require the dedication of right of way and the installation of
            roadway improvements as part of the review and approval of development
            projects. The City shall require the dedication of major road rights of way
            (generally, arterials and thoroughfares) at the earliest opportunity in the
            development process in order to implement this policy.
CI-11	   The City shall assist Caltrans in implementing improvements to I-5 and Hwy 99
         within the city.
	        CI-11-Action 1 Require the reservation of right of way for projects adjacent to
         I-5 and Hwy 99 sufficient to accommodate the freeway facilities outlined in the
         most recent Caltrans Transportation Concept Report.
	        CI-11 Action 2 A new Whitelock Parkway interchange, as shown on Figure -,
         may be considered by the City Council in the future. Any interchange in this
         general location shall be designed to minimize impacts to the Elk Grove Regional
         Park as well as other assets to the fullest extent possible. Consultation with
         CalTrans, the Cosumnes Community Services District, and other stakeholder
         groups shall be conducted prior to approval of any interchange design.
CI-12	   The City supports efforts to develop the Capital SouthEast Connector,
         providing a regional roadway connection from Interstate 5 and State Route 99
         in Elk Grove to Highway 50.
	        The City recognizes the adopted conceptual route alignment for the Capital
         SouthEast Connector, utilizing Kammerer Road and Grant Line Road through
         the City.
	        CI-12-Action 1 The City will work with the Capital SouthEast Connector Joint
         Powers Authority (JPA) in the delivery of the planned roadway improvements
         pursuant to the JPA’s Project Design Guidelines provided that the Project
         Design Guidelines will not be applied to diminish or alter the rights of City-
         approved projects and provided that the Project Design Guidelines are not
         amended to diminish the City’s land use authority to approve future projects
         proximate to or its authority to determine access to the Capital SouthEast
         Connector.
CI-13	   The City shall require that all roadways and intersections in Elk Grove operate
         at a minimum Level of Service “D” at all times.
	        The City acknowledges that the Capital SouthEast Connector has identified
         higher LOS standards for certain segments. The City will strive to achieve
         these standards to the extent feasible and will work with the JPA as necessary.
CI-14	   The City recognizes that Level of Service D may not be achieved on some
         roadway segments, and may also not be achieved at some intersections.
         Roadways on which LOS D is projected to be exceeded are shown in the General
         Plan Background Report, based on the latest traffic modeling conducted
         by the City. On these roadways, the City shall ensure that improvements to
         construct the ultimate roadway system as shown in this Circulation Element
         are completed, with the recognition that maintenance of the desired level of
         service may not be achievable.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CI-7

Circulation Element
                                 	        Cl-14-Action 1 The City shall develop criteria to determine which roadway
                                          segments and intersections will not achieve the desired level of service
                                          standard.
                                 CI-15	   Development projects shall be required to provide funding or to construct
                                          roadway/intersection improvements to implement the City’s Circulation
                                          Master Plan. The payment of established traffic impact or similar fees shall
                                          be considered to provide compliance with the requirements of this policy
                                          with regard to those facilities included in the fee program, provided that the
                                          City finds that the fee adequately funds all required roadway and intersection
                                          improvements. If payment of established fees is used to provide compliance
                                          with this policy, the City may also require the payment of additional fees
                                          if necessary to cover the fair share cost of facilities not included in the fee
                                          program.
                                 	        CI-15-Action 1 Update the City’s traffic analysis guidelines to implement the
                                          policies of this General Plan. Items to be addresses should include:
                                          •	 Guidelines for determining when traffic analysis is required
                                          •	 Guidelines for the preparation of traffic analysis
                                          •	 Significance criteria for use in CEQA analysis of proposed projects
                                        The guidelines and significance criteria referenced above shall be reviewed by
                                        the Elk Grove Planning Commission within six months of adoption of this General
                                        Plan.
                                 CI-16	   Where a development project is required to perform new roadway construction
                                          or road widening, the entire roadway shall be completed to its planned
                                          width from curb-to-curb prior to the operation of the project for which the
                                          improvements were constructed, unless otherwise approved by the City
                                          Engineer. Such roadway construction shall also provide facilities adequate to
                                          ensure pedestrian safety as determined by the City Engineer.
                                 CI-17	   The City shall regulate truck travel as appropriate for the transport of goods,
                                          consistent with circulation, air quality, congestion management, and land use
                                          goals.
                                 	        CI-17-Action 1 The City shall on an as-needed basis review existing truck routes
                                          within Elk Grove and designate routes consistent with the need to reduce
                                          traffic, noise and other impacts, and negative effects on residential areas.
                                 CI-18	   To the extent possible, major traffic routes for residential areas should be
                                          separate from those used by the city’s industrial areas, with the purpose of
                                          avoiding traffic conflicts and potential safety problems.
                                 CI-19	   The circulation system serving the city’s industrial areas should be designed to
                                          safely accommodate heavy truck traffic.
CI-8	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Circulation Element
Figure CI-2: Master Plan of Roadways
CI-20	   The City shall discourage the creation of private roadways unless the roadways
         are:
         1) Constructed to public roadway standards, or
         2) Are used in an affordable residential development.
CI-21	   The City shall require the installation of traffic pre-emption devices for
         emergency vehicles (police and fire) at all newly constructed intersections,
         and shall seek to retrofit all existing intersections to incorporate these features.
CI-22	   Where traffic calming devices or techniques are employed, the City shall
         coordinate design and implementation with the Elk Grove Police Department
         and the Elk Grove CSD to ensure adequate access for police and fire vehicles.
CI-23	   All public streets should have sufficient width to provide for parking on both
         sides of the street and enough remaining pavement width to provide for fire
         emergency vehicle access.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CI-9
Circulation Element
                                 CIRCULATION POLICIES: AIRPORTS
                                 CI-24	    The City shall consider the recommendations in the Comprehensive Land Use
                                           Plans (CLUPs) for airports within or adjacent to Elk Grove in the review of
                                           potential land uses or projects.
                                 CI-25	    The City shall ensure that new development near airports be designed to protect
                                           public safety from airport operations consistent with recommendations and
                                           requirements of the Airport Land Use Commission, Caltrans, and the Federal
                                           Aviation Administration.
                                 Please refer to the Background Report for information on the Comprehensive Land Use
                                 Plans for airports in the Planning Area.
                                 CIRCULATION POLICIES: COMMUTER RAIL
                                 CI-26	 The City shall encourage commuter rail transportation by providing for a
                                 potential train station location for Amtrak and/or other rail service providers along the
                                 Union Pacific Railroad line on the east side of the City.
                                 	         CI-26-Action 1 The City shall require irrevocable offers of dedication of rights-
                                           of-way and a station site at the City’s preferred location for a commuter rail
                                           station. Offers of dedication shall be required as part of the approval of any
                                           tentative map or other discretionary approvals as appropriate.
                                 	         CI-26-Action 2 The City shall work with CalTrans Division of Rail and other
                                           stakeholders to develop a train station plan. The plan shall include required
                                           environmental analysis, funding identification, required right-of-way, and
                                           preliminary facility design.
CI-10	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

 Conservation and
Air Quality Element
Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                     This Element of the General Plan addresses several important topics:
                                         •	 Conservation of the City’s natural resources, and
                                         •	The preservation and enhancement of local and regional Air Quality through
                                            reductions in the emission of pollutants and energy use.
                                         •	 The preservation and enhancement of Water Quality in streams and rivers and in
                                            the underground aquifer.
                                     CONSERVATION
                                     Conservation is an important issue not only for Elk Grove but for every jurisdiction in
                                     the Sacramento region and in California. Many of the resources on which the city relies
                                     are available in limited and/or finite amounts (energy, for example); resources such as
                                     natural riparian habitat, watershed, and other types of open land uses would also be
                                     threatened by unplanned development.
                                     Resources in Elk Grove which require the implementation of conservation-oriented
                                     policies include:
                                         •	Energy
                                         •	 Water supplies
                                         •	 Land for future development
                                         •	 Agricultural lands and soils
                                         •	 Lands within the Primary Zone of the Sacramento River Delta
                                         •	 Natural habitats
                                         •	Trees
                                         •	 Air quality
                                         •	 Surface and Groundwater Quality and Supply
                                     Other “resources” which are addressed in other elements of the General Plan are also
                                     important. These include:
                                         •	 The rural character of the eastern portion of Elk Grove
                                         •	 The capacity of drainage systems to provide flood protection for developed areas
                                            of the city
                                         •	 Open space for a variety of uses
                                     Please refer to the Land Use and Public Facilities and Finance elements for discussion
                                     of and policies related to rural areas, and to the Safety Element of this General Plan for
                                     additional discussion of and policies related to flooding.
  Electrical distribution facilities
            in Elk Grove             ENERGY
                                     Energy supplies (electricity and natural gas) are supplied to the city by the Sacramento
                                     Municipal Utility District (SMUD); details regarding energy supplies are provided in the
CAQ-2	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
General Plan Background Report. An additional major source of energy supplies in the
Planning Area is Suburban Propane, which maintains a distribution facility in Elk Grove
on Grant Line Road near State Route 99.
This General Plan addresses conservation of energy through policies and programs aimed
at making the city’s homes and businesses as energy-efficient as possible. Policies and
programs in the Circulation Element of this General Plan also seek to reduce energy
consumption by encouraging the use of transport modes other than single-occupant
vehicles and by making the flow of vehicles on the city’s roadways as smooth as possible.
WATER SUPPLIES
Domestic water supplies in Elk Grove are provided by two major providers: the County
of Sacramento Water Agency and the Elk Grove Water Service. Details on the areas
in which these suppliers provide service can be found in the General Plan Background
Report.
In addition to these providers, homes and businesses in a large area of Elk Grove (primarily
east of Bradshaw Road) rely on private wells, which tap the underground aquifer beneath
the city.
                                                                                                  The historic water tower in Old
This Element of the General Plan contains policies and programs intended to make more             Town remains part of the city’s
efficient use of water supplies.                                                                       water supply system
LAND FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
As discussed in the Land Use Element, Elk Grove is expected to continue developing for
the foreseeable future, adding new homes and businesses primarily on lands now either
vacant or in agricultural use. Policies and programs intended to ensure an adequate
supply of land for future development are contained in the Land Use, Housing, and
Public Facilities and Finance elements of this General Plan.
AGRICULTURAL LANDS AND SOILS
Agriculture has historically been an important part of Elk Grove’s land use and economy.
Soils within Elk Grove are capable of supporting a number of crops, many of which are
still grown (please see the General Plan Background Report for further information on
soils within Elk Grove and the Planning Area).
However, Elk Grove’s recent history has seen the development of large areas of the city
(and, to a lesser extent, the Planning Area) that had previously been farmed. A number
of factors, including the growth of the Sacramento region in general, increasing prices
related to the production of agricultural crops (energy, water, fertilizers, etc.), stable or
declining prices for many crops, and increasing values for land which can be developed
with urban uses, have led many property owners to either stop farming altogether or to
shift their operations to other parts of Sacramento County or elsewhere.                          Farming remains a part of Elk
                                                                                               Grove, but has been in decline and
                                                                                               is not expected to be as dominant
This General Plan provides for a pattern of land uses (see the Land Use Element for
                                                                                                          in the future.
further information) which will result in the loss of agricultural use of soils over a large
portion of the city (generally, the area south of Elk Grove Boulevard and west of Hwy 99)
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CAQ-3

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                     which has historically been used for large-scale farming. Although this General
                                     Plan designates a large area of the city (generally east of Bradshaw Road) for
                                     rural uses, the small parcel sizes in this area will most likely limit agricultural uses
                                     to “hobby” farming, the raising of animals either for personal enjoyment or on a
                                     small commercial scale, or the growing of specialty crops such as nursery plants.
                                     In the Planning Area outside the current (2004) city limits, this General Plan
                                     envisions the potential for converting some additional lands from agriculture
                                     to urban uses in the “Urban Study Areas” east of Grant Line Road and south
                                     of Kammerer Road. Although the conversion of these lands to urban uses by
                                     the City of Elk Grove would require annexation and the completion of detailed
                                     planning for these areas, the loss of agricultural production in these areas is a
                                     potential that this General Plan considers.
                                     Within Elk Grove, the City considers agriculture (outside of the rural areas
                                     designated on the Land Use Policy Map) to be an interim use. This Element of
                                     the General Plan provides policies and programs that support the use of these for
                                     farming while property owners wish to continue this use. The City does not seek
                                     to reverse the conversion of agricultural lands to urban uses in the developing
                                     areas of Elk Grove, or to curtail the use of non-agricultural lands in order to
                                     preserve farming uses on adjacent or nearby properties.
                                     SACRAMENTO RIVER DELTA
                                     Although not within the current incorporated boundaries of Elk Grove, a portion
                                     of the Sacramento River Delta is inside the larger Planning Area of the General
                                     Plan (please see the Introduction for a description and map of the Planning Area).
                                     Therefore, the City’s long-term land use policies will require coordination with
                                     the Delta Protection Commission (a state agency) once these lands are included
                                     within the corporate boundary of Elk Grove.
       The Sacramento River Delta    The Delta Protection Commission in 2000 adopted the following Mission
                                     Statement and Vision for the Delta:
                                            MISSION STATEMENT:
                                            The mission of the Commission is to guide the protection of the
                                            Delta’s unique natural quality, cultural viability, economic vitality,
                                            and recreational opportunity through:
                                            •	 Protection, maintenance, and enhancement and restoration of
                                               the overall quality of the Delta environment including agriculture,
                                               wildlife habitat, and recreational activities;
                                            •	 Assurance of orderly, balanced conservation and development
                                               of Delta land resources; and
                                            •	 Improvement of flood protection to ensure an increased level of
                                               public health and safety.
CAQ-4	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                              Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
       VISION STATEMENT:
       The vision of the Delta Protection Commission is a region in which the
       essential land uses and unique natural qualities flourish in self-sustaining
       harmony.
NATURAL HABITAT
As discussed earlier in this Element, although substantial new development is currently
(2003) occurring in several areas of Elk Grove, large areas of the city remain in agricultural
or “rural” uses. These open lands, combined with the city’s location near the Cosumnes
and Sacramento rivers and within the range of many native plant and animal species,
results in the use of many areas of Elk Grove as habitat for native plants and animals.
(Please see the General Plan Background Report for detailed information on existing
habitat and plant and animal species in Elk Grove.)
This Element provides policies and programs intended to reduce impacts to plants and
animals which will result from the loss of habitat to development (see the discussion
of Agricultural Lands above). This General Plan, as discussed earlier, envisions the
development of many areas currently used as habitat by native plants and animals; the
                                                                                                    Elk Grove’s creeks provide
loss of this habitat is viewed as an unavoidable result of urbanization, and while impacts      important habitat for many native
to native species can be reduced or mitigated, this Plan does not seek to entirely                plants and animals, as well as
eliminate these impacts.                                                                           serving as a community and
                                                                                                        aesthetic resource
TREES
Mature trees—both native oaks and other native and non-native species—form an
important part of Elk Grove’s aesthetic, open space, and historical heritage. Because
they provide relief from the primarily flat terrain of the city, as well as shade, shelter for
animals and other plants, and ties to the area’s historical past, mature trees are viewed
as an important resource to be protected and conserved. Trees also provide other
benefits, including improvements in water quality, shade for buildings, and reduction in
pollution, which also justify their protection as a resource.
This Element provides policies and programs aimed at preserving and protecting large
mature trees of all types.
AIR QUALITY
Air quality in the Sacramento region is, unfortunately, among the worst in the United
States. A combination of poor air circulation, high summertime temperatures, and                    Oaks and other trees form a
numerous sources of pollution both locally and at distant locations combine to create air        shaded canopy over a portion of
pollution which frequently exceeds state and federal standards. (For more information            Sheldon Road in the rural area of
                                                                                                             Elk Grove.
on current air quality, please see the General Plan Background Report.)
The City recognizes that Elk Grove can play a role in the improvement of local and
regional air quality. To that end, this Element contains policies and programs that seek
to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels, whose burning in engines and at generating
plants is a major source of air pollutants.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CAQ-5

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                   This General Plan also contains policies and programs in the Circulation Element, which
                                   are intended to reduce the use of private motor vehicles in favor of walking, cycling, and
                                   public transit, and to reduce roadway congestion.
                                   WATER QUALITY
                                   The quality of Elk Grove’s surface and subsurface (groundwater) supplies is important
                                   not only to its residents—all of the city’s drinking water supplies are derived from a
                                   combination of surface water and groundwater—but for the plants and animals who
                                   rely on water to survive. This Element addresses the issue of protecting and preserving
                                   water quality through reduction in pollutants discharged to the ground, or to surface
                                   waters via urban runoff. This Element also addresses protection and enhancement
                                   of water quality in local creeks through efforts to preserve natural creek buffers and
                                   natural creek alignments and control/reduce runoff discharge volume, rate, velocity,
                                   and/or temperature.
                                   The establishment and implementation of conservation-oriented policies can have
   Regional air quality frequently
  does not meet state and federal  numerous benefits, including the establishment of more efficient and cost-effective land
   standards, but the City of Elk  uses which minimize the unnecessary use of limited resources. The Conservation and
    Grove seeks to help achieve    Air Quality policies of the General Plan implement these Guiding and Focused Goals:
    improvements in air quality
                                      Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
                                      Focused Goal 1-3: A balanced and efficient transportation system
                                      Focused Goal 1-5: Excellence in the design of new development
                                      Focused Goal 1-9: A pattern of land use which enhances the community character
                                      of Elk Grove, provides employment and shopping opportunities to serve residents
                                      and the region, which provides for use of transit, and which protects Elk Grove’s
                                      unique historical and natural features
                                      Guiding Goal 2: Diversified Economic Base
                                      Focused Goal 2-2: A balance between the numbers and types of workers residing in
                                      Elk Grove and opportunities for employment in the city
                                      Guiding Goal 3: Protection of the Natural Environment
                                      Focused Goal 3-1: Development which recognizes environmental constraints and is
                                      designed and operated to minimize impacts on the environment
                                      Focused Goal 3-2: Open space lands in proximity to Elk Grove that provide for
                                      agricultural use and habitat for native species
CAQ-6	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
  Focused Goal 3-3: Natural resources managed and protected for the use and
  enjoyment of current and future generations
  Focused Goal 3-4: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s natural areas, in
  particular the areas within the floodplain of the Cosumnes River
  Guiding Goal 4: Preservation and Enhancement of Elk Grove’s Unique Historic and
  Natural Features
  Focused Goal 4-1: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s historic structures
  and districts
  Focused Goal 4-2: Preservation of the large oak and other tree species which are an
  important part of the City’s historic and aesthetic character
  Guiding Goal 5: Preservation of the Rural Character of Elk Grove
  Focused Goal 5-1: Retention of those areas identified for 2-acre and larger lots on the
  Land Use Map as a rural area through land use and infrastructure controls
  Focused Goal 5-2: Maintenance of those features that provide the character of Elk
  Grove’s rural areas, including: large oak and other trees, small local roadways, animal
  keeping and raising, equestrians, agriculture, and limited commercial opportunities
The following policies and action items implement these goals:
CONSERVATION POLICIES: CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
Policies related to Energy Conservation are found in the Air Quality section of this Element.
CONSERVATION POLICIES: CONSERVATION OF WATER
CAQ-1	 Reduce the amount of water used by residential and non-residential uses by
          encouraging water conservation.
	         CAQ-1-Action 1 Implement the City’s Water Conservation Ordinance.
	         CAQ-1-Action 2 Actively encourage water conservation by both agricultural
          and urban water users.
	         CAQ-1-Action 3 Work with urban and agricultural water purveyors to establish
          long range conservation plans which set specific conservation objectives and
          utilize, to the extent possible, a common planning horizon, plan framework and
          estimating/ forecasting procedures.
	         CAQ-1-Action 4 Promote the use of drought-tolerant vegetation to minimize
          water consumption by providing information to developers and designers.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CAQ-7

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                CONSERVATION POLICIES:
                                CONSERVATION OF LAND FOR FUTURE
                                DEVELOPMENT
                                Policies related to future use of land for development are found in the Land
                                          Use Element of this General Plan.
                                CONSERVATION POLICIES: CONSERVATION OF
                                AGRICULTURAL USES
                                CAQ-2	 The loss of agricultural productivity on lands designated for urban
                                          uses within the city limits as of January 2004 is accepted as a
                                          consequence of the development of Elk Grove. As discussed in the
                                          Land Use Element, the City’s land use concept for the Planning Area
                                          outside the 2004 city limits anticipates the retention of significant
                                          areas of agricultural production outside the current city limits.
                                	         (Please see the Land Use Concept Map in the Land Use Element for
                                          further information.)
                                CAQ-3	 The City of Elk Grove considers the only mitigation for the loss of
                                          agricultural land to consist of the creation of new agricultural land
                                          in the Sacramento region equal in area, productivity, and other
                                          characteristics to the area that would be lost due to development.
                                          The protection of existing agricultural land through the purchase
                                          of fee title or easements is not considered by the City to provide
                                          mitigation, since programs of this type result in a net loss of
                                          farmland.
                                Please see the Open Space Policies section of the Parks, Trails, and Open
                                Space Element of this General Plan for further discussion of the City’s policies
                                regarding agricultural lands.
                                CAQ-4	 While agricultural uses are anticipated to be phased out within the
                                          city limits, the City recognizes the right of these uses to continue as
                                          long as individual owners/farmers desire. The City shall not require
                                          buffers between farmland and urban uses, relying instead on the
                                          following actions to address the impacts of farming on urban uses:
                                	         CAQ-4-Action 1 Implement the City’s “Right to Farm” ordinance.
                                	         CAQ-4-Action 2 Prospective buyers of property adjacent to
                                          agricultural land shall be notified through the title report that they
                                          could be subject to inconvenience or discomfort resulting from
                                          accepted farming activities as per provisions of the City’s right-to-
                                          farm ordinance.
CAQ-8	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
CONSERVATION POLICIES: CONSERVATION OF SOILS
CAQ-5	 Roads and structures shall be designed, built and landscaped so as to minimize
         erosion during and after construction.
CONSERVATION POLICIES: LANDS WITHIN THE
PRIMARY ZONE OF THE SACRAMENTO RIVER DELTA
Note to reader: No portion of the Primary Zone of the Sacramento River Delta is currently
within the 2002 city limits, although a portion of the Primary Zone is within the larger
Planning Area for this General Plan (see the Introduction for a description of the Planning
Area).
CAQ-6	 Within the Primary Zone of the Legal Delta (as defined by the State of California
         in the State Water Code, Section 12220), the City’s land use and other policies
         shall conform with the “Land Use and Resource Management Plan for the
         Primary Zone of the Delta” developed by the Delta Protection Commission.
	        CAQ-6-Action 1 Coordinate with the Delta Protection Commission by providing
         updates on the status of any requests by the City to include any lands in the
         Primary Zone in the City’s sphere of influence or incorporated boundaries.
	        CAQ-6-Action 2 Prior to the annexation of any land in the Primary Zone of
         the Legal Delta, ensure that this General Plan is consistent with the Delta
         Protection Commission’s Act and Plan as it affects the area within the Primary
         Zone.
CONSERVATION POLICIES: CONSERVATION OF NATIVE
AND NON-NATIVE HABITATS, PLANTS, AND ANIMALS
CAQ-7	 Encourage development clustering where clustering would facilitate on-site
         protection of woodlands, grasslands, wetlands, stream corridors, scenic areas,
         or other appropriate natural features as open space, provided that:
          1.	 Urban infrastructure capacity is available for urban use.
          2.	On-site resource protection is appropriate and consistent with other General
              Plan Policies.
          3.	The architecture and scale of development is appropriate for the area.
          4.	Development rights for the open space area are permanently dedicated and
              appropriate long-term management is provided for by either a public agency,
              homeowners association, or other appropriate entity.
	        This policy shall not apply in the Rural Residential area east of State Route 99,
         where clustering of development is not permitted.
CAQ-8	 Large trees (both native and non-native) are an important aesthetic (and, in
         some cases, biological) resource. Trees which function as an important part of
         the City’s or a neighborhood’s aesthetic character or as natural habitat should
         be retained to the extent possible during the development of new structures,
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CAQ-9

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                     roadways (public and private, including roadway widening), parks, drainage
                                     channels, and other uses and structures.
                                	    If trees cannot be preserved onsite, offsite mitigation or payment of an in-lieu
                                     fee may be required by the City. Where possible, trees planted for mitigation
                                     should be located in the same watershed as the trees, which were removed.
                                	    Trees that cannot be protected shall be replaced either on-site or off-site as
                                     required by the City.
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 1 When reviewing native or non-native trees for preservation,
                                     considering the following criteria:
                                     •	 Aesthetic value
                                     •	 Biological value
                                     •	Shade
                                     •	 Water quality benefits
                                     •	 Runoff reduction
                                     •	 Air quality (pollutant reduction)
                                     •	 Health of the tree(s)
                                     •	 Suitability for preservation in place
                                     •	 Safety hazards posed by the tree(s)
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 2 Develop a list of trees which shall be considered generally
                                     exempt from preservation. These may include trees, which pose a threat to
                                     public safety, to native trees, or to natural habitat.
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 3 Develop a list of trees which may be used when providing
                                     replacement trees for the loss of native and non-native trees.
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 4 Implement the City’s Tree Preservation Ordinance.
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 5 Amend the City’s Tree Preservation Ordinance to conform
                                     with the policies of this General Plan and to expand protection to non-native
                                     trees.
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 6 Develop a list of trees that should not be planted due to
                                     their invasive nature (that is, their ability to escape cultivation or to dominate
                                     natural areas) and provide this information to the public and the development
                                     community.
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 7 Retain the services of a qualified arborist(s) under contract to
                                     the City to provide information to decision-makers and staff on the suitability
                                     of trees for preservation.
                                	    CAQ-8-Action 8 Consider the use of revised standard roadway cross-sections
                                     which do not require the removal of trees in order to provide additional
                                     roadway capacity.
CAQ-10	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                            Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
	CAQ-8-Action 9 Provide funds for education, programs, and materials
         emphasizing the value and importance of trees. Support private foundations
         with local funds for their tree planting efforts. Encourage the harvesting of
         native seeds and plants prior to the clearing of project sites.
CAQ-9	 Wetlands, vernal pools, marshland and riparian (streamside) areas are
         considered to be important resources. Impacts to these resources shall be
         avoided unless shown to be technically infeasible. The City shall seek to ensure
         that no net loss of wetland areas occurs, which may be accomplished by
         avoidance, re-vegetation and restoration onsite or creation of riparian habitat
         corridors.
	        CAQ-9-Action 1 As part of the development review process, ensure that all
         potentially affected wetland areas are identified, and provide mitigation
         to ensure that no net loss occurs. Mitigation should occur within the same
         watershed as the impact, where feasible.
	        CAQ-9-Action 2 Coordinate with the California Department of Fish and Game
         and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in the review of development projects.
CAQ-10	 Consider the adoption of habitat conservation plans for rare, threatened, or
         endangered species.
	        CAQ-10-Action 1 As appropriate, work with the County of Sacramento
         and other agencies on a Habitat Conservation Plan or other mechanism to
         implement this policy.
CAQ 11	 The City shall seek to preserve areas, where feasible, where special-status
         plant and animal species and critical habitat areas are known to be present
         or potentially occurring based on City biological resource mapping and
         data provided in the General Plan EIR or other technical material that may
         be adversely affected by public or private development projects. Where
         preservation is not possible, appropriate mitigation shall be included in the
         public or private project. “Special-status” species are generally defined as
         species considered to be rare, threatened, endangered, or otherwise protected
         under local, state, and/or federal policies, regulations or laws.
	        CAQ-11 Action 1 The City shall require a biological resources evaluation
         for private and public development projects in areas identified to contain
         or possibly contain special-status plant and animal species based on City
         biological resource mapping and data provided in the General Plan EIR or
         other technical material. The biological resources evaluation shall determine
         the presence/absence of these special-status plant and animal species on the
         site. The surveys associated with the evaluation shall be conducted during the
         appropriate seasons for proper identification of the species. Such evaluation
         will consider the potential for significant impact on special-status plant and
         animal species, and will identify feasible mitigation measures to mitigate such
         impacts to the satisfaction of the City and appropriate governmental agencies
         (e.g., U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, California Department of Fish and Game
         and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) where necessary (e.g., species listed under
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CAQ-11

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                        the State and/or Federal Endangered Species Act). Mitigation measures may
                                        include, but are not limited to, the following:
                                        •	For special-status plant species: On- or off-site preservation of existing
                                           populations from direct and indirect impacts, seed and soil collection or
                                           plant transplant that ensures that the plant population is maintained.
                                        •	 For special-status animal species: avoidance of the species and its habitat
                                           as well as the potential provision of habitat buffers, avoidance of the species
                                           during nesting or breeding seasons, replacement or restoration of habitat
                                           on- or off-site, relocation of the species to another suitable habitat area,
                                           payment of mitigation credit fees.
                                        •	 Participation in a habitat conservation plan.
                                CONSERVATION POLICIES: PROTECTION OF WATER
                                QUALITY AND SUPPLY
                                CAQ-12	 The City shall seek to ensure that the quality of groundwater and surface water
                                        is protected to the extent possible.
                                	       CAQ-12-Action 1 Continue to cooperate with the County, other cities, and the
                                        Regional Water Quality Control Board regarding compliance with the NPDES
                                        permit system, and support other water quality improvement projects in order
                                        to maintain compliance with the Basin Plan.
                                	       CAQ-12-Action 2 Implement the City’s NPDES permit on all public and private
                                        development projects and activities.
                                	       CAQ-12-Action 3 Collect information on design, construction, and operation
                                        techniques which help prevent water pollution, and provide this information to
                                        the public and the development community.
                                CAQ-13	 Implement the City’s NPDES permit through the review and approval of
                                        development projects and other activities regulated by the permit.
                                CAQ-14	 The city shall seek to minimize the amount of impervious surfaces and
                                        directly connected impervious surfaces in areas of new development and
                                        redevelopment and use on-site infiltration of runoff in areas with appropriate
                                        soils where the infiltration of storm water would not pose a potential threat to
                                        groundwater quality.
                                CAQ-15	 The City shall encourage water supply service providers and County Sanitation
                                        District 1 to design water supply and recycled water supply facilities in a manner
                                        that avoids and/or minimizes significant environmental effects. The City shall
                                        specifically encourage the Sacramento County Water Agency to design well
                                        facilities and operation to minimize surface flow effects to the Cosumnes River.
                                CAQ-16	 Future land uses that are anticipated to utilize hazardous materials or waste
                                        shall be required to provide adequate containment facilities to ensure that
                                        surface water and groundwater resources are protected from accidental
                                        releases. This shall include double-containment, levees to contain spills, and
CAQ-12	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
         monitoring wells for underground storage tanks, as required by local, state and
         federal standards.
CONSERVATION POLICIES: FLOODING AND DRAINAGE
CAQ-17	The City recognizes the value of naturally vegetated stream corridors,
         commensurate with flood control and public acceptance, to assist in removal
         of pollutants, provide native and endangered species habitat and provide
         community amenities.
CAQ-18	 Post-development peak storm water run-off discharge rates and velocities
         shall be designed to prevent or reduce downstream erosion, and to protect
         stream habitat.
CAQ-19 	 Encourage the retention of natural stream corridors, and the creation of natural
         stream channels where improvements to drainage capacity are required.
	        CAQ-19-Action 1 Re-vegetation using native plant species shall be encouraged;
         use of non-native species shall be discouraged. Use of invasive species shall be
         prohibited.
	        CAQ-19-Action 2 The City shall permit stream channel realignment only:
         •	When necessary to eliminate flood hazards, after alternatives to provide
            flood capacity while protecting the natural alignment have been shown to
            be infeasible; or
         •	To protect and preserve natural features and vegetation which would
            otherwise be removed; or
         •	If the existing channel has been significantly disrupted by agricultural
            improvements or other man-made changes.
	        CAQ-19-Action 3 The City shall require, to the maximum extent practical,
         retention of topographic diversity and variation when channels are realigned
         or modified, including:
         •	 “Self-sustaining” meander characteristics,
         •	Berms,
         •	 Naturalized side slope, and
         •	 Varied channel bottom elevation, consistent with the characteristics of the
            watershed, public safety, and other site-specific considerations.
	        CAQ-19-Action 4 Where existing streams support riparian vegetation, evaluate
         options for constructing secondary flood control channels or other facilities for
         flood control and water quality purposes.
	        CAQ-19-Action 5 Channel lowering of existing natural streams shall occur only
         after consideration of alternatives (including surface drainage systems which
         do not require channel lowering) and only when it is necessary to accommodate
         the gravity drainage of storm runoff and/or accommodate floodflows under
         existing bridge structures.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN CAQ-13

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                	       CAQ-19-Action 6 All storm drainage improvements on natural streams shall
                                        be designed where feasible to maintain water flows necessary to protect and
                                        enhance existing fish habitat, native riparian vegetation, water quality, and/or
                                        ground water recharge.
                                	       CAQ-19-Action 7 Improvements in watercourses shall be designed for low
                                        maintenance, and to accommodate peak flows with vegetation (including
                                        mitigation plantings) in the channel. Channel modifications shall retain marsh
                                        and riparian vegetation whenever possible.
                                	       CO-19-Action 8 Development design shall maximize the total floodplain
                                        frontage that is open to public view. Development adjacent to stream corridors
                                        shall be encouraged to provide a public street paralleling at least one side of
                                        the corridor with vertical curbs, gutters, foot path, street lighting, and post and
                                        cable barriers to prevent vehicular entry.
                                	       CAQ-19-Action 9 Trails along stream corridors shall be located to minimize
                                        wildlife impacts and shall be restricted to non-motorized traffic.
                                	       CAQ-19-Action 10 Except where approved by the City as part of the
                                        development of a public or private development project, no grading, clearing,
                                        tree cutting, debris disposal or any other similar action shall be allowed in
                                        stream corridors except for normal channel maintenance.
                                CAQ-20 Fill may not be placed in any 100-year floodplain as delineated by currently
                                        effective FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps or subsequent comprehensive
                                        drainage plans unless specifically approved by the City.
                                	       No fill shall be permitted in wetland areas unless approved by the City and
                                        appropriate state and federal agencies.
                                CAQ-21	 Development adjacent to a natural stream(s) shall provide a “stream buffer
                                        zone” along the stream.
                                	       “Natural streams” shall be generally considered to consist of the following,
                                        subject to site-specific review by the City:
                                        •	 Deer Creek
                                        •	 Elk Grove Creek
                                        •	 Laguna Creek and its tributaries
                                        •	 Morrison Creek
                                        •	 Strawberry Creek
                                        •	 White House Creek
                                	       The following are examples of desired features for this transition zone; the
                                        specific design for each transition zone shall be approved on a case-by-case
                                        basis by the City.
CAQ-14	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                              Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
	        Stream buffer zones should generally measure at least 50 (fifty) feet from
         the stream centerline (total width of 100) feet or more, depending on the
         characteristics of the stream, and shall include:
         1.	 Sufficient width for a mowed fire-break (where necessary), access for channel
             maintenance and flood control, and for planned passive recreation uses.
         2.	Sufficient width to provide for:
             a.	Quality and quantity of existing and created habitat,
             b.	Presence of species as well as species sensitivity to human disturbance,
             c.	Areas for regeneration of vegetation,
             d.	Vegetative filtration for water quality,
             e.	Corridor for wildlife habitat linkage,
             f. Protection from runoff and other impacts of urban uses adjacent to the
                corridor
             g. Trails and greenbelts.
         3.	The stream buffer zone should not include above ground water quality
             treatment structures designed to meet pollutant discharge requirements.
CAQ-22	 Stream crossings shall be minimized and be aesthetically compatible with the
         natural appearance of the stream channel. The use of bridges and other stream
         crossings with natural (unpaved) bottoms shall be encouraged to minimize
         impacts to natural habitat.
CAQ-23	Uses in the stream corridors shall be limited to recreation and agricultural
         uses compatible with resource protection and flood control measures. Roads,
         parking, and associated fill slopes shall be located outside of the stream
         corridor, except at stream crossings.
CAQ-24	 Open space lands within a stream corridor shall be required to be retained as
         open space as a condition of development approval for projects that include
         a stream corridor. Unencumbered maintenance access to the stream shall be
         provided.
CONSERVATION POLICIES: CONSERVATION OF OTHER
NATURAL RESOURCES/RECYCLING AND RE-USE OF
MATERIALS
CAQ-25	 The City shall encourage:
         •	Recycling,
         •	 Reduction in the amount of waste, and
         •	 Re-use of materials to reduce the amount of solid waste generated in Elk
             Grove.
	        CAQ-25-Action 1 The City shall comply with the requirements of AB939 with
         regard to meeting state-mandated targets for reductions in the amount of
         solid waste generated in Elk Grove.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CAQ-15

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                	       CAQ-25-Action 2 The City shall provide information to businesses and
                                        residents on available options to implement the City’s waste reduction targets.
                                	       CAQ-25-Action 3 Encourage the use of recycled concrete in all base material
                                        utilized in City and private road construction.
                                	       CAQ-25-Action 4 Include a requirement for the use of recycled base material
                                        in all requests for bids for City roadway construction projects.
                                	       CAQ-25-Action 5 Establish procurement policies and procedures, which
                                        facilitate purchase of recycled, recyclable or reusable products and materials
                                        where feasible.
                                	       CAQ-25-Action 6 Outside contractors bidding to provide products or services
                                        to the City, including printing services, shall be required to demonstrate that
                                        they will comply with City recycled materials policies.
                                	       CAQ-25-Action 7 The City shall actively promote a comprehensive, consistent
                                        and effective recycled materials procurement effort among other governmental
                                        agencies and local businesses.
                                CONSERVATION POLICIES: AIR QUALITY
                                CAQ-26	 It is the policy of the City of Elk Grove to minimize air pollutant emissions from all
                                        City facilities and operations to the extent feasible and consistent with the City’s
                                        need to provide a high level of public service.
                                	       CAQ-26-Action 1 The City shall encourage all its employees to use transportation
                                        alternatives such as public transit, bicycling, walking, and carpooling for
                                        commute and other work-related trips. The City shall provide information on
                                        these and other applicable programs to all employees.
                                	       CAQ-26-Action 2 All City facilities shall incorporate energy-conserving design
                                        and construction techniques.
                                	       CAQ-26-Action 3 The City shall encourage City contractors and vendors to
                                        reduce emissions from their operations (such as by using low emission vehicles),
                                        and shall consider including a preference for low emission contractors and
                                        vendors in City requests for proposals where appropriate.
                                CAQ-27	 The City shall promote energy conservation measures in new development
                                        to reduce on-site emissions and power plant emissions. The City shall seek
                                        to reduce the energy impacts from new residential and commercial projects
                                        through investigation and implementation of energy efficiency measures
                                        during all phases of design and development.
                                	       CAQ-27-Action 1 Provide information to the public and builders on available
                                        energy conservation techniques and products.
CAQ-16	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Conservation and Air Quality Element
	        CAQ-27-Action 2 Encourage the use of trees planted in locations that will
         maximize energy conservation and air quality benefits. Encourage the use of
         landscaping materials which produce lower levels of hydrocarbon emissions.
	        CAQ-27-Action 3 During project review, City staff shall consider energy
         conservation and, where appropriate, suggest additional energy conservation
         techniques.
	        CAQ-27-Action 4 During project review, ensure that “Best Available Control
         Technology” is properly used and implemented.
	        CAQ-27-Action 5 Encourage new commercial uses to limit delivery hours to
         non-peak hours.
CAQ-28	The City shall emphasize “demand management” strategies which seek to
         reduce single-occupant vehicle use in order to achieve state and federal air
         quality plan objectives.
	        CAQ-28-Action 1 Implement the requirements for designated carpool and
         vanpool parking for all new office developments.
	        CAQ-28-Action 2 All City facilities shall include designated carpool and vanpool
         spaces, and all City staff shall be encouraged to take part in ridesharing.
CAQ-29	The City shall seek to ensure that public transit is a viable and attractive
         alternative to the use of private motor vehicles.
	        CAQ-29-Action 1 Consider implementation of a development impact fee to
         provide funding for the development of new public transit facilities in Elk
         Grove.
	        CAQ-29-Action 2 The City shall review all options for providing public transit
         to the residents and businesses of Elk Grove and seek to implement the option
         which provides the most effective and cost-efficient service.
CAQ-30	 All new development projects which have the potential to result in substantial
         air quality impacts shall incorporate design, construction, and/or operational
         features to result in a reduction in emissions equal to 15 percent compared
         to an “unmitigated baseline” project. An “unmitigated baseline project” is a
         development project which is built and/or operated without the implementation
         of trip-reduction, energy conservation, or similar features, including any such
         features which may be required by the Zoning Code or other applicable codes.
	        CAQ-30-Action 1 The City shall develop and implement “Emission Reduction
         Measures” to achieve the reduction required by this policy. These Emission
         Reduction Measures should consider the following:
         •	Cost-effectiveness
         •	A maximum cost for measures, and consideration of a waiver from full
            compliance if this maximum cost would be exceeded.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 CAQ-17

Conservation and Air Quality Element
                                        •	 Credits for emission reductions already in place (e.g., for buildings in the
                                           latter phases of a multi-phased project which included emission reduction
                                           measures in its design) or which are required to mitigate other impacts.
                                CAQ-31	 The City shall support intergovernmental efforts directed at stringent tailpipe
                                        emission standards and inspection and maintenance programs for all feasible
                                        vehicle classes and revisions to the Air Quality Attainment Plan to accelerate
                                        and strengthen market-based strategies consistent with the General Plan.
                                	       CAQ-31-Action 1 The City shall ensure that all City vehicles conform with
                                        applicable emission standards and the time of purchase and continuing
                                        throughout their use by the City. The City shall consider pollutant emissions
                                        as one criterion for vehicle purchasing decisions, seeking to purchase lower-
                                        emitting vehicles.
                                	       CAQ-31-Action 2 The City shall participate in intergovernmental groups
                                        seeking to improve local and regional air quality.
                                	       CAQ-31-Action 3 In conjunction with Sacramento Metropolitan Air Quality
                                        Management District, support and participate in a public education and
                                        outreach program dealing with air quality issues, with a goal of attaining a
                                        solid foundation of public support for needed air quality measures.
                                	       CAQ-31-Action 4 The City shall consider the adoption of an ordinance to
                                        discourage excessive idling of diesel-powered and other heavy vehicles to
                                        reduce air pollutant emissions.
                                CAQ-32	 As part of the environmental review of projects, the City shall identify the air
                                        quality impacts of development proposals to avoid significant adverse impacts
                                        and require appropriate mitigation measures, potentially including—in the
                                        case of projects which may conflict with applicable air quality plans—emission
                                        reductions in addition to those required by Policy CAQ-30.
                                	       CAQ-32-Action 1 Coordinate with the Sacramento Metropolitan Air Quality
                                        Management District on the review of proposed development projects,
                                        specifically including projects that could conflict with any applicable air quality
                                        plans and/or the State Implementation Plan.
                                CAQ-33	 The City shall require that public and private development projects use low
                                        emission vehicles and equipment as part of project construction and operation,
                                        unless determined to be infeasible.
CAQ-18	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                              Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Economic Development Elemen
Economic Development Element
                                       The Economic Development Element is an optional element of the General Plan, which is
                                       not mandated by the State. By inclusion of this Element in the General Plan, the City of Elk
                                       Grove acknowledges the importance of economic development, including jobs creation,
                                       enhancement of the City’s economic base through establishment of a clear economic
                                       strategy, and effective use of the City’s finances, public services and facilities as they relate
                                       to economic development.
                                       This is not a mandatory general plan element, and therefore there are no mandated
                                       content requirements. The City has defined this element and created policies within
                                       this element to support its long term effort to improve economic conditions for all city
                                       residents.
                                       The City of Elk Grove makes a healthy local economy a high priority, and recognizes the
                                       need to create high quality jobs for the future well being of its citizens. As noted in the
                                       State of California’s “General Plan Guidelines,”
                                                “The structure of a [local] economy plays an important role in the physical
                                                development of a planning area and the stability of the local tax base. An
                                                effective (economic) element will establish a consistent set of policies which
                                                provide general direction to local government on how the community can
                                                focus resources to retain local businesses, attract new industries, support
                                                the tax base, and sustain the ability to provide public services for existing
                                                and future residents.” 1
                                       This Element of the General Plan includes:
                                            •	 An overview of the historic economic conditions affecting the City of Elk Grove;
  New commercial development in
                Elk Grove                   •	 A description of existing economic conditions;
                                            •	 A discussion of projected and desired future economic conditions for the City of
                                               Elk Grove; and
                                            •	A set of focused goals, policies and actions (implementation strategies) to help
                                               achieve the desired economic development conditions.
                                       HISTORIC ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
                                       In 1850, Elk Grove was established as a hotel and stage stop 15 miles south of Sacramento’s
                                       historic Sutter’s Fort. The area became a crossroad for business, entertainment, mail
                                       service, agriculture, and home base for gold miners. After the gold rush and statehood
                                       period, Elk Grove evolved with a distinctly rural and western lifestyle, independent from
                                       urban Sacramento’s growth and development.
                                       In 1952, most of the 3,000 residents in the Elk Grove Community Plan Area lived in rural areas.
                                       However, job growth in Sacramento starting in the mid-1950s spurred a steady increase
                                       of residents to Elk Grove who commuted to Sacramento for work. This trend continued
                                       through 1975, when growth accelerated. During the 1990s, the population of Elk Grove grew
1
  State of California General Plan     by more than 70 percent. Job growth during that period was taking place in other areas of
  Guidelines, Governor’s Office of     the County and region. Sacramento County’s General Plan vision for the unincorporated Elk
  Planning and Research, November 1998 Grove Community Plan Area was primarily that of a suburb of Sacramento.
ED-2	        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                    Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Economic Development Element
The City of Elk Grove was incorporated on July 1, 2000, establishing local control over
land use and development services. Since incorporation, both residential and non-
residential development in the City has increased.
Additional information regarding the City’s origins and growth is provided in the General
Plan Background Report.
EXISTING ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
In all cities, interdependence exists between local economic issues and the overall
quality of life—many important aspects of community life are provided by the local
government, which relies in large part on tax revenues to fund these services.
Elk Grove is a growing community with a well-established mix of land use and significant
opportunity for new development and redevelopment. Prior to incorporation, Elk Grove
                                                                                            Historic commercial building in
was planned and developed primarily as a bedroom community. However, the City’s                   Old Town Elk Grove
Vision as carried out in this General Plan identifies the desire to increase the jobs/
housing balance in Elk Grove to match the numbers and types of workers living in Elk
Grove with job opportunities in the city. To that end, General Plan Land Use Element
map amendments increased the amount of land designated for commercial and office
development and incorporated a regional commercial land use category.
The Comprehensive Fiscal Analysis for the incorporation (by EPS, dated March 1999)
projected that the City’s revenues would exceed its costs for services. Because the
incorporation was not shown to be “revenue neutral,” the City is obligated to mitigate
the County’s loss for the difference in transferred revenues and expenditures in the form
of a tax sharing agreement. Under the terms of the Revenue Neutrality Agreement, a
portion of the City’s property tax revenues is returned to the County for a specified
amount over a twenty-five year period.
Because of the loss in property tax revenues through fiscal year 2024/2025, Elk Grove
will need to identify other sources of revenue and to diversify the City’s sources for
revenues. To that end, the City has commissioned the establishment of an Economic
Development Plan, which will establish detailed, short-term strategies to implement the
focused goals and policies in this Element.
Currently, the Elk Grove Chamber of Commerce is actively involved in many issues and
efforts that foster community and business growth in Elk Grove. The Economic/Industrial
Development Committee for the Chamber is tasked with identifying and encouraging
industries and specific business firms which could enhance the Elk Grove area economy
by relocating or expanding within the Chamber’s service boundaries.
PROJECTED FUTURE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
According to projections by the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG), all
of the cities and the unincorporated areas in Sacramento County will experience growth
in population, housing, and employment over the next 20-year period. Sacramento
County population and employment growth projections range between 0.9 and 2.4
percent annually until 2020 (peak growth taking place in the 2000 through 2005 period
and declining thereafter). Annual population and employment growth rates in Elk Grove
are also projected to peak during the 2000 through 2005 period, but at a much higher
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	        ED-3

Economic Development Element
                              rate of 6.2 and 13.1 percent, respectively. SACOG projection assumptions utilize historic
                              growth rates and jobs housing balance data prior to Elk Grove’s Incorporation in July
                              2000. It is the City’s intent to increase the jobs/housing ratio and to expand the existing
                              commercial and industrial growth trends. Therefore, the City anticipates a higher growth
                              rate, particularly in terms of employment growth.
                              The City of Elk Grove is a developing community with opportunity to expand the existing
                              commercial, business, and industrial development and employment base. As described
                              in the Land Use Element, development efforts within specified areas will allow new
                              investment and complementary uses to meet local and regional shopping needs, provide
                              expanded job opportunities to improve the jobs/housing ratio, and build the City’s tax
                              base. The City’s vision is for Elk Grove to be a community in which people can live, work,
                              shop, and play. This Element will guide the economic component of that vision.
                              The structure of the City’s economy plays an important role in the physical development
                              of the planning area and the stability of the local tax base. The goals, policies, and
                              actions in this section are intended to provide direction as to how the community
                              can focus resources to retain local businesses, attract new commercial, business, and
                              industrial enterprises, support the tax base (create additional tax revenue), and continue
                              to provide public services for existing and future residents of Elk Grove.
                              The following goals serve as the foundation for an overall economic development
                              strategy for the City:
                                Guiding Goal 1: High Quality of Life for All Residents
                                Focused Goal 1-5: Excellence in the design of new development
                                Focused Goal 1-8: Creation and maintenance of a strong, positive community image
                                for Elk Grove
                                Guiding Goal 2: Diversified Economic Base
                                Focused Goal 2-1: A business community which includes a diversity of industrial
                                and office uses, locally and regionally oriented retail and services, and a diversity of
                                residential types
                                Focused Goal 2-2: A balance between the numbers and types of workers residing in
                                Elk Grove and opportunities for employment in the city
                                Focused Goal 2-3: A positive environment for business retention and expansion
                                Focused Goal 2-4: Creation of Elk Grove as a desirable place to establish a business,
                                particularly major employment-generating uses
                                Focused Goal 2-5: A current and comprehensive economic development plan
                                outlining the City’s strategy to strengthen the local economy
                                Focused Goal 2-6: A balanced municipal budget which will allow the City to provide
                                a high level of service to all residents and businesses
ED-4	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Economic Development Element
The following policies and action items implement these goals:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICIES:
DIVERSE AND BALANCED MIX OF USES
ED-1	    Strive to establish a balanced mix of commercial, office and industrial businesses
         to the City to ensure a variety of employment and business opportunities.
	        ED-1-Action 1 Periodically review the General Plan to ensure that there is an
         adequate supply of land designated for economic development, with flexibility
         in the commercial and industrial land use designations to allow a wide range of
         targeted businesses without the need for amendments to the General Plan.
ED-2	    The City recognizes the importance of making an adequate supply of land
         available for economic development. Specific properties for economic
         development and corresponding target land uses will be identified on the
         City’s Zoning Map and/or in its Economic Development Plan or Strategy.
ED-3	    Encourage the full and efficient utilization of vacant and underutilized parcels
         in appropriately designated areas to support the development and expansion
         of targeted industrial and commercial facilities.
ED-4	    Encourage developers of larger commercial and office projects to provide for
         on-site ancillary uses that would allow employees and residents to make non-
         work-related trips (e.g., banking, lunch, dry cleaning, recreation, child care)
         without having to use their automobiles.
	        ED-4-Action 1 Ensure that commercial and industrial land use designations and
         zoning designations for larger scale developments allow for a complimentary
         mix of uses.
	        ED-4-Action 2 Encourage and support efforts to provide support services
         such as child care and health services near employment centers.
ED-5	    Consider the use of public/private partnerships as a means of revitalizing
         selected areas.
	        ED-5-Action 1 On an ongoing basis, evaluate opportunities for City involvement
         in public/private partnerships, including public investment in infrastructure
         and other improvements, the location of public areas, and modification of land
         use regulations and other development controls.
ED-6	    Promote policies, programs and services that support a diverse local economy
         providing a range of goods and services, support existing local businesses, and
         that encourage new, independent business ventures.
	        ED-6-Action 1 Support efforts that encourage Elk Grove residents and
         businesses to buy goods and services locally.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 ED-5

Economic Development Element
                              ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICIES:
                              JOBS HOUSING BALANCE
                              ED-7	  Maximize the use of non-residential land for employment-generating and
                                     revenue-generating uses.
                              	      ED-7-Action 1 Continue to improve Elk Grove’s jobs/ housing ratio and seek
                                     to achieve sufficient employment opportunities in Elk Grove for all of the
                                     employed persons living in the city, while continuing to promote the City’s role
                                     as a regional center.
                              	      ED-7-Action 2 In cooperation with the private sector, support efforts to provide
                                     a supply of land ready for the development of buildings (that is, land with all
                                     infrastructure in place) and available for development of uses in target markets.
                              ED-8	  Support the creation and retention of jobs that provide sustainable wages and
                                     benefits.
                              ED-9	  Provide sufficient land for business expansion and attraction of new employers
                                     that utilize the City’s existing labor pool.
                              	      ED-9-Action 1 Identify industries whose employee needs correspond to the
                                     educational and job skills profile of the community, and develop strategies to
                                     attract such employers.
                              	      ED-9-Action 2 Promote the establishment and expansion of workplace
                                     alternatives, including home occupations and telecommuting.
                              	      ED-9-Action 3 Support strategies to increase business-to-business commerce
                                     in Elk Grove.
                              ED-10	 Use Elk Grove’s skilled labor force as an economic development and business
                                     attraction tool and increase the number of jobs that go to Elk Grove residents
                                     by coordinating economic development efforts with employment placement.
                              	      ED-10-Action 1 Market Elk Grove’s sizable skilled labor force as an economic
                                     development advantage for new and expanding businesses.
                              	      ED-10-Action 2 Work with local businesses and employment recruiters
                                     to establish a process for recruitment of Elk Grove residents for new jobs.
                                     Consider incentive programs for new businesses that provide commitments to
                                     hire minimum numbers or percentages of Elk Grove residents.
                              	      ED-10-Action 3 Support efforts to coordinate education and job training
                                     programs among the Elk Grove Unified School District, Cosumnes River College,
                                     local universities, employment training and service agencies, and employers.
                              	      ED-10-Action 4 Provide labor market information from data sources and
                                     industry sectors to local educational institutions and training agencies for
                                     adults and youths.
ED-6	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                              Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Economic Development Element
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICIES:
BUSINESS RETENTION AND EXPANSION
ED-11	   Retain existing businesses, particularly those that contribute to meeting Elk
         Grove’s strategic economic goals, and facilitate their expansion as appropriate.
	        ED-11-Action 1 Develop a proactive business retention program that addresses
         issues affecting all business sectors.
	        ED-11-Action 2 Develop small business assistance programs, including but not
         limited to below market interest rate loans and creating new or expanding
         existing business plans.
	        ED-11-Action 3 Work with the US Department of Commerce, State Trade
         and Commerce Agency, Sacramento Area Commerce and Trade Association,
         Sacramento County Economic Development Department, Chamber of
         Commerce, and educational institutions to implement marketing and
         educational programs supporting business retention strategies.
	        ED-11-Action 4 Create a program to recognize employers that contribute to
         the quality of life in the community.
ED-12	   Promote a thriving local retail, personal and business services sector.
	        ED-12-Action 1 Actively promote revitalization and strong sales in Old Town
         Elk Grove, and along major commercial thoroughfares.
	        ED-12-Action 2 Assist local merchants and business organizations interested
         in forming mutual benefit organizations such as merchants associations and
         business improvement districts.
ED-13	   Recognizing that business conditions are often turbulent, the City shall endeavor
         to maintain close links with corporate leaders to monitor business conditions
         and identify issues in which the City may be of assistance.
	        ED-13-Action 1 Host regular meetings with major employers to discuss current
         operation and to provide information on City services. This allows the City to
         quickly respond if the business is considering either relocating or expanding.
ED-14	   Support the retention of viable agricultural, ranching and dairy farm businesses
         and land uses, consistent with the City’s long-term land use goals and policies
	        ED-14-Action 1 Work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, California
         Department of Food and Agriculture, and Sacramento County Farm Bureau to
         support local agriculture, ranches and dairies, consistent with the City’s long-
         term land use policies.
	        ED-14-Action 2 Consider assigning staff to serve as an Agricultural and Land
         Use Coordinator for the City of Elk Grove to assist in the retention of agricultural
         businesses.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 ED-7

Economic Development Element
                              ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICIES: BUSINESS
                              ATTRACTION
                              ED-15	 As part of the City’s Economic Development Plan, include a Business Attraction
                                     Program to identify a focused market effort and assist businesses in locating in
                                     or relocating to Elk Grove. A successful business attraction program not only
                                     promotes economic growth but also provides economic diversification. This
                                     diversification will result in more resilience in the local economy and allows the
                                     community to withstand cyclical declines in various sectors of the local and
                                     national economies.
                              	      ED-15-Action 1 Identify target industries in the manufacturing, retail, and office
                                     sectors.
                              	      ED-15-Action 2 Implement specific recruitment programs tailored to specific
                                     target markets.
                              ED-16	 Attract and expand industrial, high technology, regional-serving office
                                     development that diversifies the local economy and produces higher-wage
                                     jobs.
                              	      ED-16-Action 1 Consider a zoning incentive program (which may include
                                     flexible development standards, shared parking, fast-track processing, and
                                     the like) to facilitate development or re-use of key sites by high-employment-
                                     generating uses and high value-added businesses.
                              	      ED-16-Action 2 Focus available incentives and business assistance services on
                                     attracting and retaining firms in industries that typically provide high-quality
                                     employment, living wages and strong career advancement opportunities, and
                                     which generate strong tax revenues, or fill a critical market niche.
                              ED-17	 Work to remove both real and perceived barriers to development, particularly
                                     for constrained sites. Potential strategies include:
                                     •	 Conduct a thorough inventory of vacant and underutilized land designated
                                        for commercial and industrial uses and identify opportunities for pre-
                                        development studies (i.e., Phase I analysis, site assembly, right-of-way
                                        improvements) which could be done by the City or the private sector to
                                        facilitate development of key sites.
                                     •	Streamlining City administrative and regulatory processes wherever
                                        possible. Reduce inefficiencies, overlap, and time delays associated with
                                        these processes.
                                     •	Simplifying the development review process for small-scale changes to
                                        previously approved site plans and buildings.
                              ED-18	 Work proactively with those businesses interested in expanding existing
                                     businesses or establishing new businesses to install necessary infrastructure
                                     improvements. The goal is to establish an inventory of ready-to-go non-
                                     residential sites, complete with zoning, infrastructure, and environmental
                                     clearances. City actions may include:
ED-8	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Economic Development Element
         1)	Sharing of engineering studies and plans on water supply and treatment
            capacities, wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment capacities,
            storm water drainage and roadway improvements.
         2)	Working jointly with developers where City Capital Improvement Plans call
            for extension or upgrades to City infrastructure.
         3)	Pursuing financing options, including possible tax credits, to assist
            developers in providing necessary infrastructure improvements.
         4) Allowing for phased extension or upgrades to infrastructure in conjunction
            with approved phasing plans for site development.
ED-19	   The City shall use its discretion to ensure that retail land is appropriately sited
         and quantified.
ED-20	 Provide incentives for private reinvestment in underutilized commercial areas
         where adequate infrastructure exists.
ED-21	   Support micro loans, small business loan guarantees and other measures to
         support entrepreneurs and new business development.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICIES:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
ED-22	 Promote economic development within Elk Grove through preparation and
         implementation of an Economic Development Strategy.
	        ED-22-Action 1 Prepare an Economic Development Strategy that:
         1)	Identifies the needs of existing businesses and acknowledges the important
            contributions existing businesses provide to the community;
         2) Identifies specific goals or targets for business retention and development
            over the next 20 years; and
         3) Includes targets for economic development in 5-year increments and
            implementation steps to be undertaken to help achieve specific goals.
	        ED-22-Action 2 Involve community members and business leaders in preparing,
         updating, and implementing the Economic Development Strategy.
ED-23	 Designate an Economic Development Coordinator on City staff with
         responsibility for promoting economic development opportunities and
         implementing and tracking the progress/effectiveness of the policies and
         actions of the current Economic Development Plan.
ED-24	 Establish an Economic Development Action Team composed of key
         departments and outside organizations to respond to urgent or substantial
         needs of existing businesses.
ED-25	 Continue to participate in regional economic organizations and monitor the
         regional economy to ascertain the impacts on the local economy.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 ED-9
Economic Development Element
                               ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICIES: BALANCED
                               BUDGET WITH ADEQUATE SERVICE LEVELS
                               ED-26	 Coordinate between capital projects and economic development projects
                                      within the context of the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
                               ED-27	 Seek innovative ways to reduce the cost burden of infrastructure provision on
                                      new industrial and commercial development, without unduly transferring the
                                      burden to the residential sector.
ED-10	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                            Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Historic Resources Elemen
Historic Resources Element
                                    Although Elk Grove is home to a federally recognized historic district in Old Town, little
                                    has been done either in Old Town or outside the boundaries of the Old Town Special
                                    Planning Area to provide additional protection to historic resources. This Element
                                    summarizes the historic resources that exist in Elk Grove and lay out recommended
                                    policies to help provide additional protections for these resources, potentially including
                                    City review of alterations to historic buildings.
                                    HISTORIC RESOURCES
                                    On March 1, 1988, Old Town Elk Grove became nationally recognized as the Elk Grove
                                    Historic District (see the Background Report) on the National Register of Historic
                                    Places.
                                    Outside of Old Town Elk Grove, there are four sites listed as California Historical
                                    Landmarks. Three of these sites are within the Elk Grove city limits, while the other
                                    one is located just outside city limits within the Planning Area.
                                        •	Grave of Elitha Cumi Donner Wilder – Elk Grove Masonic Cemetery, Row C, Lot
                                           2 – Donner party survivor (City)
                                        •	 Site of first County free library branch in California – 9125 Elk Grove Blvd. (City)
                                        •	Murphy’s Ranch (monument) – near the SW corner of Grant Line Road and
   The former Odd Fellows Hall in          Highway 99 – the site of the beginning of the United States’ conquests of California
  Old Town is part of the federally
      registered historic district.     •	Grave of Alexander Hamilton Willard – Franklin Cemetery – perhaps the last
                                           survivor of the exploring party that accompanied Lewis and Clark (Planning Area)
                                    For additional, detailed information on historic resources in Elk Grove—including the
                                    federal historic district and other structures not within the district—please consult the
                                    Background Report.
                                    OLD TOWN SPECIAL PLANNING AREA
                                    In 1985, Sacramento County adopted the Elk Grove Old Town Special Planning Area
                                    (SPA) Ordinance, to serve as the guiding policy document for the historic area. (The
                                    boundaries of the Old Town SPA are shown in the Background Report.) The intent of
                                    the Sacramento County Board of Supervisors was,
                                            “. . . to permit rehabilitation of existing structure which will be compatible
                                            with the present conditions with minimal disruption to the lifestyle
                                            of residents and to consider and include new construction where
                                            appropriate. This Ordinance will implement the goals…regarding the
                                            retention and enhancement of a viable commercial center in Elk Grove
                                            and the preservation of the early California cultural aspect of the town. It
                                            is important that construction of new buildings or structures not alter the
                                            cultural and/or historical value of this section of the town.” [Old Town
                                            SPA, excerpt]
                                    This Element of the General Plan will maintain some of these original intentions. It also
HR-2	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Historic Resources Element
provides out a policy framework to further preserve and protect the historic resources
and establish policies for community education and involvement in historic preservation
efforts for the Old Town area.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES
In addition to historic resources, Elk Grove and the planning area contain a variety of
archaeological resources dating to the pre-historic eras. Detailed information on these
resources is contained in the Background Report.
The following are the goals of the City of Elk Grove related to the preservation and
enhancement of the city’s historical and archaeological resources:
  Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
  Focused Goal 1-8: Creation and maintenance of a strong, positive community image
  for Elk Grove
  Focused Goal 1-9: A pattern of land use which enhances the community character
  of Elk Grove, provides employment and shopping opportunities to serve residents
  and the region, provides for use of transit, and protects Elk Grove’s unique historical
  and natural features
  Guiding Goal 2: Diversified Economic Base
  Focused Goal 2-4: Creation of Elk Grove as a desired place to locate major
  employment-generating uses
  Guiding Goal 3: Protection of the Natural Environment
  Focused Goal 3-1: Development which recognizes environmental constraints and is
  designed and operated to minimize impacts on the environment
  Guiding Goal 4: Preservation and Enhancement of Elk Grove’s Unique Historic and
  Natural Features
  Focused Goal 4-1: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s historic structures
  and districts
  Focused Goal 4-3: Preservation of the large oak and other tree species which are an
  important part of the City’s historic and aesthetic character
  Guiding Goal 5: Preservation of the Rural Character of Elk Grove
  Focused Goal 5-2: Maintenance of those features that provide the character of Elk
  Grove’s rural areas, including: large oak and other trees, small local roadways, animal
  keeping and raising, equestrians, agriculture, and limited commercial opportunities
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 HR-3

Historic Resources Element
                                 The following policies and action items implement these goals:
                                 HISTORIC RESOURCE POLICIES
                                 HR-1	    Encourage the preservation and enhancement of existing historical and
                                          archaeological resources in the City.
                                 	        HR-1-Action 1 Develop and update a comprehensive Historic Resource inventory
                                          using the National Register, the California Register, California Historical
                                          Landmarks, California Points of Historical Interest, and any other structures or
                                          properties the City Council determines to have historic value.
                                 	        The Inventory should contain a map that shows the location of all of the
                                          structures with a historically significant designation, and a list of all of the
                                          historically significant structures within Elk Grove.
                                 	        HR-1-Action 2 Establish a Historic Preservation Committee to provide input
                                          regarding the City’s historic preservation regulations.
                                 	        This Committee could include members of the public experienced in and
                                          knowledgeable about historic resources in general and in the city.
                                 	        HR-1-Action 3 Create partnerships with private organizations that focus on
                                          historic resource preservation, such as the Elk Grove Historical Society.
                                 	        HR-1-Action 4 Adopt a Historic Preservation Ordinance establishing guidelines
                                          and processes for the preservation and enhancement of historic structures.
                                 	        HR-1-Action 5 Provide information to the public on historic preservation efforts
                                          and financial incentive programs. This may include:
                                          •	 Establish an informational kiosk in Old Town for the public to view about the
                                             City’s historic resources.
                                          •	 Establish a history museum in Old Town.
                                          •	Create a historic preservation page on the City of Elk Grove’s website
                                             with links to federal and state historic preservation programs and financial
                                             incentive programs.
                                          •	 Create pamphlets that outline and discuss the City of Elk Grove’s historic
                                             preservation program.
                                          •	 Keeping handouts and applications on federal and state incentive programs at
                                             the public counter at City Hall.
                                 HR-2	    The City supports the goals and objectives for the Comprehensive Statewide
                                          Historic Preservation Plan for California 2000-2005.
                                 HR-3	    Encourage restoration, renovation, and/or rehabilitation of all historic
                                          structures.
                                 	        HR-3-Action 1 Provide financial incentives to residents as encouragement for
                                          rehabilitation and restoration of private property.
HR-4	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Historic Resources Element
	        HR-3-Action 2 Participate in the Mills Act Tax Abatement Program as an
         economic incentive for private property owners to actively participate in the
         restoration of their properties.
	        HR-3-Action 3 Use grants and funds available to the City for historic
         preservation, such as the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and
         the California Heritage Fund (provided by the Safe Neighborhood Parks, Clean
         Water, Clean Air and Coastal Protection Bond Act of 2000).
HR-4	    Support use of federal financial incentive programs to encourage preservation
         of historic structures.
	        HR-4-Action 1 Provide information on applying for the Federal Historic
         Preservation Tax Incentive.
	        HR-4-Action 2 Make available information on how to claim income and
         estate tax deductions for charitable contributions of partial interest in historic
         property, per The Tax Reform Act of 1986.
HR-5	    Maintain and improve the aesthetic quality and architectural diversity of the
         Old Town historical district.
	        HR-5-Action 1 Implement the Elk Grove Old Town Special Planning Area (SPA)
         Ordinance.
	        HR-5-Action 2 Within two (2) years of the adoption of this General Plan,
         update the Old Town SPA. This update should include:
         •	A re-examination of the SPA boundaries to include all properties in the
            federal historic district and other areas as appropriate to provide a cohesive
            planning area.
         •	 Incorporate the design guidelines of the “Old Town Design Comprehensive
            Plan” prepared by the County of Sacramento.
         •	 A review of land use policy, permitted uses, and development standards and
            review.
	        HR-5-Action 3 Consider the creation of a historic overlay zone for use in the
         Old Town area or other parts of Elk Grove containing historic structures.
	        HR-5-Action 4 Use The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment
         of Historic Properties (1995) as a guideline for the preservation of historic
         buildings.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND PALEONTOLOGICAL POLICIES
HR-6	    Protect and preserve prehistoric and historic archaeological resources
         throughout the City.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 HR-5

Historic Resources Element
                                 	 HR-6-Action 1 In areas identified in the Background Report as having a
                                   significant potential for containing archaeological or paleontological artifacts,
                                   require completion of a detailed on-site study as part of the environmental
                                   review process. Implement all recommended mitigation measures.
                                 	 HR-6-Action 2 Impose the following conditions on all discretionary projects in
                                   areas which do not have a significant potential for containing archaeological
                                   or paleontological resources:
                                   •	“The Planning Division shall be notified immediately if any prehistoric,
                                      archaeologic, or paleontologic artifact is uncovered during construction. All
                                      construction must stop and an archaeologist that meets the Secretary of the
                                      Interior’s Professional Qualifications Standards in prehistoric or historical
                                      archaeology shall be retained to evaluate the finds and recommend
                                      appropriate action.”
                                   •	 “All construction must stop if any human remains are uncovered, and the
                                      County Coroner must be notified according to Section 7050.5 of California’s
                                      Health and Safety Code. If the remains are determined to be Native
                                      American, the procedures outlined in CEQA Section 15064.5 (d) and (e)
                                      shall be followed. “
HR-6	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                        Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Elemen
Housing Element
                                      Planning for the provision of housing for all economic segments of the City of Elk Grove’s
                                      (City) population is the intent of the Housing Element. The Housing Element identifies
                                      the policies and actions that the City will implement to ensure that housing in the City is
                                      affordable, safe, clean, and fit for human habitation.
                                      Affordable, safe, and decent housing
                                      for all residents is a goal of the City of Elk Grove
                                      This Housing Element implements the following goals of the City’s General Plan:
     Affordable, safe, and decent
  housing for all residents is a goal   Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
       of the City of Elk Grove
                                        Focused Goal 1-6: Safe and affordable housing for all persons.
                                        Focused Goal 2-1: A business community which includes a diversity of industrial
                                        and office uses, locally and regionally oriented retail and services, and a diversity of
                                        residential types.
                                        Focused Goal 2-2: A balance between the numbers and types of workers residing in
                                        Elk Grove and opportunities for employment in the city.
                                      This Housing Element consists of the following parts:
                                      1) Goals, Policies, and Actions
                                      2) Summary of Housing Needs
                                      3) Quantified Housing Objectives
                                      4) Housing Needs Assessment
                                      5) Adequate Sites
                                      6) Housing Resources and Incentives
                                      7) Housing Constraints
                                      8) Opportunities for Energy Conservation
                                      9) Relationship to Other Elements
                                      10) Review of Previous Element
                                      11) Public Participation
                                      12) Bibliography
H-2	       ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                    Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
1. GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
This Housing Element includes six Housing Goals. Under each Housing Goal are the
policies and actions (implementation programs) that will be implemented during the
2013–2021 Housing Element period to accomplish the goal.
The City’s Housing Goals are:
Housing Goal 1: Provide adequate sites to accommodate the City’s share of regional
housing needs through appropriate zoning and development standards.
Housing Goal 2: Assist in the development and provision of adequate housing stock to
meet the needs of extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income households
and special needs groups.
Housing Goal 3: Identify and, where appropriate, remove governmental constraints to
the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing, including housing for all
income levels and special needs groups.
Housing Goal 4: Conserve and improve the condition of existing affordable housing
stock.
Housing Goal 5: Promote housing opportunities for all persons, regardless of race,
religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability.
Housing Goal 6: Preserve assisted (subsidized) housing developments for lower-income
households.
Included in this section is a listing of the housing goals, guiding policies, and actions
the City will implement to achieve its goals. Each proposed action also describes the
implementation time frame and identifies the party responsible for carrying out the
action.
Housing Goal 1: Provide adequate sites to accommodate the City’s share of regional
housing needs through appropriate zoning and development standards.
GUIDING POLICY: PROVIDE ADEQUATE SITES
H-1 	     Policy: Maintain an adequate supply of appropriately zoned land with available
          or planned public services and infrastructure to accommodate the City’s
          projected housing needs for all income levels and for special needs groups.
          H-1 Action 1: To the extent that there are high-density residential sites identified
          as accommodating the City’s RHNA that ultimately develop with a use other
          than high-density residential development, the City will ensure that it maintains
          adequate inventory to accommodate the RHNA, including by rezoning as
          necessary.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                       ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-3

Housing Element
                               Time Frame: Review the sites inventory periodically throughout
                               the planning period
                               Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                               Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                               H-1 Action 2: The City has a lower income regional housing need of 3,462
                               units. In an effort to meet the lower income regional housing need, the City
                               will complete the following:
                                  1. Concurrently with adoption, the City will identify and rezone sites in
                                     Table 35 that meet the City’s lower income RHNA of 3,462. (Please note:
                                     this includes capacity from the SEPA and site 21).
                                  2. The City will rezone 15 acres of site 21, which will provide for a capacity
                                     of 315 units, consistent with Land Use Policy LU-40.
                                  3. The City will rezone approximately 60 acres of the Southeast Policy Area
                                     (SEPA), to meet a portion of the City’s lower-income housing needs.
                               The SEPA and site 21 will permit owner-occupied and rental multifamily
                               developments by right and will not require a conditional use permit. The City
                               has, since 2003, required Design Review for all multifamily development.
                               Design Review would be required for multifamily projects on these sites.
                               Projects under 151 units are reviewed at the “staff-level”, while larger projects
                               are reviewed by the Planning Commission. All sites will accommodate a
                               minimum of 20 units per acre and at least 16 units per site, pursuant to State
                               law requirements. Should it be determined that the SEPA or site 21 will not
                               be completed within the three year rezone timeframe, the City will identify
                               additional sites to meet the City’s RHNA.
                               Time Frame: By January 1, 2017
                               Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                               Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                               H-1 Action 3: To facilitate the development of affordable housing, and provide for
                               development phases of 50 to 150 units in size, the City will routinely coordinate
                               with property owners and give high priority to processing subdivision maps
                               that include affordable housing units.
                               Time Frame: As projects are processed through the Development Services
                               Department
                               Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                               Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                               H-1 Action 4: To ensure that there is a sufficient supply of multifamily zoned
                               land to meet the City’s RHNA, the City will help facilitate lot consolidations to
                               combine small residential lots into larger developable lots by annually meeting
                               with local developers to discuss development opportunities and incentives for
                               lot consolidation to accommodate affordable housing units. As developers/
H-4	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                        Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
         owners approach the City interested in lot consolidation for the development
         of affordable housing, the City will offer the following incentives on a project
         by project basis:
         • Allow affordable projects to exceed the maximum height limits,
         • Lessen set-backs, and/or
         • Reduce parking requirements.
         The City will also consider offsetting fees (when financially feasible) and
         concurrent/fast tracking of project application reviews to developers who
         provide affordable housing.
         Time Frame: Ongoing, as projects are processed through the Development
         Services Department. Annually meet with local developers to discuss
         development opportunities and incentives for lot consolidation.
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
H-2 	    Policy: Continue to support zero-lot line or reduced setback single-family
         residential developments and corner duplexes, in addition to multifamily
         projects, to increase affordable housing supply.
         H-2 Action 1: Continue to allow corner duplexes in single-family residential
         developments without a use permit.
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
H-3 	    Policy: Promote development where affordable housing is located in close
         proximity to services, shopping, and public transportation.
         H-3 Action 1: Continue to encourage multifamily development throughout the
         City. Utilize the following non-binding guidelines in the analysis process of
         identifying opportunity locations for new multifamily housing:
            1. Proximity to public transit or bus service.
            2. Proximity to commercial and social services.
            3. Parcel size and configuration that enhances the feasibility of development.
            4. Lack of physical constraints (e.g., noise, wetlands).
            5. Provision for a variety of housing types and affordable housing
               opportunities.
            6. Of an appropriate size to provide for on-site management.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-5

Housing Element
                                           7. Integration into and compatibility with surrounding development.
                                           8. Proximity to other multifamily development.
                                       The City may also consider other criteria, as it deems appropriate, in order to
                                       determine the feasibility and potential constraints of new multifamily development.
                                       Time Frame: Ongoing
                                       Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                       Funding Source: City Development Services Fund and Affordable Housing
                                       Fund
                                       H-3 Action 2: Offer fast track/priority processing, density bonuses, flexibility
                                       in development standards, and fee subsidies (when feasible) to developers
                                       proposing new housing, mixed-use, or infill projects affordable to lower-income
                                       households, farmworkers, seniors, and other special needs groups.
                                       Time Frame: Ongoing
                                       Responsibility: Development Services (Planning and Building Divisions)
                                       Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                               Housing Goal 2: Assist in the development and provision of adequate housing stock to
                               meet the needs of extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income households
                               and special needs groups.
                               GUIDING POLICY: ASSIST IN DEVELOPMENT OF
                               AFFORDABLE HOUSING STOCK
                               H-4	Policy: Facilitate and encourage the construction of housing affordable to
                                       extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income households by assisting
                                       nonprofit and for-profit developers with financial or technical assistance in a
                                       manner that is consistent with the City’s identified housing needs.
                                       H-4 Action 1: Continue to support affordable housing development through
                                       financial assistance from sources such as the Affordable Housing Fund,
                                       CalHome, Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), Home Investment
                                       Partnerships Program (HOME), and other US Department of Housing and Urban
                                       Development (HUD) or California Department of Housing and Community
                                       Development (HCD) funding, as feasible.
                                       Time Frame: Ongoing
                                       Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                       Funding Source: Affordable Housing Fund, CalHome, CDBG, HOME, or other
                                       HUD or HCD funding
                                       H-4 Action 2: When feasible, continue to provide waivers of or exemptions from
                                       select fees to all affordable housing projects and participate in the Sacramento
                                       Regional County Sanitation District’s fee waiver and deferral program to reduce
                                       impact fees for affordable housing development.
H-6	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning and Building Divisions)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund, Sacramento Regional
         County Sanitation District
         H-4 Action 3: Offer affordable housing funding sources through the issuance of
         a Request for Proposals process consistent with the City’s Affordable Housing
         Loan Program guidelines, or other process as approved by the City Council.
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Affordable Housing Fund
H-5 	    Policy: Increase access to homeownership by coordinating with developers
         to identify units appropriate for homeownership for low- and moderate-
         income households and by working with other agencies to increase access
         to homeownership for first-time homebuyers and low- and moderate-income
         households.
         H-5 Action 1: Continue to apply for HOME and CalHome funds for homebuyer
         assistance programs as they are available and when the City is eligible. Continue
         to administer the Affordable Homeownership Program, which provides limited
         fee waivers for deed-restricted for-sale affordable housing units. Information
         on these programs will be advertised on the City’s website when funds or
         homes are available.
         Time Frame: Ongoing; apply for HOME/CalHome funds annually or as
         available/eligible
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: HOME/CalHome, City Affordable Housing Fund
         H-5 Action 2: Continue to partner with NeighborWorks to provide homeownership
         services, such as homebuyer education and one-on-one or group counseling.
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund, private funding
H-6 	    Policy: Support energy-conserving programs in the production and
         rehabilitation of affordable housing to reduce household energy costs, improve
         air quality, and mitigate potential impacts of climate change in the region.
         H-6 Action 1: Continue to promote and support energy efficiency in new
         construction by encouraging developers to utilize Sacramento Municipal Utility
         District (SMUD) energy programs and other energy efficiency programs and to
         be consistent with the Sustainability Element of the General Plan and the City’s
         Climate Action Plan.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-7

Housing Element
                                     Time Frame: Ongoing
                                     Responsibility: Development Services (Planning and Building Divisions)
                                     Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                                     H-6 Action 2: Continue to encourage participation in SMUD’s PV (photovoltaic)
                                     Pioneer program by issuing PV system permits at no charge upon SMUD’s
                                     approval.
                                     Time Frame: Ongoing
                                     Responsibility: Development Services (Building Division)
                                     Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                               H-7 	 Policy: Continue to support housing opportunities for agricultural workers,
                                     homeless people, seniors, single-parent households, large families, and persons
                                     with disabilities.
                                     H-7 Action 1: Continue to allow flexibility in development standards, such as
                                     smaller unit sizes and parking reductions for senior projects, and by allowing
                                     development incorporating universal design measures.
                                     Time Frame: Ongoing
                                     Responsibility: Development Services (Planning and Building Divisions)
                                     Funding Source: Building and Planning fees
                                     H-7 Action 2: Continue to contribute funding and work closely with local
                                     nonprofits and regional agencies to assess homeless needs and develop plans
                                     to address homelessness at a regional level. The City will annually meet with
                                     local service providers and regional agencies (as applicable) to assess the
                                     needs regarding homelessness of the City and the region.
                                     Time Frame: Ongoing
                                     Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                     Funding Source: CDBG funds (when available)
                                     H-7 Action 3: Continue to procure funding sources that will allow the City to
                                     contribute to agencies that provide services for persons with special housing
                                     needs.
                                     Time Frame: Ongoing; as Notices of Funding Availability are released
                                     Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                     Funding Source: CDBG and other funds if available
                                     H-7 Action 4: Amend the Zoning Code to comply with Health and Safety
                                     Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6, which deal with certain kinds of employee
                                     housing. The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance to treat employee housing
                                     that serves six or fewer persons as a single-family structure and permit-ted
                                     in the same manner as other single-family structures of the same type in the
                                     same zone (Section 17021.5). The Zoning Ordinance will also be amended to
H-8	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                            Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
         treat employee housing consisting of no more than 12 units or 36 beds as an
         agricultural use and permitted in the same manner as other agricultural uses in
         the same zone (Section 17021.6) in zones where agricultural uses are permitted.
         Time Frame: Within one year from adoption of the Housing Element
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
         H-7 Action 5: Work with the Alta California Regional Center to implement an
         outreach program that informs families within the City about housing and
         services available for persons with developmental disabilities. The program
         could include the development of an informational brochure, including
         information on services on the City’s website, and providing housing-related
         training for individuals/families through workshops.
         Time Frame: Development of an outreach program within one year of adopting
         the Housing Element.
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
H-8 	    Policy: Assist extremely low-, very low-, and low-income households in locating
         affordable housing and finding sources of assistance with housing payments
         and rent.
         H-8 Action 1: Continue to update the affordable housing unit database and to
         provide information regarding affordable housing opportunities, both through
         direct response to inquiries and making information available on the City’s
         website.
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
         H-8 Action 2: Consider a housing choice voucher (Section 8) education
         program for residents (neighbors) and landlords to provide awareness of the
         program and the opportunities and constraints it provides.
         Time Frame: Education outreach would occur annually
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
Housing Goal 3: Identify and, where appropriate, remove governmental constraints to
the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing, including housing for all
income levels and special needs groups.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                               ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-9

Housing Element
                               GUIDING POLICY: REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL
                               CONSTRAINTS
                               H-9 	  Policy: Continue to monitor Title 23 of the Municipal Code, entitled Zoning,
                                      and other regulations to ensure that the City’s policies and regulations do not
                                      inappropriately constrain housing development and affordability.
                                      H-9 Action 1: Continue to provide regulatory incentives for the development
                                      of units affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and low-income households,
                                      including second dwelling units, senior housing, and apartment units, and
                                      housing for special needs groups, including agricultural employees, persons
                                      with disabilities (including developmental disabilities), and individuals and
                                      families in need of emergency/transitional housing. The City will also take
                                      subsequent action, as appropriate, to make the development of such units
                                      more financially feasible and will consider providing financial incentives, such
                                      as reducing, waiving, and/or deferring fees, where feasible.
                                      Time Frame: Ongoing, as projects are processed through the Development
                                      Services Department.
                                      Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                      Funding Source: City Development Services Fund, CDBG, Affordable Housing
                                      Fund
                               H-10 	 Policy: Continue to make efforts to keep the review process for extremely low-,
                                      very low-, and low-income housing developments and special needs housing
                                      as streamlined as possible.
                                      H-10 Action 1: Continue to designate a staff planner to guide affordable
                                      housing development projects through the planning process and designate
                                      the Housing Program Manager to implement housing-related programs and
                                      policy initiatives.
                                      Time Frame: Ongoing
                                      Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                      Funding Source: City Development Services Fund, City Affordable Housing
                                      Fund, CDBG
                                      H-10 Action 2: Continue to allow the Planning Director to serve as the approving
                                      authority on all multifamily projects of 150 units or less, including affordable
                                      projects, that are consistent with General Plan and zoning requirements.
                                      Time Frame: Ongoing
                                      Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                      Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
H-10	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                             Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
         H-10 Action 3: Continue to conduct interdepartmental meetings to coordinate
         the early review of development projects and address policy concerns.
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning, Building, and Public Works
         Divisions)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund, Planning and Building fees
H-11 	   Policy: Encourage creative and flexible design for residential developments.
         H-11 Action 1: Continue to encourage more creative and flexibly designed
         projects with an affordable housing component through the use of the Design
         Review process, which eliminated minimum lot width and public street frontage
         requirements, thus creating more flexibility for higher-density projects.
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
         H-11 Action 2: Consider adopting a Universal Design Ordinance that would
         encourage construction or modification of new and existing homes using
         design principles that allow individuals to remain in their homes as their
         physical needs and capabilities change.
         Time Frame: Consider the adoption of an ordinance by December 2014
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
H-12 	   Policy: Review the Housing Element to determine the appropriateness of the
         document to current conditions.
         H-12 Action 1: Continue to annually review the Housing Element to determine
         its effectiveness and its consistency with the General Plan, as part of the annual
         review required by Government Code Section 65400. Report on the findings
         of this review and suggest changes if needed.
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
Housing Goal 4: Conserve and improve the condition of existing affordable housing
stock.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-11
Housing Element
                               GUIDING POLICY: CONSERVE AND IMPROVE
                               AFFORDABLE HOUSING STOCK
                               H-13 	 Policy: Ensure that affordable housing stock is maintained in good, safe, and
                                      decent condition.
                                      H-13 Action 1: Continue to operate housing repair and/or rehabilitation
                                      programs that assist lower-income households occupying housing in need of
                                      repair, including the new Minor Home Repair Program that offers forgivable
                                      loans to very low- and low-income homeowners whose homes have one or
                                      more health and safety hazards.
                                      Time Frame: Ongoing
                                      Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                      Funding Source: CDBG funds
                                      H-13 Action 2: Continue to refer individuals interested in utility assistance to
                                      the appropriate local energy provider, usually SMUD or Pacific Gas and Electric
                                      (PG&E), both of which offer programs to assist with utility costs.
                                      Time Frame: Ongoing
                                      Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                      Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                                      H-13 Action 3:	 Provide information on available housing rehabilitation
                                      programs, such as the Minor Home Repair Program, to homeowners
                                      experiencing difficulty repairing health and safety hazards.
                                      Time Frame: Ongoing; as needed
                                      Responsibility: Development Services (Planning and Code Enforcement
                                      Divisions)
                                      Funding Source: CDBG funds
                                      H-13 Action 4: Consider a rental inspection program that is administered by
                                      the Code Enforcement Department with the goal of enforcing Municipal Code
                                      standards for rental housing.
                                      Time Frame: Consider program by December 2014
                                      Responsibility: Development Services (Planning and Code Enforcement
                                      Divisions)
                                      Funding Source: CDBG funds or other source to be identified
                               H-14 	 Policy:	 Ensure the retention of the City’s mobile home park.
                                      H-14 Action 1: If the one mobile home park in the City is in danger of being
                                      removed from the housing stock, partner with tenant associations or a nonprofit
                                      organization to provide assistance to mobile home park tenants in preserving
                                      their homes through the State Mobilehome Park Resident Ownership Program
                                      (MPROP), when appropriate.
H-12	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                             Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
          Time Frame: Work with tenant associations as need arises
          Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
          Funding Source: MPROP
H-15 	    Policy: Monitor the conversion of rental housing to condominiums to retain the
          supply of rental housing.
          H-15 Action 1: Monitor and evaluate the conversion of rental housing units to
          condominiums in order to assist in amending the land use plan to provide for
          additional multifamily areas if necessary.
          Time Frame: Annually
          Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
          Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
Housing Goal 5: Promote housing opportunities for all persons, regardless of race,
religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability.
GUIDING POLICY: HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
FOR ALL PERSONS
H-16 	    Policy: Prohibit discrimination in the sale or rental of housing to anyone on
          the basis of race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, disability, sex, familial
          status, marital status, or other such arbitrary factors.
          H-16 Action 1: Continue to provide information about fair housing choices to
          residents by distributing the fair housing materials upon request. Promptly
          address complaints of discrimination in the sale, rental, and development of
          housing by forwarding complaints to HUD, the California Department of Fair
          Employment and Housing, or other nonprofit or governmental agencies as
          appropriate.
          Time Frame: Ongoing
          Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
          Funding Source: City Development Services Fund, CDBG
          H-16 Action 2: Proactively monitor rental housing providers to determine
          whether they are engaging in dis-criminatory practices. At a minimum, offer
          education on fair housing law to providers found to act in a discriminatory
          manner.
          Time Frame: 2014
          Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
          Funding Source: CDBG
          H-16 Action 3: Meet with other jurisdictions in the region to identify fair
          housing strategies and discuss whether a regional fair housing strategy would
          be beneficial from a cost and/or efficiency perspective.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                         ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-13
Housing Element
                                         Time Frame: Ongoing
                                         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund, CDBG
                               Housing Goal 6: Preserve assisted (subsidized) housing developments for lower-income
                               households.
                               GUIDING POLICY: PRESERVE ASSISTED HOUSING
                               H-17 	    Policy: Preserve existing affordable housing developments at risk of converting
                                         to market rate.
                                         H-17 Action 1: Maintain and update the City’s affordable housing database as
                                         a mechanism to monitor and identify units at risk of losing their affordability
                                         subsidies or requirements.
                                         Time Frame: Annually
                                         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                                         H-17 Action 2: Continue to work with federal, State, and nonprofit housing
                                         organizations that function to purchase or fund the purchase of subsidized,
                                         at-risk complexes that the owner wishes to convert to market rate. Annually
                                         evaluate the need for the City to establish a program to preserve affordable
                                         units at risk of conversion.
                                         Time Frame: Annually evaluate and apply for funding as necessary
                                         Responsibility: Development Services (Planning Division)
                                         Funding Source: City Development Services Fund
                               2. SUMMARY OF HOUSING NEEDS
                               REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
                               The Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) Regional Housing Needs Plan,
                               finalized in November 2012, projected a Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
                               requirement for the City of Elk Grove of 1,018 extremely low-income units, 1,017 very
                               low-income units, 1,427 low-income units, 1,377 moderate-income units, and 2,563 above
                               moderate-income units. Table 1 depicts a summary of the needs determination for the
                               City’s affordable units.
H-14	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                                  Table 1
                                Regional Housing Needs Allocation
                   Income Category                                      RHNA 2013–2021
                     Extremely Low                                             1,0181
                        Very Low                                                1,017
                          Low                                                  1,427
                        Moderate                                               1,377
              Subtotal Affordable Units                                        4,839
                    Above Moderate                                             2,563
                          Total                                                7,402
 Source: SACOG Regional Housing Needs Plan; Metrolist; City of Elk Grove
 1
   Extremely low-income need was determined by assuming the need is 50% of the very low-income
 RHNA allocation.
3. QUANTIFIED HOUSING OBJECTIVES
Quantified housing objectives are provided in Table 2 for the new construction (new
units), rehabilitation (existing units), and preservation (at-risk units) of affordable and
special needs housing units as a result of implementation of the actions set forth in the
Goals, Policies, and Actions section of this element.
The actions identified by the City during the planning period will assist in the construction
of 96 extremely low , 234 very low-, 345 low-, and 1,530 moderate-income units, and
6,120 above moderate-income units.
                                                 Table 2
                                  Quantified Objectives: 2013–2021
                                                              Income Level
            Task
                              Extremely                                                Above
                                           Very Low         Low       Moderate                      Total
                                 Low                                                  Moderate
 Fair Share Allocation          1,018        1,017         1,427         1,377         2,563        7,402
 New Construction     1
                                  96          229           325         1,530          6,120        8,300
 Rehabilitation2                  0            5             20            0             0            25
 Conservation/                    0            0              0            0             0             0
 Preservation3
 Totals                           96          234           345         1,530          6,120        8,325
 Source: City of Elk
 Grove, January 2014
 1
   New construction estimates are based on projections of 400-800 market-rate units annually in 2013
   to 2015, and 1,200 market-rate units annually in 2016 to 2021. At the present affordable housing fee
   of about $3,400 per unit, the City would generate about $26 million to subsidize affordable housing
   during the eight-year timeframe. At a subsidy of $40,000 per unit, about 650 lower-income units
   could be funded. The actual number of units built will vary based on funding availability (including
   tax credits), construction costs, etc.
 2
   Rehabilitation numbers are based on the availability of funding, primarily at the state or federal level.
 3
   The City does not have any at-risk units.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-15

Housing Element
                               4. HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
                               Demographic and socioeconomic variables such as population, household characteristics,
                               and housing stock conditions must be analyzed in order to adequately determine the
                               present and future housing needs of the City.
                               The following data is taken from the 2000 and 2010 US Census reports, 2006–2010
                               American Community Survey, California Department of Finance, SACOG-approved data,
                               various City documents (including the Affordable Housing Nexus Study completed in
                               February 2013), and other sources.
                               The US Census, which is completed every ten years, is an important source of information
                               for the Housing Needs Assessment. It provides the most reliable and in-depth data for
                               demographic characteristics of a locality. The 2010 Census forms were much shorter
                               and collected a fraction of the data previously collected. To supplement the shorter
                               form, the American Community Survey was utilized to create sample-based data sets.
                               While the American Community Survey provides a much larger range of data, it also
                               comes with a greater margin of error. There are a few data sets referenced in this table
                               that do not perfectly match totals or percentages. Those inconsistencies are the results
                               of variable margins of error inherent in the American Community Survey data source.
                               The State Department of Finance (DOF) is another source of valuable data that is more
                               current than the Census. However, the DOF does not provide the depth of information
                               that can be found within the 2010 US Census. Whenever possible, DOF data and other
                               local sources were used in the Housing Needs Assessment in order to provide the most
                               current profile of the community.
                               The Affordable Housing Nexus Study was conducted to determine the need for
                               affordable housing in the City, which is directly related to new market-rate residential
                               and nonresidential development, and to calculate an affordable housing impact fee
                               related to the housing needs of very low- and low-income households. The DOF provides
                               provisional population and housing estimates for January 1, 2001, through end of 2013.
                               POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                               From incorporation in 2000 until 2010, the population of the City increased by 111
                               percent, an average increase of 11 percent annually. The City’s rapid development came
                               as a result of an increase in jobs in the Sacramento region and the availability of land
                               outside the downtown Sacramento area (Table 3). According to DOF estimates, the
                               City’s population in 2013 was 159,074. Growth over the past decade can be largely
                               attributed to new construction (people moving to the City) and the annexation of the
                               Laguna West-Lakeside CDP (adding 25,000 residents to the City), although growth has
                               slowed in recent years. The population of the City is projected to continue to grow at a
                               modest rate over the next several years, reaching over 190,000 by 2029.
H-16	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                             Table 3
                                       Population Trends
                                                                                        Annual
                                                                 Percentage
          Year           Population           Change                                 Percentage
                                                                   Change              Change
       1
          2000             72,665                 --                   --                   --
       2
          2005            125,703              53,038              72.99%               14.60%
        3
          2010            153,015               27,312              21.73%               4.35%
        2
           2013           159,074               6,059               3.96%                1.32%
        4
           2017           166,228               7,154               4.50%               0.90%
       4
          2029            193,783              27,555              16.58%                1.38%
 Source: 12000 Census, 2Department of Finance, 32010 Census, Elk Grove 2012, and Center for Strategic
 Economic Research, 2010
POPULATION BY AGE
According to the 2010 Census, the City’s residents are approximately the same age
as Sacramento County residents as a whole. The median age is 34.3 years for the City
and 34.8 years for the County. In the City, children (age 14 and under) account for 24.5
percent of the total population, compared with 21 percent for Sacramento County. The
City and the County both have a majority of their population under the age of 55; the
55 and over age group accounts for approximately 18 percent of the City’s population,
whereas persons 55 and older make up approximately 22 percent of Sacramento
County’s population. The largest age group for the City is made up of individuals 35 to
44 years old, who make up nearly 16 percent of the total City population, compared with
over 13 percent for Sacramento County.
Generally, persons aged 25 to 44 are considered to be in the family-forming age group.
This family-forming age group represents approximately 28 percent of the population in
both the City and Sacramento County. These age characteristics suggest that the City’s
housing needs will be somewhat similar to those of Sacramento County.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                            ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-17

Housing Element
                               Table 4 shows the age characteristics for the City and Sacramento County as of 2010.
                                                                            Table 4
                                                  Elk Grove and Sacramento County Population by Age
                                                                 Elk Grove                       Sacramento County
                                    Age Group             Number           Percentage         Number          Percentage
                                Under 5 years       11,060             7.23%            101,063           7.12%
                                5 to 9 years        12,631             8.25%            98,112            6.92%
                                10 to 14 years      13,830             9.04%            99,820            7.04%
                                15 to 19 years      13,101             8.56%            105,680           7.45%
                                20 to 24 years      8,635              5.64%            101,908           7.18%
                                25 to 34 years      18,646             12.19%           206,646           14.56%
                                35 to 44 years      24,042             15.71%           190,835           13.45%
                                45 to 54 years      23,312             15.24%           200,536           14.13%
                                55 to 59 years      8,472              5.54%            85,332            6.01%
                                60 to 64 years      6,542              4.28%            70,305            4.96%
                                65 to 74 years      7,378              4.82%            83,295            5.87%
                                75 to 84 years      3,924              2.56%            53,193            3.68%
                                85 years and over   1,442              0.94%            23,063            1.63%
                                Median Age          34.3               34.8
                                Source: 2010 Census, DP-1
                               Population by Race and Ethnicity
                               According to the 2010 Census, white individuals made up the largest racial group in
                               the City, comprising approximately 38 percent of the City’s population. Whites also
                               represented the County of Sacramento’s largest racial group, making up over 48
                               percent of the County’s total population. Asians, which include Chinese, Filipino, Asian
                               Indian, Vietnamese, and other Asian groups, make up the second largest ethnic group,
                               approximately 26 percent, in the City and the third largest, approximately 14 percent,
                               in Sacramento County. African Americans represent nearly 10 percent of the County’s
                               population and nearly 11 percent for the City. In the City, 18 percent of residents are
                               Hispanic, compared to 21.5 percent for all of Sacramento County.
                               The racial profile of the City shifted somewhat between 2000 and 2010. In both the City
                               and Sacramento County, white individuals declined as a percentage of the population,
                               while the percentage of individuals be-longing to ethnic minorities (predominantly
                               Asians) increased. Asians, making up approximately 26 percent of the City’s residents
                               in 2010, comprised only 18 percent in 2000. Similarly, Asian individuals comprised
                               approximately 11 percent of Sacramento County’s residents in 2000 and 14 percent in
                               2010.
                               Race characteristics for the City and Sacramento County are shown in Table 5.
H-18	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                               Table 5
             Elk Grove and Sacramento County Population by Race/Ethnicity
                                                  Elk Grove                Sacramento County
                  Race                   Number          Percentage    Number        Percentage
 White                                    58,305           38.10%      687,166         48.43%
 African American                          16,462          10.76%      139,949          9.86%
 American Indian and Alaska Native          507             0.33%         7,875         0.56%
 Asian                                    39,479           25.80%      198,944         14.02%
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander        1,731           1.13%       13,099          0.92%
 Hispanic                                  27,581          18.03%      306,196         21.58%
 Other Race                                 350             0.23%         3,418         0.24%
 Two or More Races                         8,600            5.62%        62,141         4.38%
 Total                                    153,015           100%      1,418,788         100%
 Source: 2010 Census, DP-1
EMPLOYMENT CHARACTERISTICS
The work force in the Sacramento metropolitan area encompasses professional, technical,
production, transportation, and service occupations. The region’s manufacturing sector
has grown steadily since the late 1970s, spurred by the expansion of high-technology
industries. The City’s major employers reflect this economic diversity and include
technology, healthcare, financial, and retail activities. The major employers in the City
provide about 25 percent of jobs in the community.
                                               Table 6
                           Major Employers: City of Elk Grove (2013)
                      Employer                                      Employees
 Sutter Health Sacramento Sierra Region                               6,026
 Elk Grove Unified School District                                    5,500
 Apple Inc.                                                           1,600
 Kaiser Permanente                                                    1,468
 Mercy’s Methodist Hospital                                             1,113
 Cosumnes River College                                                330
 ALLDATA/AutoZone                                                      260
 Frontier Communication Solutions                                      200
 Source: City of Elk Grove, Chamber of Commerce, 2013
According to the 2006–2010 American Community Survey, approximately 23 percent of
employed City residents (15,319 individuals) were employed in the education, health, and
social assistance industries. Approximately 15 percent worked in public administration,
11 percent in retail trade industries, and another 9 percent in professional, scientific, and
administrative positions.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-19

Housing Element
                                                                                Table 7
                                                                Elk Grove Employment by Industry
                                                                   Sector                                 Number         Percentage
                                Educational services, and healthcare and social assistance                  15,319         22.87%
                                Public administration                                                       9,885          14.76%
                                Retail trade                                                                7,229          10.79%
                                Professional, scientific, and management, and administrative and waste      6,062          9.05%
                                management services
                                Finance and insurance, and real estate and rental and leasing               5,519           8.24%
                                Arts, entertainment, and recreation, and accommodation and food             4,825           7.20%
                                services
                                Manufacturing                                                               3,839           5.73%
                                Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                               3,808           5.68%
                                Construction                                                                3,532           5.27%
                                Other services, except public administration                                3,214          4.80%
                                Wholesale trade                                                             1,840           2.75%
                                Information                                                                  1,734          2.59%
                                Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining                        187          0.28%
                                Total                                                                      66,993           100%
                                Source: 2006–2010 American Community Survey, DP03
                               According to SACOG population estimates, the City had 11,147 jobs in 2000. Between
                               2000 and 2005, the number of jobs in the City more than doubled. As shown in Table 8,
                               although future employment growth is projected to occur at a smaller rate, the number
                               of jobs in the City is still expected to roughly double by 2035.
                                                                                Table 8
                                                                    Elk Grove Jobs Projections
                                               Year                               Jobs                  Percentage Change
                                              2000*                               11,147                            --
                                              2005*                              24,653                          121.16%
                                              2009                               28,076                          13.88%
                                               2017                              34,944                          24.46%
                                               2029                              48,992                          40.20%
                                               2035                              56,292                          14.90%
                                Source: SACOG 2002 and 2012, SACOG Draft 2035 Projections
                                * SACOG projections based on Laguna and Elk Grove Regional Analysis Districts
                               Jobs-Housing Balance
                               One way to determine a jobs-to-housing ratio is to divide the number of jobs in an area
                               by the number of occupied housing units in that same area in order to estimate the
                               number of jobs per housing unit. It is generally considered ideal to have one job per
                               housing unit.
H-20	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                     Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
Using 2010 Census data it is possible to estimate the ratio of employed residents,
whether working in the City or elsewhere, to the total population. This calculation
excludes members of the City’s community that are not part of the labor force and
therefore not in need of a job. The City experiences a net worker outflow with far more
workers leaving the area for employment than coming into it. Fewer than 5,800 City
residents work in the city. Approximately 47,000 workers leave the city for employment,
leading to a much lower jobs-to-housing ratio than Sacramento County as a whole, as
shown in Table 9.
                                              Table 9
                            Elk Grove Jobs–Housing Balance, 2010
	
                                              Elk Grove                   Sacramento County
  Housing Units                                 47,927                          513,945
  Employment                                    24,581                          544,287
  Jobs per Housing Unit                          0.51                             1.06
  Source: Led On-The-Map Data – Inflow/Outflow of Workers –All Jobs 2010-HTTP://ONTHEMAP.CES.
  CENSUS.GOV
HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
According to the 2010 Census, 47,927 households were located in the City. Table 10
shows the change in the number of households in the City since 2000. While the
number of households continues to increase, the rate of household growth is slowing.
The number of households in the City doubled from 2000 to 2010, but is expected to
increase only 10 percent from 2010 to 2017.
                                             Table 10
                                  Elk Grove Household Growth
	
                                                                                       Annual
                                                                  Percentage
                          Households           Change                                Percentage
                                                                    Change             Change
  20001              23,766              -                    -                  -
  20052              39,987              16,221               68.25%             13.65%
  2009   2
                     46,892              6,905                17.27%             4.32%
  2010 3
                     47,927              1,305                2.21%              2.21%
  2012 2
                     48,469              542                  1.13%              0.57%
  20172
                     52,722              4,253                8.77%              1.75%
  Source: 2000 Census; Department of Finance 2007 Estimates; 2010 Census
           1            2                                       3
  * SACOG projections based on Laguna and Elk Grove RADs
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-21

Housing Element
                               Household Income
                               California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) publishes
                               annual income limits for each county in the State. The 2013 area median income (AMI)
                               in Sacramento County (for a four-person household) is $76,100. Table 11 shows the
                               maximum annual income level for each income group adjusted for household size for
                               Sacramento County, as determined by HCD. The maximum annual income data is then
                               utilized to calculate the maximum affordable housing payments for different households
                               (varying by income level) and their eligibility for federal housing assistance.
                               On average, the household incomes for the City are higher compared to household
                               incomes for Sacramento County. According to the 2006–2010 American Community
                               Survey, the household median income in the City was $79,457 compared to $56,439 for
                               all of Sacramento County. In the City, 34 percent of households had in-come of at least
                               $100,000, compared to 21 percent for all of Sacramento County.
                                                                            Table 11
                                               Maximum Household Income Level by Household Size, 2013
                                                                             Maximum Income Level
                                   Household
                                      Size          Extremely       Very Low          Low           Median           Moderate
                                                       Low
                                1-Person         $16,000         $26,650        $42,650         $53,250          $63,900
                                2-Person         $18,300         $30,450        $48,750         $60,900          $73,050
                                3-Person         $20,600         $34,250        $54,850         $68,500          $82,150
                                4-Person         $22,850         $38,050        $60,900         $76,100          $91,300
                                5-Person         $24,700         $41,100        $65,800         $82,200          $98,600
                                6-Person         $26,550         $44,150        $70,650         $88,300          $105,900
                                7-Person         $28,350         $47,200        $75,550         $94,350          $113,200
                                8-Person         $30,200         $50,250        $80,400         $100,450         $120,500
                                Source: Department of Housing and Community Development, Division of Housing Policy
                                Development, February 2013
                               Extremely Low-Income Households
                               Households that earn 30 percent or less than the County’s median income (up to $22,850
                               for a family of four in 2013) are considered “extremely low-income.” To estimate the
                               number of households in this income category, the City reviewed 2006–2010 American
                               Community Survey data for the number of households in the extremely low-income range.
                                                                           Table 12
                                                       Extremely Low-Income Households (Estimate)
                                                  Income Range                      Number of Owners       Number of Renters
                                           Extremely Low (0-30% of AMI)                   1,941                   3,633
                                                       Total                              5,574
                                Source: 2006–2010 American Community Survey, B25118
H-22	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
Household Size
According to the 2006–2010 American Community Survey, two-person households are
the most common in the City. Table 13 displays the number of households by size and
percentage of each household size within the community.
                                           Table 13
                             Household Size of Elk Grove Residents
	
                                     Number of Households             Percentage
             1 person                         7,252                      15.13%
             2 person                        12,547                     26.18%
             3 person                         9,051                     18.88%
             4 person                        9,865                      20.58%
             5 person                         5,146                     10.74%
             6 person                         2,381                      4.97%
            7+ person                         1,685                      3.52%
               Total                        47,927                       100%
     Average Household Size                     3.2
  Source: 2006–2010 American Community Survey, B11016
Household Type
According to the 2006–2010 American Community Survey, the significant majority
of households in the City were family households (approximately 81 percent); the
remaining 19 percent were non-family households. In Sacramento County, 65.5 percent
of households were family households and 34.5 percent were non-family households.
Married couples made up 63 percent of all the households in the City. A summary of the
City’s household characteristics is provided in Table 14.
                                           Table 14
                       Household Characteristics of Elk Grove Residents
                                            Number                    Percentage
  Family Households                         36,063                      81.34%
  Married Couple Households                  28,136                     63.46%
  Female Householder, no                      5,901                      13.31%
  husband present
  Male Householder, no wife                  2,026                       4.57%
  present
  Non-Family Household                       8,272                      18.66%
  Householder living alone                   6,426                      14.49%
  Householder not living alone                1,846                      4.16%
  Total                                     44,335                       100%
  Source: 2006–2010 American Community Survey, DP02
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                             ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-23

Housing Element
                               Household Tenure
                               As shown in Table 15 below, the 2006–2010 American Community Survey reported
                               that the majority of house-holds (approximately 75 percent) in the City were owner-
                               occupied. Approximately 25 percent of households in the City were occupied by renters,
                               a significantly lower amount than for all of Sacramento County, in which 42.5 percent of
                               occupied households were rental units. Numbers in Sacramento County have been more
                               stable, although the number of renter-occupied units increased a few percentage points
                               during this period. There were 47,927 occupied housing units at this time in the City.
                               Housing market conditions have led to an increase in rental housing in recent years that
                               is likely not yet reflected in the American Community Survey estimates. Foreclosures
                               and a perception that the City’s housing was undervalued led to substantial investor
                               interest in 2012 and 2013.
                                                                          Table 15
                                                                     Household Tenure
                                                                                   Elk Grove            Sacramento County
                                Owner-Occupied                               35,738        74.57%     295,482       57.49%
                                Renter-Occupied                               12,189       25.43%     218,463       42.51%
                                Total Occupied Housing Units                 47,927         100%      513,945        100%
                                Source: 2006–2010 American Community Survey, DP04
                               Overcrowded Households
                               Overcrowding is defined as a household where there is more than one person per room
                               in an occupied housing unit. Overcrowding can result from a low supply of affordable and
                               adequate housing units. Households that are unable to afford larger housing units may
                               be forced to rent or purchase housing that is too small to meet their needs. According to
                               the 2005–2009 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data, 3 percent
                               of all occupied households in the City were overcrowded to some degree and 19 percent
                               of all overcrowded units (0.57 percent of total units in the community) were considered
                               “severely overcrowded,” meaning that there were 1.5 people or more per room in the
                               household.
                                                                          Table 16
                                                                 Overcrowded Households
                                                                                                          Total    Percentage
                                                                                                        Occupied
                                                                     Owner                Renter                   of Housing
                                                                                                         Housing      Units
                                                                                                          Units
                                Overcrowded                      425    72.03%       555       89.52%      980        2.45%
                                (1.01–1.49 persons per room)
                                Severely Overcrowded             165    27.97%        65       10.48%      230        0.57%
                                (1.50 persons or more per room)
                                Total Overcrowded                590     100%        620        100%      1,210       3.02%
                                Units by Tenure
                                Source: 2005–2009 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
H-24	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
Age of Housing Stock
According to the 2006–2010 American Community Survey, nearly two-thirds
(approximately 63 percent) of all housing units in the City were constructed between
1990 and 2004, and three-quarters of the City’s houses have been built since 1990. Less
than 3 percent of housing units in the community were constructed prior to 1950.
                                            Table 17
                                         Age of Housing
           Year                 Number                Percentage         Accumulated
                                                                           Percentage
 Built 1939 or earlier             441                  0.93%                0.93%
 Built 1940 to 1949                255                  0.54%                 1.48%
 Built 1950 to 1959                676                   1.43%                2.91%
 Built 1960 to 1969                1,011                 2.14%               5.05%
 Built 1970 to 1979               3,015                  6.39%               11.44%
 Built 1980 to 1989               6,274                 13.30%               24.74%
 Built 1990 to 1999              14,805                 31.38%               56.13%
 Built 2000 to 2004              15,013                 31.83%               87.95%
 Built 2005 or later              5,683                 12.05%                100%
 Total                           47,173                  100%
 Source: 2006–2010 American Community Survey, DP04
Condition of the Housing Stock
As of February 2013, according to the current age of the housing stock, approximately
12 percent of the housing stock was in need of some type of rehabilitation. In an effort
to assist with the rehabilitation needs, the City has a new Minor Home Repair Program
that offers forgivable loans of up to $10,000 to low-income homeowners whose homes
have one or more health and safety hazards.
In July 2001, a Housing Condition Survey was conducted to determine the condition of
the City’s housing stock. Of approximately 25,000 housing units existing at the time,
2,557 were surveyed. Neighborhoods constructed within the prior 10 years or areas that
appeared to be in generally good condition were not surveyed. The survey areas were
selected as a result of a drive-by survey of the entire City, which determined areas that
appeared to exhibit signs of disrepair or the potential to need repair during the planning
period of the Housing Element.
For the survey, seven scoring categories were used: foundation, structural elements,
roofing, siding, windows and doors, landscaping, and accessory buildings. A total of four
classes—sound condition, sound with minor repairs needed, deteriorated (moderate
repairs required), and dilapidated (major repairs required)—were used to describe the
condition of housing units and the extent of rehabilitation needed. The housing condition
survey was conducted for single-family houses, duplexes, multifamily developments,
and mobile homes. The criteria for each class are listed as follows.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-25

Housing Element
                               Class 1 – Sound Condition
                                  •	 Foundation is sound, intact, and complete. Vent screens are in place. No substantial
                                     damage or wear is visible.
                                  •	All structural elements are sound and in good state of repair, including exterior
                                     walls, porches, overhead porch and shade structures, carports and other attached
                                     structures, and fences.
                                  •	Roofing and associated elements are in good repair. Little or no maintenance/
                                     repair required.
                                  •	 Siding is in good shape, needs no repair, and needs little or no paint.
                                  •	 Windows and doors are intact and in good repair. Little or no damage.
                                  •	 Landscaping is reasonably maintained.
                               Class 2 – Sound/Minor Repairs Required
                                  •	 Foundation requires some repairs, but is generally intact. Screens may be damaged.
                                     Stem walls or block foundations may show minor damage.
                                  •	Structural elements show some wear and require minor repairs, but are basically
                                     sound.
                                  •	Some roof shingles missing. Gutters slightly skewed. Minor repairs required, but
                                     roof is generally sound.
                                  •	 Stucco shows minor cracks. Siding has minor surface damage, but is intact. Needs
                                     repainting.
                                  •	 Windows and doors show some damage. Some screens are damaged or missing.
                                  •	 Landscaping needs minor or major restoration. Some plants dead. Dead patches in
                                     lawn.
                               Class 3 – Deteriorated/Moderate Repairs Required
                                  •	Foundation is either partially missing or is in such condition that substantial
                                     portions must be replaced. May demonstrate sagging at floor line.
                                  •	Structural elements show extensive wear, including porches with minor sagging,
                                     fences that are leaning, structure members (major wood elements) showing some
                                     cracking, railings or stairs damaged.
                                  •	Roof needs to be replaced. Roof structure intact. Chimney requires minor to
                                     moderate repairs. Gutter sections detached or significantly skewed. Downspouts
                                     missing.
                                  •	 Siding or stucco needs moderate repair, patching, and paint.
                                  •	 Window frames require some repair. Multiple panes broken.
                                  •	Landscaping requires substantial restoration. Some debris accumulating in yard.
                                     Overgrown vegetation creating minor hazards.
H-26	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
Class 4 – Dilapidated/Major Repairs Required
    •	 No foundation is present or foundation is in advanced state of disrepair and needs
       a completely new foundation.
    •	Major structural issues. Accessory structural elements show major flaws such as
       leaning. Load-bearing elements show signs of cracking and wear that could result
       in structure failure. Fence sections are failing or are down. Conditions constitute a
       hazard to the public and/or residents.
                                                Table 18
                               Percentages of Classification Types
               Class                              Units                   Percentage
                 1                                1,469                      57.5%
                 2                                 936                      36.6%
                 3                                 103                       4.0%
                 4                                  49                        1.9%
               Total                              2,557                      100%
 Source: City of Elk Grove
                                                Table 19
                            Classification by Type of Residential Unit
      Type           Total Units        Class 1          Class 2    Class 3        Class 4
  Single-family         2,051            1,220             712         79            40
     Duplex              103               28              68           5             2
   Multifamily          400               218              156         19             7
  Mobile Home             3                 3               0          0              0
      Total             2,557           1,469             936         103            49
 Source: City of Elk Grove
As seen in Tables 18 and 19, a much higher number of units were classified as sound or
sound with minor repairs needed, making up 57.5 percent and 36.6 percent respectively,
of the total surveyed housing stock. Nearly 2 percent of the total surveyed housing
stock, or 49 units, were clearly dilapidated or deteriorated and in need of major repair.
HOUSING COSTS AND OVERPAYMENT
For Sale Housing Costs
The recent recession, exacerbated by the collapse of the subprime mortgage industry,
caused a national decline in the residential real estate market that particularly affected
California. Foreclosures resulting from the recession and an increase in housing inventory
led to a decrease in housing prices, but recent information indicates that home prices
are rising. According to the Sacramento Association of Realtors, the median home sales
price in the City in July 2013 varied by zip code from $260,750 to $305,000, as shown
in Table 20.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-27

Housing Element
                                                                              Table 20
                                                             Median Home Prices in Elk Grove
                                                                July 2013            One Year Prior      Five Years Prior (July
                                                                                                                  2008)
                                          95624                 $305,000                $223,500                $270,597
                                          95757                 $350,000                $256,500                $309,000
                                          95758                 $260,750                $200,000                $242,500
                                Source: Sacramento Association of Realtors, 2013
                               Rental Housing Cost
                               According to monthly rental rates surveyed from Trulia.com and Rent.com in December
                               2012, the median rent in the City was $1,059 for apartments and $1,525 for single-family
                               houses. The median rental price for apartments and single-family homes in the City by
                               the number of bedrooms is shown in Table 21. Of the 182 housing units surveyed, 140
                               were single-family houses. Some of the apartment units surveyed could be in projects
                               with rent-restricted units, which offer affordable rents to lower-income households.
                                                                              Table 21
                                                                    Elk Grove Rental Costs
                                    Bedroom Type                  Median Gross Rent                 Number of Units Surveyed
                                                                             Apartments
                                1 bedroom                                $935                                  9
                                2 bedroom                               $1,098                                25
                                3 bedroom                               $1,339                                 8
                                                                       Single-Family Homes
                                1 bedroom                                $1,100                                 1
                                2 bedroom                               $1,250                                 9
                                3 bedroom                               $1,395                                57
                                4 bedroom                               $1,650                                58
                                5 bedroom                                $1,875                                13
                                6 bedroom                               $3,850                                  2
                                Source: Trulia.com December 2012, Rent.com December 2012
                               Overpayment
                               Overpayment occurs when a household’s monthly shelter cost exceeds 30 percent
                               of the household’s income. Shelter cost is defined as the monthly owner costs (e.g.,
                               mortgages, taxes, insurance on the property, and utilities) or the gross rent (contract
                               rent plus the estimated average monthly cost of utilities).
                               According to the 2005–2009 CHAS data, approximately 43 percent of the owner-
                               occupied households and approximately 53 percent of the renter-occupied households
                               in the City were overpaying for housing. Table 22 illustrates the extent of overpayment by
H-28	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
income group for the City. In total, 7,970 lower-income households (very low- and low-
income)—4,229 households in owner-occupied units, or 13 percent of owner-occupied
households, along with 3,740 lower-income households in renter-occupied units, or
44 percent of all rental households—were overpaying. The overpayment rates among
homeowners may be a result of the subprime mortgage collapse combined with lower
incomes as a result of the recession. Lower incomes may also be a factor in overpayment
of rental units, along with the increased difficulty in gaining homeownership of entry-
level single-family homes, and may signal a need for the availability of a variety of rental
housing types.
                                            Table 22
                         Total Households Overpaying by Tenure
    Household Type              Renters                  Owners                Total
                        Number     Percentage    Number     Percentage Number    Percentage
 Very Low-Income         2,430       54.2%         1,920       14.2%     4,351       24.2%
 (31–50% MFI)
 Low-Income               1,310       29.2%       2,309         17.1%    3,619       20.1%
 (51–80% MFI)
 Total Lower Income      3,740       44.0%        4,229        13.4%     7,970       19.9%
 Households
 Overpaying
 Moderate and Above        740         8.7%       9,289                 10,029       55.7%
 Moderate-Income
 (>81% MFI)
 Total Households        4,480       52.7%        13,518       42.9%    17,999       45.0%
 Overpaying
 Total All Households    8,500           -        31,535          -    40,035           -
 Source: 2005–2009 CHAS data
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY BY HOUSEHOLD INCOME
The cost of homeownership can be compared to a household’s ability to pay for housing
to determine the “affordability gap,” or the difference between housing costs and the
income levels of area residents. As noted previously, the median income for a four-person
family in Sacramento County is $76,100, the median home sale price in the City varied
by zip code from $260,750 to $305,000, and the median rental price in the community
is $1,059 for an apartment and $1,525 for a single-family house. To avoid overpaying for
housing at the expense of other needs (food, clothing, medical care, etc.) an affordable
home is one that costs 30 percent or less of the household’s income.
Tables 23 and 24 show the maximum rents and sales prices, respectively, that are
affordable to very low-, low-, moderate-, and above moderate-income households.
Affordability is based on the following assumptions: a household spending 30 percent
or less of their total household income for shelter; the maximum household in-come
levels established by HCD as shown previously in Table 11; and maximum affordable
sales prices based on 5 percent down, 30-year fixed rate mortgage at 4.5 percent.
Tables 23 and 24 illustrate affordable housing costs for the different income groups for
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-29

Housing Element
                               a four-person household. The median apartment rental cost in the City is not considered
                               affordable for extremely low- and very low-income households, and the median rent for
                               a three-bedroom apartment or any size single-family house exceeds what is considered
                               affordable for a low-income household. Additionally, the median home sale price for
                               houses with any number of bedrooms in the City is not affordable for extremely low- and
                               very low-income households, and three and four-bedroom houses are not considered
                               affordable for low-income households.
                                                                             Table 23
                                                         Affordable Renter-Occupied Housing Costs
                                        Unit Size             Very Low Income           Low Income       Moderate Income
                                       1 Bedroom                    $690                    $994              $1,603
                                      2 Bedrooms                    $774                    $1,117             $1,801
                                      3 Bedrooms                    $851                   $1,232             $1,993
                                Source: City of Elk Grove Affordable Housing Nexus Study 2013
                               Affordable housing cost for renter-occupied households assumes 30 percent of gross
                               household income, including utility costs.
                                                                             Table 24
                                                         Affordable Owner-Occupied Housing Costs
                                        Unit Size             Very Low Income           Low Income       Moderate Income
                                      2 Bedrooms                  $122,200                $179,000           $294,000
                                      3 Bedrooms                  $138,100                $201,800           $329,100
                                      4 Bedrooms                  $150,800                $219,600           $357,000
                                Source: City of Elk Grove Affordable Housing Nexus Study 2013
                               Affordable housing sales prices are based on the following assumed variables:
                               approximately 5% down payment, 30-year fixed mortgage at 4.5% annual interest rate.
                               Housing Vacancy
                               Vacancy trends in housing are analyzed using a “vacancy rate” which establishes the
                               relationship between housing supply and demand. For example, if the demand for
                               housing is greater than the supply, then the vacancy rate is probably low and the price
                               of housing will most likely increase. According to “Raising the Roof, California Housing
                               Development Projections and Constraints, 1997–2020,” the desirable vacancy rate in
                               a community is considered to be 5 percent. Generally, when the vacancy rate drops
                               below 5 percent, the demand for housing exceeds the supply of housing. Subsequently,
                               prospective buyers and renters may experience an increase in housing costs.
                               According to the 2010 Census, the vacancy rate was 5.6 percent for the City and 7.5
                               percent for Sacramento County. Table 25 shows the City’s vacancy rates by type of
                               housing. Sacramento County has a larger percentage of vacant housing units than the
                               City, although the City has a substantially greater proportion of vacant for sale-only units.
H-30	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                    Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                                 Table 25
                                      Household Vacancy Status
	
                                                             Elk Grove     Sacramento County
  Total                                                 48,532       100%  556,208     100%
  Occupied Housing Units                                45,830       94.4%  514,221    92.5%
  Vacant Housing Units                                   2,702        5.6%  41,987      7.5%
    For rent                                              722        26.7%  19,949     47.5%
    For sale only                                         894        33.1%   7,714     18.4%
    Rented or sold, not occupied                          188         7.0%   2,152      5.1%
    For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use         181         6.7%   2,357      5.6%
    For migrant workers                                    0         0.0%     53        0.1%
    Other vacant                                          722        26.7%   9,762     23.3%
  Source: 2010 Census
FUTURE HOUSING NEEDS
SACOG’s current Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) covers January 1, 2013, through
October 31, 2021. Pursuant to the provisions of the RHNP and to adequately provide
affordable housing for all income groups, specifically very low- and low-income groups,
the City will need to identify sites for 3,462 new extremely low-, very low-, and low-
income housing units through 2021. The City’s allocated number of affordable housing
units is equal to approximately 47 percent of the 7,402 total housing units the City is
projected to need by 2021.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation
An RHNP is mandated by the State of California (Government Code Section 65584) for
regions to address housing issues and needs based on future growth projections for the
area. The RHNP is developed by SACOG and allocates to cities and counties their “fair
share” of the region’s projected housing needs. The RHNP allocates “fair share” housing
allocations by household income groupings over the eight-year planning period for each
specific jurisdiction’s Housing Element. The RHNP, which covers a span of 7.5 years, also
identifies and quantifies the existing housing needs for each jurisdiction.
The intent of the RHNP is to ensure that local jurisdictions address not only the needs of
their immediate areas but also fill the housing needs for the entire region. Additionally,
a major goal of the RHNP is to ensure that every community provides an opportunity
for a mix of housing affordable to all economic segments of its population. The RHNP
jurisdictional allocations are made to ensure that adequate sites and zoning are provided
to address existing and anticipated housing demands during the planning period and
that market forces are not inhibited in addressing the housing needs for all facets of a
particular community. Table 26 provides the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
target for the planning period 2013 through 2021 (also referred to as “basic construction
needs”) for each of the five household income groups for the City of Elk Grove.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-31

Housing Element
                                                                           Table 26
                                                            Regional Housing Needs Allocation
                                           Income Level                      Allocation                   Percent of Total
                                Extremely low (below 30% AMI)                   1,0181                          13.75%
                                Very low (30% to 50% AMI)                       1,017                           13.74%
                                Low (51% to 80% AMI)                            1,427                           19.28%
                                Moderate (81% to 120% AMI)                      1,377                          18.60%
                                Above moderate (over 120% AMI)                  2,563                          34.63%
                                Total                                          7,402                             100%
                                Source: SACOG 2013–2021 Regional Housing Needs Assessment – Final Allocations
                                1
                                  Extremely low-income was determined by assuming the need is 50 per-cent of the very low-income
                                RHNA.
                               SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
                               Household groups with special needs include seniors, mentally and physically disabled
                               persons, single-parent households (both female-headed and male-headed), large family
                               households, agricultural workers, and home-less persons. Households with special
                               housing needs often have greater difficulty in finding decent and afford-able housing.
                               As a result, these households may experience a higher prevalence of overpayment,
                               overcrowding, and other housing problems.
                               Senior Households
                               Senior households have special housing needs primarily resulting from physical
                               disabilities and limitations, in-come, and healthcare costs. Additionally, senior households
                               have other needs that help preserve their independence, including protective services
                               to maintain their health and safety, in-home support services to perform activities
                               of daily living, conservators to assist with personal care and financial affairs, public
                               administration assistance to manage and resolve estate issues, and networks of care
                               to provide a wide variety of services and daily assistance. According to the 2006–2010
                               American Community Survey, there were 5,461 households in the City headed by a
                               person 65 years or older. The median household income in the City at this time was
                               $79,754; as shown in Table 27, more than 20 percent of elderly-headed households were
                               earning less than 30 percent (approximately $23,926) of the median income.
H-32	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                          Table 27
                               Elderly Households by Income
           Income Level                            Elderly-Headed Households
                                           Number                           Percent
 Less than $10,000                           266                             4.87%
 $10,000 to $14,999                          393                             7.20%
 $15,000 to $19,999                          321                             5.88%
 $20,000 to $24,999                          276                             5.05%
 $25,000 to $29,999                          308                             5.64%
 $30,000 to $34,999                          344                             6.30%
 $35,000 to $39,999                          248                             4.54%
 $40,000 to $44,999                          252                             4.61%
 $45,000 to $49,999                          203                             3.72%
 $50,000 to $59,999                          645                             11.81%
 $60,000 to $74,999                          380                             6.96%
 $75,000 to $99,999                          623                             11.41%
 $100,000 to $124,999                        521                             9.54%
 $125,000 to $149,999                        329                             6.02%
 $150,000 to $199,999                        305                             5.59%
 $200,000 or more                             47                             0.86%
 Total                                      5,461                            100%
 Source: 2006–2010 American Community Survey, B19037
Of the senior households in the City, approximately 79 percent are owner-occupied and
21 percent are renter occupied, as shown in Table 28.
                                          Table 28
                               Senior Householders by Tenure
    Householder Age             Owners                   Renters                  Total
 65–74 years             3,089                  676                     3,765
 75 plus years           1,954                  699                     2,653
 Percentage              78.58%                 21.42%                  100%
 TOTAL                   5,043                  1,375                   6,418
 Source: 2010 Census
Senior Housing
Residential care homes (for six or fewer people) are a permitted use in all residential
and agricultural zones, as well as the General Commercial (GC) zone. Residential care
facilities (for more than six people) are a permitted use in the higher-density residential
designations (RD-20, RD-25, and RD-30), and are allowed with a Conditional Use Permit
(CUP) in all agricultural zones and in the Limited Commercial (LC), GC, and Commercial
Recreation (C-O) zones. Adult day care centers are a permitted use in all residential
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-33

Housing Element
                               zones except for the higher-density designations (where they are allowed with a CUP),
                               as well as being a permitted use in all agricultural zones. Housing types for persons with
                               disabilities are provided for in the Zoning Code adequately and no constraints are present.
                               Further, caretaker housing is allowed with a CUP in the industrial zones and is permitted
                               by right in all commercial zones. No special design or permitting standards have been
                               established for residential care facilities other than the CUP where required. In addition,
                               the City ensures compliance with all standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act
                               (ADA).
                               A number of residential care homes for the elderly are located in the City and provide
                               living assistance to persons 60 years of age and older. As of early 2013, licensed care
                               homes and those with their licenses pending had a capacity of 1,036 people. In addition
                               to care homes, the City has five senior apartment complexes providing a total of 710
                               units for persons 55 and over. Of these units, all but 115 are affordable senior housing.
                               Disabled Persons
                               According to the California Government Code, a “disability” includes, but is not limited
                               to, any physical or mental disability as defined in Section 12926.
                               “Mental disability” includes, but is not limited to, having any mental or psychological
                               disorder or condition, such as intellectual disability, organic brain syndrome, emotional
                               or mental illness, or specific learning disabilities, that limits a major life activity.
                               “Physical disability” includes, but is not limited to, having any physiological disease,
                               disorder, condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss that affects one or
                               more of the following body systems: neurological, immunological, musculoskeletal,
                               special sense organs, respiratory, including speech organs, cardiovascular, reproductive,
                               digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine.
                               Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities could prevent a person from working,
                               restrict a person’s mobility, or make caring for oneself difficult. Therefore, disabled
                               persons often have special housing needs related to accommodating potential limited
                               earning capacity, the lack of accessible and affordable housing, and higher health costs
                               associated with disabilities. Additionally, people with disabilities require a wide range
                               of different housing, depending on the type and severity of their disability. Housing
                               needs can range from institutional care facilities to facilities that support partial or full
                               independence (i.e., group care homes). Supportive services such as daily living skills
                               and employment assistance need to be integrated in the housing situation. The disabled
                               person with a mobility limitation requires housing that is physically accessible. Examples
                               of accessibility in housing include widened doorways and hallways, ramps, bathroom
                               modifications (e.g., lowered counter-tops, grab bars, adjustable showerheads) and
                               special sensory devices including smoke alarms and flashing lights.
                               The Census defines three types of disabilities including work disability, mobility limitation,
                               and self-care limitation. According to the 2008–2010 American Community Survey,
                               14,993 people in the City over the age of 5 possessed some type of disability. Table 29
                               shows the total number of disabilities by employment status. Many of these persons
                               have more than one disability, which is the reason for a higher number of disabilities than
                               disabled persons. The greatest proportion of disabilities are employment disabilities
H-34	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
followed closely by physical disabilities, which are often related to each other, meaning
a person with a physical disability may not be able to work.
According to the 2008–2010 American Community Survey, of the 73,807 people in the
City’s labor force, 3,376 people are employed with a disability, and 644 members of the
labor force are unemployed and possess a disability.
The City incorporates the Federal Fair Housing Act, the California Fair Employment and
Housing Act of 1964, and the ADA as supported in Title 24 of the California Government
Code, as a part of its building requirements. These three statutes address the fair housing
and building standards adhered to by the City for persons with disabilities.
                                              Table 29
                       Disability Type by Employment Status (Ages 16–64)
                                                                                Percentage
         Total Disabilities                    Number                              100%
 Employed                                       3,376                                 -
 Hearing difficulty                              1,237                            36.64%
 Vision difficulty                                335                              9.92%
 Cognitive difficulty                             953                             28.23%
 Ambulatory difficulty                           1,187                            35.16%
 Self-care difficulty                              116                             3.44%
 Independent living difficulty                    395                             11.70%
 Unemployed                                       644                                 -
 Hearing difficulty                               223                             34.63%
 Vision difficulty                                197                             30.59%
 Cognitive difficulty                             249                             38.66%
 Ambulatory difficulty                            167                             25.93%
 Self-care difficulty                               0                                0%
 Independent living difficulty                     95                             14.75%
 Not in Labor Force                             3,763                                 -
 Hearing difficulty                               845                             22.46%
 Vision difficulty                                656                             17.43%
 Cognitive difficulty                            1,635                            43.45%
 Ambulatory difficulty                          2,564                             68.14%
 Self-care difficulty                           1,200                             31.89%
 Independent living difficulty                   1,739                            46.21%
 Source: 2008–2010 American Community Survey, B18120
 * Figures in each category may not add up to the total because some individuals may report having
 multiple disabilities.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                         ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-35

Housing Element
                               In accordance with Government Code Sections 65583, an analysis of the City’s codes
                               and development procedures to identify any constraints to the development of housing
                               for persons with disabilities was completed as a part of this Housing Element update.
                               Residential care homes are allowed by right in all residential zones, with the exception
                               of residential care facilities (for more than six persons) which are only allowed by right
                               in the higher density designations (RD-20, 25, 30). Adult day care service uses are
                               also allowed by right in all residential zones except in the RD 20, 25, and 30, where a
                               conditional use permit (CUP) is required. Housing types for persons with disabilities are
                               provided for in the Zoning Code adequately and no constraints are present.
                               The Zoning Code has provisions for group homes (residential care facilities) over six
                               persons specifically for disabled residents and has no siting requirements or other
                               standards specifically for residential care facilities that affect the cost or development
                               of housing for persons with disabilities. In addition, the City ensures compliance with
                               all the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The Zoning Code’s
                               definition of family is consistent with state law.
                               In order to accommodate persons with disabilities, residential care homes for six or
                               fewer adults are allowed in the City’s residential zones by right. In addition, residential
                               care facilities with more than six adults are permitted in all of the agricultural zones as
                               well as some of the commercial zones in the City with a CUP. Further, care-taker housing
                               is allowed with a CUP in the industrial zones and is permitted by right in all commercial
                               zones. No special design or permitting standards have been established for residential
                               care facilities other than the CUP where required.
                               The City has 39 adult residential care homes that are licensed or have licenses pending,
                               which provide living assistance to persons 18 to 59 years of age.
                               Persons with Developmental Disabilities (Senate Bill 812)
                               Government Code Section 65583(a)(7) requires the City to discuss the needs of
                               individuals with a developmental disability in the special needs housing analysis.
                               A developmental disability is defined in Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions
                               Code as a disability that originates before an individual is 18 years old, continues or
                               can be expected to continue indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for
                               the individual, including intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This
                               includes disabling conditions found to be closely related to intellectual disability, or
                               requiring treatment similar to that required for individuals with intellectual disability, but
                               does not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
                               Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently in a
                               conventional housing environment, although more severely disabled individuals may
                               require a supervised group living environment. The most severely affected individuals
                               may require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy
                               are available. Because developmental disabilities appear during childhood, the first
                               issue in supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the
                               person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
                               The California Department of Developmental Services provides community-based
                               services to approximately 243,000 individuals with developmental disabilities and
H-36	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
their families through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental
centers, and two community-based facilities. The City is serviced by the Alta California
Regional Center in Sacramento, which provides a point of entry to services for people
with developmental disabilities. The center is a private nonprofit community agency
that contracts with local businesses and nonprofits to offer a wide range of services.
As of October 2012, the Alta California Regional Center provided services to 17,127 people
across six counties; 1,407 of these individuals lived in the City. Table 30 summarizes the
number of City residents being served by age group.
                                                Table 30
 Developmentally Disabled Persons in Elk Grove Assisted by Alta California Regional
                                           Center by Age
            Age Group                            Number                  Percentage
         0 to 14 years old                         587                     41.72%
        15 to 22 years old                         345                     24.52%
        23 to 54 years old                         415                     29.50%
        55 to 64 years old                          39                      2.77%
      65 years old and over                         21                      1.49%
               Total                              1,407                     100%
 Source: Alta California Regional Center Data, Sacramento County, 2012
There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a developmental
disability, including rent-subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes,
Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and Senate Bill
962 homes. The design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to services
and transit, and the availability of group living opportunities represent some of the
considerations that are important in serving these individuals.
Single-Parent and Female-Headed Households
Single-parent households are households with children under the age of 18 at home and
include both male- and female-headed households. These households generally have
a higher ratio between their income and their living expenses (that is, living expenses
take up a larger share of income than is generally the case in two-parent households).
Therefore, finding affordable, decent, and safe housing is often more difficult for single-
parent households. Additionally, single-parent households have special needs involving
access to day care or child care, healthcare, and other supportive services.
Table 31 illustrates the percentage of all families that are female-headed with no husband
present and male-headed with no wife present, as well as the percentages of single-
parent families in poverty, as reported by the 2006–2010 American Community Survey.
Single-parent female-headed families comprised 18 percent of all families in the City,
and approximately two-thirds (63 percent) have children under 18. Among all families
below the poverty level, 40 percent are female-headed single-parent families, and 36
percent are female-headed single-parent families with children under 18. By contrast,
single-parent male-headed households make up just under 9 percent of families below
the poverty level.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-37

Housing Element
                                                                              Table 31
                                                                     Single-Parent Families
                                Householder Type                                                 Number        Percentage
                                     Female-Headed Families (no husband present) with              4,475         62.92%
                                     Children under 18
                                     Female-Headed Families (no husband present) without           2,072         37.08%
                                     Children under 18
                                Total Female-Headed (no husband present) Families                  6,547          100%
                                     Male-Headed Families (no wife present) with Children          1,343         66.29%
                                     under 18
                                     Male-Headed Families (no wife present) without Children        683          33.71%
                                     under 18
                                Total Male-Headed (no wife present) Families                       2,026          100%
                                Total Single-Parent Families                                       8,573         23.77%
                                Total Families                                                    36,063          100%
                                Total Female-Headed Families (no husband present) under the         915          40.11%
                                Poverty Level
                                     Female-Headed Families (no husband present) with               820          35.95%
                                     Children under 18 under the Poverty Level
                                     Male-Headed Families (no wife present) under the               198          8.68%
                                     Poverty Level
                                Total Single-Parent Families under the Poverty Level               2,281          100%
                                Source: 2010 Census, QT-P11, 2006–2010 American Community Survey, DP02, B17012
                               Large Family Households
                               Large family households are defined as households containing five or more persons.
                               Large family households are considered a special needs group because there is limited
                               supply of adequately sized housing to accommodate their needs. The more persons in
                               a household, the more rooms are needed to accommodate that household. Specifically,
                               a five-person household would require three or four bedrooms, a six-person household
                               would require four bedrooms, and a seven-person household would require four to six
                               bedrooms. According to the 2010 Census, approximately 19 percent of all households
                               in the City include five or more people, as shown in Table 32. Approximately 71 percent
                               of large households own their homes (slightly less than the community average of 75
                               percent), and 29 percent rent.
                               According to the 2006–2010 American Community Survey, more than 87 percent of
                               all housing units in the City had at least three bedrooms. Approximately 95 percent
                               of all owner-occupied units and 64 percent of all renter-occupied units had three or
                               more bedrooms. Because the number of units with at least three or more bedrooms
                               significantly exceeds the number of large households in the community, there does not
                               appear to be a housing shortage for large households in the City. However, affordability
                               of larger housing units for large lower-income families may still be an issue.
H-38	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                         Table 32
                                    Large Households
  Household Size                          Number                       Percentage
  1 person                                  7,252                         15.13%
  2 people                                 12,547                        26.18%
  3 people                                  9,051                        18.88%
  4 people                                  9,865                        20.58%
  5 people                                  5,146                        10.74%
  6 people                                  2,381                         4.97%
  7 people or more                          1,685                         3.52%
  All large households (five or             9,212                        19.23%
  more people)
  All households                           47,927                         100%
  Source: 2010 Census
Agricultural Workers
Agricultural workers earn their primary income through permanent or seasonal
agricultural labor. According to the 2006–2010 American Community Survey, 187 people
(0.28 percent of all employed civilians) in the City worked in the agriculture, forestry,
fishing, hunting, and mining economic sectors. In all of Sacramento County, 0.6 percent
of workers are employed in these industries.
The types of agricultural production in the City do not require large numbers of migrant
and seasonal farm la-borers and a large influx of farm labor does not occur. It is considered
that the housing need for the limited number of farmworkers in the City is met through
existing housing. Housing for employees is a permitted use in all agricultural zones.
Employee housing serving six or fewer employees is considered a single-family residence
and allowed in all residential zones. Any application for farmworker housing is treated
in the same way as other affordable housing projects and all the resources the City has
to offer for affordable housing are made avail-able for the development of the project.
Incentives such as fee reduction, expedited permitting process, and streamlining and
modification of development standards are available for the production of farmworker
housing.
Homeless Persons
Homeless individuals and families have perhaps the most immediate housing need of
any group. They also have one of the most difficult sets of housing needs to meet, due
to both the diversity and complexity of the factors that lead to homelessness and to
community opposition to the location of facilities that serve homeless clients. California
state law requires that housing elements estimate the need for emergency shelter for
home-less people.
According to the 2011 Sacramento County Homelessness Count, 2,376 persons were
homeless throughout the County on any given night in January of that year, 353 of
whom were considered chronically homeless (some-one with a disabling condition who
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-39

Housing Element
                               has either been continuously homeless for at least a year or has been homeless at least
                               four times in the previous three years). The California DOF projects that Sacramento
                               County had a population of 1,427,961 in January 2011, so approximately 0.18 percent
                               of the County population was homeless and 0.02 percent was chronically homeless.
                               Applying these percentages to the City’s projected 2011 population, it can be assumed
                               that the City had 278 homeless people, 31 of whom were chronically homeless.
                               The City has two main providers of homeless services: the Elk Grove Food Bank and
                               Sacramento Self Help Housing (SSHH). The Elk Grove Food Bank indicated that it served
                               approximately 62 homeless persons in December 2012, comprising 39 households. Of
                               these 62 individuals, 12 were children, and 10 were considered chronically homeless.
                               SSHH offers assistance to City residents in need of housing, with a focus on persons who
                               are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless. SSHH’s clientele includes people living on
                               the streets or living with friends or family; it served more than 90 households in 2011–12.
                               In March 2013, the City opened its first transitional home, Grace House, located in Old
                               Town Elk Grove. In 2012, the City purchased the 2,200-square-foot, five-bedroom, three-
                               bathroom home and subsequently completed a full renovation of the property. Grace
                               House provides a temporary place for homeless persons to stay while they get on their
                               feet and work on finding permanent housing. Homeless residents can stay for up to six
                               months. The home is operated by SSHH, in cooperation with the Elk Grove Food Bank
                               and People Assisting the Homeless, which provides job training, mentoring, and case
                               management to the residents.
                               New legislation (SB 2) requires local jurisdictions to strengthen provisions for addressing
                               the housing needs of the homeless, including the identification of a zone or zones where
                               emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use. Emergency shelters are permitted
                               without any discretionary action in the General Commercial (GC) and Light Industrial (LI)
                               zones in the City of Elk Grove. The GC zone is especially appropriate as it is intended to
                               support the development of urban villages that offer a mixture of retail, offices, services,
                               entertainment and commercial. As of July 2008, there were 76 acres of vacant GC and
                               LI land in the City and an additional 34 acres of underdeveloped sites, which provides
                               ample opportunity for the development of emergency shelters. Emergency shelters are
                               also allowed with a conditional use permit in the RD-7, RD-10, RD-15, RD-20, RD-25, and
                               RD-30 zones. The CUP requirement does not constrain the development of emergency
                               shelters, because the application must comply with only two criteria: (1) consistency
                               with the General Plan (i.e., Housing Element goals and policies); and (2) that the use will
                               not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of
                               persons residing or working in the neighborhood.
                               Transitional housing is defined by Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code.
                               Transitional and supportive housing may be designated for a homeless individual or
                               family transitioning to permanent housing. Taking several forms, transitional housing can
                               be group housing or multifamily units and may include supportive services. Transitional
                               housing is a permitted use in all residential zoning districts.
                               Individuals and families that are homeless or are at risk of becoming homeless are part
                               of the extremely low-income group. Government Code Section 65583, as amended in
H-40	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
2006, requires the identification and analysis of the housing needs of extremely low-
income households. A Housing Element must also identify zoning to en-courage and
facilitate supportive housing and single-room occupancy units. Supportive housing
types differ slightly from transitional housing. According to Section 50675.14 of the
Health and Safety Code, supportive housing has no limit on the length of stay when
occupied by a target population as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 53260
(i.e., low-income person with mental disabilities, AIDS, substance abuse or chronic
health conditions or persons whose disabilities originated before the person turned 18),
and is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist residents in retaining housing,
improving their health skills, maximizing their ability to live and, when possible, work in
the community. The City allows supportive housing as a permitted use in all residential
zoning districts. Additionally, single-room occupancy units are specifically allowed with
a CUP in RD-10, RD-15, RD-20, RD-25, and RD-30 zones, as well as being a permitted
use in GC zones.
5. ADEQUATE SITES
COMPLYING WITH THE ADEQUATE SITES REQUIREMENT
State law requires jurisdictions to demonstrate that “adequate sites” will be made
available over the planning period (2013–2021 for the SACOG region) to facilitate
and encourage a sufficient level of new housing production. Jurisdictions must also
demonstrate that appropriate zoning and development standards, as well as services
and facilities, will be in place to facilitate and encourage housing.1 The Housing Element
provides an inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant
and underutilized sites, and analyzes the relationship of zoning and public facilities and
services to these sites.
To comply with the adequate sites requirement, the City can take credit toward the
RHNA for any new housing units during the 2013–2021 planning period. New housing
units include either those built (issued a certificate of occupancy) or approved since
January 1, 2013 (the beginning of the 5th Housing Element cycle).
The following discussion identifies how the City may provide for a sufficient number of
sites to facilitate housing production commensurate with the 2013–2021 RHNA numbers.
In evaluating the adequacy of sites to fulfill the RHNA by income level, HCD assesses
a jurisdiction’s development potential by zoning district and corresponding density
level. The assumption is that density can reduce the per-unit cost of development and
therefore the sales price or rent of the housing developed.
PROGRESS TOWARD MEETING HOUSING NEEDS
An important component of the Housing Element is the identification of sites for future
housing development and evaluation of the adequacy of these sites in fulfilling the City’s
share of regional housing needs as determined by SACOG. Between January 1, 2013, and
August 31, 2013, 343 housing units were completed.
After considering units constructed, the City’s remaining housing allocation to be
accommodated under the SACOG Regional Housing Needs Plan is 7,059 housing
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-41

Housing Element
                               units: 1,018 extremely low-income units, 1,017 very low-income units, 1,427 low-income
                               units, 1,377 moderate-income units, and 2,220 above moderate-income units. Table 33
                               summarizes the City’s progress in meeting its 2013–2021 RHNA.
                                                                                 Table 33
                                                        Progress in Meeting Regional Housing Allocation
                                                                          2013–2021                        Land
                                                         2013–2021                       Remaining
                                  Income Category                           Units                        Inventory  Surplus
                                                            RHNA                           RHNA
                                                                         Constructed                      Capacity
                                 Extremely Low                1,018           0             1,018          3,508      46
                                 Very Low                     1,017           0             1,017
                                 Low                         1,427            0            1,427
                                 Moderate                    1,377            0            1,377           4,427     830
                                 Above Moderate              2,563           3431
                                                                                           2,220
                                 Total Units                 7,402           343           7,059           7,935     876
                                 1
                                   Units receiving a Certificate of Occupancy between January 1 and August 31, 2013
                               AVAILABLE SITES
                               As part of the 5th round Housing Element update, the City analyzed sites appropriate
                               for single- and multifamily development that were vacant or underdeveloped. Sites
                               zoned RD-25 or higher, and sites that have the multifamily overlay zoning, (see Table
                               35) are available to meet the City’s lower income RHNA. The entitled projects included
                               in Table 36 will accommodate the City’s moderate and above moderate income RHNA.
                               Please refer to Figure 1 for a map of these sites.
                               The City’s approach to meeting its regional housing need allocation included modifying
                               the density range for the RD-25 zone from 20.1–25 units per acre to 20.1–30.0 units per
                               acre, and evaluating a list of candidate sites to apply the new RD-25 zoning.
                               In determining the candidate sites, the City looked at several factors, which were
                               consistent with the City’s General Plan. Some of the general factors considered for each
                               site were:
                                     •	 Compatible with surrounding land uses
                                     •	 Between 8-15 acres
                                     •	 Proximity to multifamily (within 1/3 mile)
                                     •	 Services nearby (today)
                                     •	 Major roads (existing)
                                     •	 Public transit (existing)
                                     •	 Pedestrian accessible (existing)
                               All sites identified met a minimum of one of the factors listed above.
                               The total number of multifamily units that could be developed on available sites is
                               1
                                 State of California, Government Code, Section 65583(c)(1).
H-42	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                       Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
3,501 and 30 on sites with the multifamily overlay. While the City is not relying on any
multifamily overlay sites (Site 4-8) to meet its RHNA, there is additional capacity available
on these sites if needed. For sites included in Table 35 where an onsite constraint has
been identified, the capacity for the site has been adjusted to only include the buildable
acreage.
In addition, to ensure the City has enough capacity to meet its lower income RHNA,
the City has included Program H-1, Action 2, which requires rezoning approximately 60
gross acres of the Southeast Policy Area (site 13) and 15 acres of site 21 to High Density
Residential.
Southeast Policy Area (SEPA)
On July 27, 2012, the City Council directed staff to prepare a master plan for the 1,200
acre Southeast Policy Area. Their initial direction focused on providing a strong jobs
center to address the City’s jobs-housing imbalance, along with refining the ideas
found in a series of visioning workshops held with the public in the preceding months.
On March 13, 2013, after review and refinement by the Planning Commission, the City
Council re-viewed and directed staff to proceed in the master planning based upon a
refined illustrative land use map. That map indicates the location and scale of various
land uses planned for the area, and includes 60 acres of higher density residential uses
(20.1 to 30.0 dwellings per acre). Since the March 2013 meeting, staff has been working
to refine the illustrative land use map (e.g., including drainage infrastructure, parks, trails,
roadway sizing). The 60 gross acres of high density residential has not been modified
through this process.
The ultimate master plan will include four key components, described below:
    1) A Community Plan, which will be adopted as part of the General Plan, and will
       provide policy-level guidance on future development of the 1,200 acres.
    2) Four technical studies, including traffic, drainage, water, and sewer, which will
       “pre-plan” the public infrastructure and streamline future development of the
       area, thereby reducing a constraint to the development of housing.
    3) The required Environmental Impact Report under the California Environmental
       Quality Act (CEQA), which will provide programmatic-level coverage for future
       development. It is anticipated that most, if not all, future projects will qualify
       for streamlined review and minimal to no further CEQA work under State CEQA
       Guidelines Section 15183.
    4) A Special Planning Area, or SPA, which will serve as the zoning regulations for the
       area. The document includes a land plan and regulation pertaining to minimum
       density, allowed building height, setbacks, and other development standards and
       regulations applicable to the area. Properties within the SPA will be rezoned into
       the SPA as part of the adoption of the master plan.
As of December 2013, these four components are being finalized for release for public
review in early 2014. Plan adoption is scheduled for May 2014.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                       ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-43

Housing Element
                               Site 21
                               Site 21 (Sheldon Farms) is located at the southeast corner of Sheldon Road and
                               Bruceville Road and is directly adjacent to the City’s boundary with Sacramento City.
                               The site measures approximately 146 acres across five parcels, is bisected by Laguna
                               Creek, and is under common ownership. It is currently zoned Laguna Community/
                               Floodplain Special Planning Area, a special purpose zoning district established in the
                               1980s by Sacramento County prior to Elk Grove incorporation. The current zoning limits
                               development of the site to limited agricultural uses, on an interim basis, until certain
                               drainage improvements are completed upstream of the site. These improvements were
                               completed by the City around 2006.
                               In 2008, the City adopted General Plan Land Use Policy LU-40, which requires that
                               between 10 and 15 acres of the 146 acres be developed with high density residential
                               uses. Implementation of this program will require, at a minimum, the rezoning of a
                               portion of the property. The City anticipates that a mini-master plan will be prepared
                               for the site. This plan will replace the existing regulations and provide the zoning
                               information necessary to develop the site. Given the common ownership of the site, the
                               City anticipates this to be an applicant-initiated master plan.
                               The sites in Table 36 are all currently entitled projects and can accommodate the City’s
                               moderate and above moderate RHNA. These sites are planned for moderate to lower-
                               density single-family projects. Sites with General Plan designations of LDR, MDR, and
                               HDR allow densities ranging from 4 to 20 units per acre for a total capacity of 4,427
                               units.
                               It is assumed that the City’s moderate- and above moderate-income RHNA will be met
                               on sites included in Table 36. Based on data in the Housing Needs Assessment regarding
                               recent sales prices and affordability by income level, moderate-income households can
                               afford current market-rate sales prices. Tables 20 (Median Home Prices in Elk Grove)
                               and 24 (Affordable Owner-Occupied Housing Costs) show that median sales prices in
                               the City range from $260,000 to $350,000 and the maximum affordable cost for a
                               moderate-income household is $357,000.
                               For sites noted as underutilized in Table 35, these sites generally have one to two single-
                               family homes on them. On several sites, property owners have expressed interest in
                               developing them with more intensive uses (including residential development of various
                               densities). Based on location, size, and surrounding uses, these sites have the potential
                               to be developed at a higher density. Because of this, the City feels they are appropriate
                               to include in the site inventory
                               Realistic Capacity
                               In an effort to determine the realistic capacity for each site, the City staff reviewed
                               affordable multifamily projects in the City since 2005 (Table 34). It was determined that
                               the average density of multifamily development projects was approximately 24 units per
                               acre. Although the City has assumed a density of 21 units per acre when determining
                               the realistic capacity for each site, the maximum allowable density in the RD-25 zone
                               will be 30 du/acre.
H-44	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                                Table 34
                      Elk Grove Affordable Multifamily Housing Projects
                                                       Number of Income
       Year Built                Project Name                                Density (units/acre)
                                                         Restricted Units
          2012              Ridge Apartments         103 very low- and 100 19
                                                     low-income units
          2012              Vintage at Laguna II     23 very low- and 45   30
                                                     low-income units
          2009              Montego Falls            26 very low- and 105  25
                                                     low-income units
          2009              Seasons Apartments       45 very low- and 176  26
                                                     low-income units
          2007              Stoneridge               36 very low- and 59   19
                                                     low-income units
          2006              Waterman Square          34 very low- and 49   21
                                                     low-income units
          2006              Crossings at Elk Grove   40 very low- and 131  21
                                                     low-income units
          2005              Vintage at Laguna I      32 very low- and 125  38
                                                     low-income units
 Source: City of Elk Grove, 2013
 *Funding through Affordable Housing Loan Program.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-45
Housing Element
                                                                       Table 35
                                     Elk Grove Higher Density Vacant/Underutilized Sites Characteristics
                                                                                        Realistic                                            Clear of
  Map                    Developable                                General                            Vacant or        Entitlement
               APN                                 Location                   Zoning      Unit                                            Known Site
   ID                      Acreage                                   Plan                          Underdeveloped           Status
                                                                                       Capacity                                           Constraints
                                                                                                                         DA requires
1       134-1010-013          15.3       North end of Lent Ranch     HDR        SPA       245            Vacant                                 Y
                                                                                                                       affordable units
                                         East Franklin at SW corner
                                         of Quail Run Lane/Poppy
2       132-1780-046          12.4                                   HDR       RD-25      260       Underdeveloped           None               Y
                                         Ridge Road and Bruceville
                                         Road
                                         Laguna Ridge, SE corner
3       132-0050-050           14        of Poppy Ridge Road and     HDR       RD-25      294       Underdeveloped           None               Y
                                         Bruceville Road
                                                                                                                                            Floodplain
        116-0042-025                                                                                                     Application       issues; final
6                            5.04                                   C/O/MF   AR-5 (MF)     60            Vacant
        & 007                                                                                                             withdrawn      station sitting
                                                                                                                                           unresolved
                                         NW corner of Laguna
8       116-0320-024            2        Boule-vard and Big Horn     O/MF     MP (MF)      30            Vacant              None               Y
                                         Road
                                         East Stockton Boulevard
9       115-0150-069          8.68                                   HDR       RD-25       182           Vacant              None               Y
                                         just north of Sheldon Road
                                                                                                                                         Laguna Creek;
                                         NW corner of Big Horn and                                                                          some area
10      116-0011-004         6.50  1
                                                                     HDR       RD-25       137           Vacant              None
                                         Bruceville Road                                                                                  available to
                                                                                                                                             de-velop
        Not yet                                                                                                           In process,
11                        Approx. 60     Southeast Policy Area2      SEPA      RD-25     1,260      Underdeveloped                              Y
        assigned                                                                                                          consistent
12      119-1110-089          3.91       Laguna West Town Center     HDR       RD-25       82            Vacant              None               Y
13      119-1110-090          3.92       Laguna West Town Center     HDR       RD-25       82            Vacant              None               Y
                                         Laguna Ridge, SW corner of
14      132-0050-091           9.5                                   HDR       RD-25      200            Vacant              None               Y
                                         Poppy Ridge and Big Horn
15      132-0050-052          0.9                                    HDR       RD-25        19           Vacant              None               Y
16      132-0050-044           1.6                                   HDR       RD-25       34            Vacant              None               Y
        115-0180-012         2.08        Elk Grove Florin Road just  HDR       RD-25       93                          Prior application
17                                                                                                  Underdeveloped                              Y
        115-0180-013          2.34       south of Calvine            HDR       RD-25                                      withdrawn
        116-1560-002          0.16       Elk Grove Boulevard at                                                          Application
18                                       Backer Ranch (next to       HDR       RD-25       64            Vacant           in process,           Y
        116-1560-003          0.14
                                         Nug-get)                                                                         consistent
        119-1920-017           1.8
19                                       Harbour Point at Maritime   HDR       RD-25       63            Vacant              None               Y
        119-1920-018           1.2
        115-0162-033          4.75
        115-0162-011          1.66       East Stockton Boulevard at
20                                                                   HDR       RD-25       171           Vacant              None               Y
        115-0162-019          1.18       Bow Street
        115-0162-023         0.56
        116-0012-051         44.8
        116-0012-059         35.87
                                         Sheldon/Bruceville/Big
21      116-0012-049         20.01                                   HDR       RD-25       315           Vacant              None               Y
                                         Horn/Lewis Stein
        116-0012-048          31.6
        116-0012-064          13.8
Total                        245.7                                                        3,591
Source: City of Elk Grove, 2014
1 18-acre site. Only 6.5 acres assumed to be buildable due to floodplain.
2 The Southeast Policy Area (SEPA, aka Meridian) will be adopted after the Housing Element. Planning is underway for this area and parcels are yet
to be designated. Of the 1,200 acres in SEPA, approximately 60 will be designated for high-density residential development.
H-46	        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                             Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015
Housing Element
                                                              Table 36
                         Elk Grove Low Density Vacant/Underutilized Sites Characteristics (Entitled Projects)
                                                              Current Designations
                              Developable                                              Allowed                       Vacant or
  Map ID          APN                       Project Name                                           Entitled Units
                                Acreage                                                 Density                   Underdeveloped
                                                           General Plan     Zoning
 22         132-0870-019          8.4       Backer Ranch      HDR            RD-20        20             152          Vacant
 23          132-2150-001         72.7         Jackson       C, LDR       SC, BP, RD-5 Varies by         158          Vacant
             through 132-                                                                Zone
                2150-022
 24            132-0050-         164.1      Arbor Ranch       LDR         RD-5, RD-7,     5-8           734           Vacant
               0610, 132-                                                     RD-8
               0050-062
 25            132-0280-         79.9       Madeira East/     LDR          RD-5, RD-7     5-7            879      Underdeveloped
               0080, 132-                  Zehnder Ranch
              0280-0340,
            132-0290-029
 26            132-0050-          113.     Madeira South    LDR, MDR      RD-5, RD-7,    5-10           460       Underdeveloped
                058, 132-                                                    RD-10
              0050-090,
            132-0050-101,
            132-0050-105,
            132-0050-108
 27            132-0050-          47.5     McGeary Ranch      LDR             RD-5         5             227      Underdeveloped
                009, 132-
               0050-068
 28         132-0050-057          21.0      Tuscan Ridge      LDR             RD-5         5              97      Underdeveloped
                                                 East
 29          132-0050-011         19.5      Tuscan Ridge      LDR             RD-5         5             133      Underdeveloped
                                                 West
 30         132-0050-031,        50.7          Treasure       LDR         RD-4, RD-5      4-5            179          Vacant
               132-0050-
                   065
 31         132-0050-119,        52.0         Zgraggen        LDR          RD-5, RD-7     5-7            224          Vacant
            132-0050-128,
             132-0050-131
 32          132-0152-001        197.7    Sterling Meadows  LDR, MDR,     RD-5, RD-7,    5-20           1,184         Vacant
                                                              HDR        RD-10, RD-15,
                                                                             RD-20
 Total                           827.4                                                                 4,427
 Source: City of Elk Grove, 2014
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	       H-47
Housing Element                                                                              Housing Element
Figure 1: Site Inventory
H-48	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-49
Housing Element
                               WATER AND SEWER CAPACITY
                               Tables 35 and 36 provide the parcel number, size of parcel, zoning, any development
                               constraints, and the availability of infrastructure to service any future development.
                               Water
                               Water is provided to the City by two service providers: Sacramento County Water
                               Agency (SCWA) and the Elk Grove Water District (EGWD). SCWA has a conjunctive
                               use (“the planned use of surface and groundwater to improve overall water supply
                               reliability”) program in its initial phases that will meet the City’s projected water needs.
                               EGWD operates a series of wells and purchases wholesale raw water from SCWA.
                               Water supplies for the City come from three main sources: groundwater, surface water,
                               and recycled (this is planned but not yet implemented) water. Groundwater refers to
                               groundwater pumped from the Central Sacramento County Groundwater Basin. Surface
                               water is defined as water from the American and/or Sacramento Rivers, and recycled
                               water is defined as recycled wastewater used for non-potable purposes.
                               Wastewater
                               The City’s wastewater is handled by two service providers. The first, the Sacramento Area
                               Sewer District, formerly known as the Sacramento County Sanitation District 1, operates
                               the collection system, which includes over 4,200 miles of sewer pipelines ranging in
                               size from 4 to 75 inches in diameter. The second is the Sacramento Regional County
                               Sanitation District, which operates the Sacramento Regional Wastewater Treatment
                               Plant (SRWTP). The SRWTP receives and treats an average of 150 million gallons per
                               day (mgd) and has a permitted dry weather flow design capacity of 181 mgd.
                               The collection system within the Elk Grove Planning Area includes trunks (designed to
                               carry flows from 1 to 10 mgd) and laterals, which are wastewater conveyance facilities
                               that carry wastewater flows of less than 1 mgd. The Sacramento Sewerage Facilities
                               Expansion Master Plan identifies improvements and modifications needed to ensure
                               sufficient capacity in both conveyance and treatment facilities for the General Plan
                               buildout.
                               To comply with Government Code Section 65589.7, upon adoption, the City will
                               immediately forward its adopted Housing Element to its water and wastewater providers
                               so they can grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that include
                               units affordable to lower-income households.
H-50	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
6. HOUSING RESOURCES AND INCENTIVES
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS IN ELK GROVE
The City’s affordable housing projects include projects funded by low-income housing
tax credits, HUD funding, and local funding. The majority of the City’s deed-restricted
housing is in rental apartment complexes.
    •	 There are three public housing developments with a total of 46 units located in the
       City that are managed and owned by the Sacramento Housing and Redevelopment
       Agency (SHRA).
    •	There are 15 apartment complexes in the City that provide more than 2,000
       affordable housing units. Project funding sources include low-income housing tax
       credits, Elk Grove’s Affordable Housing Fund and Very Low Income Housing Trust
       Fund, HOME, and SHRA’s Housing Trust Fund.
    •	A total of 25 units are currently part of the Affordable Homeownership Program,
       which offers deed-restricted ownership units to income-qualified purchasers.
Assisted housing projects are listed along with the number of housing units in Table
37. The term of affordability for these projects ranges between 30 and 55 years. Since
incorporation, the City has provided financial assistance to 11 of the listed projects,
resulting in the construction of more than 1,500 affordable units.
The Housing Choice Voucher (HCV, formerly known as Section 8) program provides
assistance to low-income households by paying the difference between what the
household can afford to pay for rent and the market-rate rent cost. Vouchers can be
portable (moving with a household if they move to a new home) or property-based.
Funding for the HCV program originates from HUD, and SHRA is responsible for
administering the program. There are currently 987 housing units in the City that utilize
HCV assistance to pay the rent. Vouchers in use in the City are portable, and may be
used for housing units in multifamily complexes or for single-family homes.
Besides the HCV program, HUD also funds and administers various affordable housing
opportunities for lower-income persons, which include Section 221(d)(3), Section
202, Section 236, and Section 811 housing. However, according to the local office of
HUD, there are no HUD-administered or -subsidized affordable housing complexes or
individual housing units located in the City.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-51

Housing Element
                                                                               Table 37
                                                                     Assisted Housing Projects
                                        Name                         Address               Assisted Units      Term of Affordability1
                                                                     Affordable Housing Complexes
                               Agave2                    10070 Willard Parkway                   187         30-year term ends in
                                                                                                             2035
                               The Crossings2            8575 Elk Grove Florin Road              115         55-year term ends in
                                                                                                             2062
                               Geneva Pointe2            8280 Geneva Point Drive                 151         55-year term ends in 2061
                               Montego Falls   2
                                                         9950 Bruceville Road                    131         33-year term ends in 2041
                               Renwick Square            3227 Renwick Ave.                      149          55-year term
                               Ridge  2
                                                         8151 Civic Center Drive                202          38-year term ends in 2051
                               Seasons  2
                                                         7301 Bilby Road                         221         50-year term ends in
                                                                                                             2059
                               Stoneridge2               8515 Elk Grove Florin Road              95          55-year term ends in
                                                                                                             2062
                               Terracina at Elk          9440 West Stockton Blvd.                123         30-year term
                               Grove
                               Terracina at Laguna       9274 Franklin Blvd.                     135         30-year term
                               Creek
                               Terracina at Park         8875 Lewis Stein Road                   116         Term ends in 2040
                               Meadows2
                               Village Crossing          9241 Bruceville Road                   100          30-year term ends in 2031
                               Vintage at Laguna    2
                                                         9210 Big Horn Blvd.                     157         37-year term ends in
                                                                                                             2042
                               Vintage at Laguna II2     9204 Big Horn Blvd.                     68          40-year term ends in
                                                                                                             2052
                               Waterman Square2          9150 and 9160 Waterman Road             83          55-year term ends in
                                                                                                             2064
                               Public Housing
                               Ashley Apartments         9205 Elk Grove Blvd.                     16         No ending term date
                               Unnamed                   9353 Elk Grove Florin Road               10         No ending term date
                               Unnamed                   9205 Elk Grove Blvd.                    20          No ending term date
                               For-Sale Homes
                               (Deed-Restricted)
                               Coventry                  Sheldon Road and Elk                     14         55-year term (varied
                                                         Grove Florin Road (multiple                         starting dates)
                                                         addresses)
                               Gallery Walk              Crystal Walk Circle (multiple            11         55-year term (varied
                                                         addresses)                                          starting dates)
                               Total                                                           2,104
                               Source: City of Elk Grove May 2013
                               1
                                 Term of affordability per City Regulatory Agreement is shown. Other funding sources may require
                               longer affordability periods. Most City loan documents require affordability to continue if the City loan
                               is not fully repaid by the date shown.
                               2
                                 Denotes City-funded project.
H-52	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                      Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015
Housing Element
AT-RISK HOUSING
The Housing Element Law in the California Government Code (Section 65583) requires
all jurisdictions to include a study of all low-income housing units which may at some
future time be lost from the affordable inventory by the expiration of affordability
restrictions. There are a few cases that present the opportunity for the conversion of
affordable units including:
           1) Prepayment of HUD mortgages, such as Section 221(d)(3), Section 202, and
              Section 236. (Section references are to the following: Section 221(d)(3) -
              National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 17151(d)(3) and (d)(4); Section 202 - Housing
              Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C. 1701q), as amended; and Section 236 – Housing and
              Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C 1701.)
           2) Opt-outs and expirations of project-based Section 8 contracts. (Section 8
              references are to Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 892.)
           3) Other cases.
A prepayment of HUD mortgages under Section 221(d)(3) involves a privately owned
project with HUD providing either below market interest rate loans or market-rate loans
with subsidy to the tenants. In a Section 236 complex, HUD provides assistance to the
owner to reduce the costs for tenants by paying most of the interest on a market-rate
mortgage. Additional rental subsidy may be provided to the tenant. In a Section 202
complex, HUD provides a direct loan to nonprofit organizations for project development
and rent subsidy for low-income tenants. All Section 202 handicapped units are designed
for physically handicapped, mentally disabled, and chronically mentally ill residents.
In a housing choice voucher contract for new construction or substantial rehabilitation,
HUD provides a subsidy to the owner for the difference between a tenant’s ability to pay
and the contract rent. The likelihood for opt-outs increases as the market rents exceed
the contract rents.
Other cases that create the opportunity for the conversion of affordable housing include
the expiration of low-income use periods of various financing sources, such as Low
Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC), bond financing, density bonuses, California Housing
Finance Agency (CHFA) and CDBG and HOME funds, and redevelopment funds.
None of the affordable housing units in the City are at risk of losing affordability
restrictions during the Housing Element planning period.
Cost Analysis
State Housing Element law requires that all housing elements include additional
information regarding the conversion of existing, assisted housing developments to
other non-low-income uses (Statutes of 1989, Chapter 1452). This was the result of
concern that many affordable housing developments throughout the country were
going to have affordability restrictions lifted because their government financing was
soon to expire or could be pre-paid. Without the sanctions imposed due to financing
restrictions, affordability of the units could no longer be assured.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-53

Housing Element
                               There are no units funded by federally assisted (HUD) programs (i.e., Rural Housing
                               Services or Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Assistance) in the City that have affordability
                               covenants expiring between 2013 and 2021. Therefore, a cost analysis to preserve at-risk
                               housing in the City is not included as a component of this Housing Element.
                               Resources and Incentives for Affordable Housing
                               Efforts by the City to assist in the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of
                               affordable housing would utilize organizational and financial types of resources. The
                               following programs include local, State, and federal housing programs that are valuable
                               resources in assisting in the development of affordable housing, preserving at-risk
                               housing, and for housing rehabilitation.
                               Affordable Housing Fee Program
                               The City has established an Affordable Housing Fee Program which provides a linkage
                               between the demand for very low- and low-income housing and the development of
                               residential and all non-exempt nonresidential commercial uses. The fee varies depending
                               on the type of use, and funds generated are deposited into the City’s Affordable Housing
                               Fund. Table 38 illustrates the current fees, which are updated annually. The use of the
                               Affordable Housing Fund is restricted to creating or preserving housing affordable to
                               low- or very low-income households.
                                                                             Table 38
                                                              Affordable Housing Fee Program Fees
                                                     Land Use
                                Single-Family (1-2 units, includes duplexes)      $2,884.00 per unit
                                Multifamily (3 or more units)                     $1,730.40 per unit
                                Commercial/retail                                 $0.47 per square foot
                                Hotel                                             $1.40 per square foot
                                Manufacturing                                     $0.53 per square foot
                                Office                                            $0.00 per square foot
                                Warehouse                                         $0.57 per square foot
                                Source: City of Elk Grove, 2013 Development
                                Related Fees Booklet. July 26, 2013
                               Density Bonus Program
                               The City has instituted a housing density bonus for very low- and low-income and senior
                               households in accordance with Government Code Sections 65915 and 65917. This was
                               done as part of the City’s comprehensive update of the City’s Zoning Code (Title 23
                               of the City’s Municipal Code) in 2006. The City’s density bonus provisions provide for
                               incentives to units affordable to low- and very low-income and age-restricted projects
                               up to a maximum density bonus of 35 percent. High-density single-family uses that
                               include affordable units are allowed by right within the multifamily overlay zone.
                               Cities grant density bonuses based on a minimum of 25 percent and maximum of 35
H-54	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                     Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
percent above the base zoning density and one additional concession or incentive. The
City could provide the following:
     •	A reduction in site development standards or a modification of Zoning Code
        requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum
        building standards.
     •	 Approval of mixed-use development in conjunction with the housing development
        if the nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and
        if the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing development and
        the surrounding development.
     •	Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or that
        the City determines will result in identifiable financially sufficient and actual cost
        reductions (California Government Code §65915(h), 2002).
     •	 Priority processing of a housing development that provides income-restricted units.
Government Code Section 65915 also allows the City to “provide other incentives of
equivalent financial value based upon the land cost per dwelling unit” in place of the
density bonus and other incentives as detailed previously.
Home Investment Partnerships (HOME) Program
HOME was created under the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act
enacted in November 1990. HOME funds are awarded annually as entitlement grants to
participating jurisdictions. HUD provides a line of credit that the jurisdiction may draw
upon as needed to fund eligible projects. The program’s flexibility allows states and local
governments to use HOME funds for grants, direct loans, loan guarantees or other forms
of credit enhancement, or rental assistance or security deposits.
The City is not eligible to be a HOME-participating jurisdiction on its own. For many
years, the City participated in the HOME program through SHRA, but this ended due to a
federal rule regarding matching fiscal years (the City operates on a July-June fiscal year,
while SHRA operates on a calendar fiscal year). The City is currently able to apply for
HOME funding through the State, where funds are awarded competitively and eligible
project categories are limited.
Public Housing Authority (PHA)
The local PHA is operated by SHRA, which manages housing and community development
activities, including conventional housing (public housing) and the HCV program. The
conventional housing program involves housing developments that are managed and
maintained by the SHRA. The voucher program involves a tenant-based rental subsidy
administered by the agency. Qualified families are selected and certified from a waiting
list. A qualified family can utilize the voucher at any decent, sanitary, and safe housing
unit (single-family or multifamily) that accepts the vouchers. The tenant’s portion of the
rent is based on 30 percent of the adjusted family gross income. SHRA pays the landlord
the difference between 30 percent of the family’s adjusted gross income and either
the payment standard or the gross rent for the unit, whichever is lower. The payment
standard is based on local fair market rents. The family may choose a unit with a higher
rent and pay the landlord the difference.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-55

Housing Element
                               Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
                               HUD awards funding under the CDBG program annually to entitlement jurisdictions and
                               states for a wide range of activities, including housing, public services, and economic
                               development activities. HUD also offers various other programs that can be utilized by
                               the City, nonprofit, and for-profit agencies for the preservation of low-income housing
                               units, such as Section 202 and Section 108 loan guarantees.
                               The City has received CDBG funding annually since 2003. The amounts and projects
                               vary from year to year, but generally include the following types of activities:
                                   •	 Home repair for low-income homeowners.
                                   •	 Homeless facilities, such as transitional housing.
                                   •	 Graffiti abatement for private property.
                                   •	 ADA improvements, including curb ramps and sidewalk infill projects.
                                   •	 Nonprofit facility improvements.
                                   •	Economic development, such as loans to expanding businesses and employer
                                      assistance for new hires.
                                   •	Public services, including senior meals, housing counseling, fair housing advice
                                      and investigation, youth programs, and general social service assistance.
                               Community Reinvestment Act (CRA)
                               The CRA, enacted by Congress in 1977, is intended to encourage depository institutions
                               to help meet the credit needs of the communities in which they operate, including
                               low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with safe and sound banking
                               operations. The CRA requires that each insured depository institution’s record in helping
                               meet the credit needs of its entire community be evaluated periodically. That record
                               is taken into account in considering an institution’s application for deposit facilities,
                               including mergers and acquisitions.
                               Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program (LIHTC)
                               In 1986, Congress created the federal LIHTC program to encourage private investment in
                               the acquisition, rehabilitation, and construction of low-income rental housing.
                               Because high housing costs in California make it difficult, even with federal credits, to
                               produce affordable rental housing, the California Legislature created a State LIHTC
                               program to supplement the federal credit.
                               The State credit is essentially identical to the federal credit: the Tax Credit Allocation
                               Committee allocates both, and State credits are only available to projects receiving
                               federal credits. Twenty percent of federal credits are reserved for rural areas and 10
                               percent for nonprofit sponsors. To compete for the credit, rental housing developments
                               have to reserve units at affordable rents to households at or below 60 percent of area
                               median income. The units must be reserved for the target population for a minimum of
                               30 years. A greater level of tax credit investment (9 percent credits) usually carries a
                               55-year restriction term.
H-56	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
The federal tax credit provides a subsidy over 10 years toward the cost of producing
a unit. Developers sell these tax benefits to investors for their present market value to
provide up front capital to build the units.
Credits can be used to fund the hard and soft costs (excluding land costs) of the
acquisition, rehabilitation, or new construction of rental housing. Projects not receiving
other federal subsidies receive a federal credit of 9 percent per year for 10 years and a
State credit of 30 percent over 4 years (high cost areas and qualified census tracts get
increased federal credits). Projects with a federal subsidy receive a 4 percent federal
credit each year for 10 years and a 13 percent state credit over 4 years.
California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA)
CalHFA offers permanent financing for acquisition and rehabilitation to for-profit,
nonprofit, and public agency developers seeking to preserve “at-risk” housing units.
In addition, CalHFA offers low-interest predevelopment loans to nonprofit sponsors
through its acquisition/rehabilitation program.
Federal Home Loan Bank System
The Federal Home Loan Bank System facilitates Affordable Housing Programs, which
subsidize the interest rates for affordable housing. The San Francisco Federal Home
Loan Bank District provides local service within California. Interest rate subsidies under
the Affordable Housing Programs can be used to finance the purchase, construction,
and/or rehabilitation of rental housing. Very low-income households must occupy at
least 20 percent of the units for the useful life of the housing or the mortgage term.
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
HCD administers the Predevelopment Loan Program, which provides funds for
predevelopment costs to construct, rehabilitate, convert, or preserve assisted housing,
including manufactured housing and mobile home parks. These funds can cover costs
for site control, site acquisition for future low-income housing development, engineering
studies, architectural plans, application fees, legal services, permits, bonding, and site
preparation. Priority is given to projects that are located in rural areas, in public transit
corridors, or that preserve and acquire existing government-assisted rental housing at
risk of converting to market rents.
HCD also administers the acquisition and rehabilitation component of the Multifamily
Housing Program to acquire and rehabilitate permanent or transitional rental housing
developments of five or more units as well as permanent supportive housing. These
funds are only provided for post-construction permanent financing. Eligible costs
include child care, after-school care and social service facilities integrally linked to the
assisted housing units; real property acquisition; refinancing to retain affordable rents;
necessary on-site and off-site improvements; reasonable fees and consulting costs;
and capitalized reserves. Eligible applicants include local government agencies, private
nonprofit organizations, and for-profit organizations.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-57

Housing Element
                               Housing Choice Voucher Program
                               The federal government provides funding and oversight, and SHRA administers the HCV
                               program at a local level. The program assists very low-income families, elderly, and the
                               disabled to afford safe and sanitary rental housing. Housing choices are also not limited
                               and participants can include single-family homes, townhomes, and apartments.
                               Other State Programs
                               Affordable Housing Partnership Program: A State program that provides lower-interest
                               rate CalHFA loans to homebuyers who receive local secondary financing.
                               Single-Family Housing Bond Program (Mortgage Revenue Bonds): Bonds that are issued
                               to local lenders and developers so that below market interest-rate loans can be issued
                               to first-time home-buyers.
                               Incentives for Affordable Housing Development
                               In addition to the affordable housing resources listed above, the City anticipates offering
                               incentives to promote the development of housing affordable to very low- and low-
                               income households. As identified under the Goals, Policies, and Actions section of this
                               Housing Element, these incentives may include:
                                   •	 Financial assistance
                                   •	 Expedited development review
                                   •	 Streamlined processing
                                   •	 Fee waivers and reductions
                                   •	 Modification of development requirements
                               Interested Entities
                               The City maintains a list of entities that have expressed interest in developing new
                               affordable housing or pre-serving current affordable housing in Elk Grove. Some of
                               the entities already operate facilities that benefit Elk Grove residents. A partial listing
                               of entities that have expressed interest in developing affordable housing in Elk Grove
                               includes the following:
                                   •	 Adobi Ventures
                                   •	 Amcal Multi-Housing
                                   •	 Capital Valley Partners, LLC
                                   •	 CFY Development, Inc.
                                   •	 Chelsea Investment Corporation
                                   •	 Conkey Development
                                   •	 Domus Development
                                   •	 Lyon Real Estate
H-58	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    •	 Mercy Housing
    •	 Meta Housing
    •	 Mutual Housing California
    •	 The Pacific Companies
    •	 Sacramento Affordable Housing Organization
    •	 Sea to Summit Investments
    •	 Seali Development
    •	 St. Anton Partners
    •	 Triple Bow Capital, Inc.
    •	 Urban Housing Communities
    •	 USA Properties
    •	 Van Horn Group
7. HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
GOVERNMENTAL AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
CONSTRAINTS
Various interrelated factors can constrain the private and public sector’s ability to
provide adequate housing and meet the housing needs for all economic segments
of the community. These factors can be divided into two categories: governmental
and non-governmental. Possible non-governmental constraints may consist of land
availability, environmental factors, vacancy rates, land cost, construction costs, and
availability of financing. Governmental constraints may include land use controls,
development standards, processing fees, development impact fees, code enforcement,
site improvement costs, development permit and approval processing, and provision for
a variety of housing types.
Non-Governmental Constraints
Land Availability
The City incorporates approximately 42.02 square miles (26,890 acres) of land area.
The City is located in the southern portion of the Sacramento metropolitan area and is
surrounded on three sides by primarily agricultural and open space land uses. The City
borders urban areas of the City of Sacramento and of the County of Sacramento to the
north.
Available Multifamily Sites
The City is currently in the process of identifying candidate sites to ensure the City
has vacant land zoned for multiple-family development. The majority of the vacant
multifamily sites are located adjacent to existing residential developments, thereby
making infrastructure available. The details for each candidate multifamily vacant site
are provided in Table 35.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                              ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-59

Housing Element
                               Environment
                               The City incorporates various environmental qualities that require protection and
                               therefore constrain residential development. The most notable environmental constraint
                               is floodplains. The City is relatively flat and does not incorporate any significant geologic
                               features like hills or ridges. Areas located near the Cosumnes River and near tributaries
                               of the Sacramento River are prone to floods. The only significant portion of the 100-year
                               flood-plain inside the City is located in the north central area of the City.
                               Another significant natural feature is the native oak trees, which contribute to the City’s
                               aesthetic identity. In addition, oak trees line a majority of the streets located in the
                               eastern portion of the City. The City requires a project to be redesigned or to mitigate
                               the loss of oak trees in prospective developments; therefore, this may be considered a
                               constraint to residential development.
                               The City’s agricultural and vacant land contain some habitat for special status species, in
                               particular the Swainson’s Hawk. Development in special species habitat areas generally
                               requires mitigation. The cost of mitigation (currently about $9,400 per acre for
                               Swainson’s Hawk habitat) may be considered a constraint to residential development.
                               Land Cost
                               The cost of raw, developable land creates a direct impact on the cost for a new home
                               and is considered a non-governmental constraint. A higher cost of land raises the price
                               of a new home. Therefore, developers sometimes seek to obtain City approvals for the
                               largest number of lots allowable on a parcel of raw land. This allows the developer
                               to distribute the costs for infrastructure improvements (e.g., streets, sewer lines, water
                               lines) over the maximum number of lots. As with housing costs, land prices declined
                               significantly during the recent recession but are beginning to increase again. In March
                               2013, the cost of land in the City varied widely depending on the lot’s location and
                               whether it had any infrastructure improvements. The size of available land ranged from
                               slightly under 2 acres to approximately 10.5 acres, and prices varied from $1.12 to $9.18
                               per square foot (approximately $49,000 to $400,000 per acre).
                               Construction Costs
                               Construction costs can vary widely depending on the type of development. Multifamily
                               residential housing generally costs less to construct than single-family housing on a
                               per-unit basis.
                               Labor and materials costs also have a direct impact on housing costs and make up the
                               main component of housing costs. Residential construction costs vary greatly depending
                               on the quality of materials used and the size of the home being constructed. If labor
                               or material costs increased substantially, the cost of construction in the City could
                               rise to a level that impacts the price of new construction and rehabilitation. Therefore,
                               increased construction costs have the potential to constrain new housing construction
                               and rehabilitation of existing housing.
                               According to an Internet source of construction cost data (www.building-cost.net)
                               provided by the Craftsman Book Company, a wood-framed single-story four-cornered
                               home is estimated to cost approximately $112 per square foot as of December 2012.
H-60	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
This cost estimate is based on a 2,200-square-foot house of good quality construction
including a two-car garage and forced heating and air conditioning. The total
construction costs are estimated at $246,227, excluding land costs and additional off-
site infrastructure improvement costs required by the City.
Availability of Financing
The cost of borrowing money to finance the construction of housing or to purchase a
house affects the amount of affordably priced housing in the City. Fluctuating interest
rates can eliminate many potential homebuyers from the housing market or render a
housing project infeasible that could have been successfully developed or marketed at
lower interest rates.
The fluctuation of the prime interest rate gives some indication of the costs of borrowing
money for housing. The prime rate is the base rate banks give to their most creditworthy
corporate customers. It is typically the lowest going interest rate and serves as a basis
for other higher risk loans. In the second half of 2006, the prime rate was 8.25%, but
began dropping shortly thereafter as a result of the economic recession. As of March
2013, it was 3.25%, unchanged since December of 2008.
Governmental Constraints
Land Use Controls
The Elk Grove General Plan establishes policies that guide new development, including
residential development. These policies, along with zoning regulations, control the
amount and distribution of land allocated for different land uses in the City. The land
use designations established by the General Plan allowing single-family and multiple-
family residential developments are provided in Table 39. A total of five residential
land use designations provide for residential densities ranging from rural (as low as 0.1
dwelling unit(du)/acre) to multifamily (up to 30 du/acre). There are also two agricultural
designations, both of which allow for single-family dwellings on properties that are at
least 20 acres in size.
Residential Development Standards
The City of Elk Grove Zoning Code is the major guide for residential development
policies. The policies establish and control the type, location, and density of residential
development in the City. The zoning regulations serve to protect and promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the community residents and also implement the goals
and policies of the General Plan. The specific residential land use zones used in the City
and the respective maximum densities are shown in Tables 39 and 40. The minimum lot
area and lot coverage requirements were removed in the latest Zoning Code update.
Housing development is constrained by the amount of available land designated for
residential uses and by the density and lot sizes permitted.
In addition to zoning and minimum lot sizes, the City further controls residential
development through development standards. Table 41 details permitted residential uses
in the City. Table 42 details the development standards that are applied to residential
development in the City.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-61
Housing Element
                               The Multifamily Overlay District (MF Overlay) supplements the allowed uses and
                               development standards of the underlying zoning district. The MF Overlay established
                               multifamily residential (three or more attached units) use as a permitted use. Detached
                               single-family units may be permitted if the project furthers the City’s affordable housing
                               goals. Multifamily development may occur independently or in conjunction with other
                               nonresidential uses permitted in the underlying zone.
                                                                                  Table 39
                                                      General Plan Residential Land Use Designations
                                                                          Commercial Land Uses
                                          Designation                                                 Notes
                                Commercial                           Generally characterized by the retail sale of goods and services;
                                                                     may include ancillary office uses. No residential uses permitted.
                                Commercial/Office                    Generally characterized by office, professional, and retail sales
                                                                     uses. No residential uses permitted.
                                Commercial/Office/Multifamily        Generally characterized by office and commercial land uses;
                                                                     may include ancillary retail sales. Also includes retail uses and/or
                                                                     residential at a maximum density of 30 units per gross acre.
                                Office                               Generally characterized by office and professional land uses; may
                                                                     include ancillary retail sales. No residential uses permitted.
                                Office/Multifamily                   Generally characterized by office and professional land uses;
                                                                     may include ancillary retail sales. Also includes retail uses and/or
                                                                     residential at a maximum density of 30 units per gross acre.
                                                                     Former GP Designation: Commercial/Office
                                Light Industry                       Generally characterized by industrial or manufacturing activities
                                                                     which occur entirely within an enclosed building.
                                Heavy Industry                       Generally characterized by industrial or manufacturing activities
                                                                     which may occur inside or outside of an enclosed building.
                                                           Public, Quasi-Public, and Open Space Land Uses
                                          Designation                                                 Notes
                                Note: These categories will typically be applied to lands after acquisition by the City or another
                                agency has occurred or after the acceptance of roadways by the City or the California Department of
                                Transportation (Caltrans), and are intended to reflect existing land uses, rather than planned facilities.
                                Public/Quasi-Public                  Includes lands owned by the City of Elk Grove, the Elk Grove
                                                                     Unified School District (with the exception of public schools),
                                                                     the Elk Grove Community Services District (with the exception of
                                                                     public parks), and other public agencies.
                                                           Public, Quasi-Public, and Open Space Land Uses
                                          Designation                                                 Notes
                                Public Parks                         Includes public parks owned by the Elk Grove Community
                                                                     Services District or other public agencies.
                                Public Open Space/Recreation         Includes lands owned by public entities which have been
                                                                     reserved for open space uses such as habitat mitigation, lakes,
                                                                     trails, golf courses, and similar uses.
                                Private Open Space/Recreation        Includes lands owned by private entities which have been
                                                                     reserved for open space uses such as habitat mitigation, lakes,
                                                                     trails, golf courses, and similar uses. Included in this category are
                                                                     commercial recreation facilities principally oriented to outdoor
                                                                     uses. Former GP Designation: Recreation and Natural Reserve
H-62	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                     Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
 Public Schools                    Includes public schools or sites (K–12) owned and operated
                                   by the Elk Grove Unified School District or other public school
                                   districts.
 Institutional                     Includes facilities such as hospitals, congregate care facilities, and
                                   the like.
 Private Streets                   Used to designate existing private streets; locations of planned
                                   private streets are not shown on the General Plan Land Use Map.
                                        Residential Land Uses
            Designations            Dwelling Units Per                          Notes
                                         Gross Acre
 Rural Residential                 0.1–0.5                  Minimum lot size: 2 to 10 acres gross.
                                                            Areas with minimum lot size greater than
                                                            10 acres are included in agricultural land
                                                            use categories.
 Estate Residential                0.6–4.0
 Low Density Residential           4.1+ –7.0
 Medium Density Residential        7.1+ –15.0
 High Density Residential          15.1+ –30.0
 Commercial/Multifamily            up to 20                 Multifamily allowed at a maximum density
                                                            of 20 units per gross acre.
 Commercial/Office/Multifamily     15.1-30                  Multifamily allowed as overlay zone at a
                                                            maximum density of 30 units per gross
                                                            acre.
 Office/Multifamily                15.1-30                  Multifamily allowed as overlay zone at a
                                                            maximum density of 30 units per gross
                                                            acre.
 Multifamily Overlay               15.1–30                  Subject to development standards of high-
                                                            density residential zones (RD-20, RD-25
                                                            and RD-30); mixed-use development is
                                                            subject to the standards of the underlying
                                                            district.
 Agriculture
 Designation                       Minimum Parcel           Notes
                                   Size (Gross Acres)
 Rural Agriculture                 10–20                    Residential uses permitted; one dwelling
                                                            unit per parcel.
 General Agriculture               20+                      Applies only to areas outside of the 2002
                                                            City limits. Residential uses permitted; one
                                                            dwelling unit per parcel.
                                          Other Designations
            Designation                                              Notes
 Urban Study Area                  Area is planned for future urban uses, subject to preparation of
                                   detailed land use, infrastructure, and financing plans (see Land
                                   Use Element text for further information).
 Transit-Oriented Development      Area is identified for potential transit-related uses, including train
 (TOD)                             stations, transit hubs, and park-and-ride facilities (see Land Use
                                   Element text for further information).
 Note: This table provides a summary of land use designations described in additional detail in the
 Land Use Element and is not intended to establish land uses. City of Elk Grove General Plan, Land Use
 Element, 2009.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-63

Housing Element
                                                                             Table 40
                                                            Residential Land Use Zones and Densities
                                                                                  Maximum
                                                                 Lot Width
                                  Zone       Minimum Area                       Density (units             Residential Types
                                                                   (feet)          per acre)
                                                                                                  Very low-density single-family and
                               AG-80             80 acres           1000          1/80 acres
                                                                                                  agricultural labor housing.
                                                                                                  Very low-density single-family and
                               AG-20             20 acres            500          1/20 acres
                                                                                                  agricultural labor housing.
                                                                                                  Rural and agricultural detached
                               AR-5/10      5/10 gross acres      250/300              1
                                                                                                  single-family residences.
                                                                                                  Rural and agricultural detached
                               AR-2           2 gross acres          150               1
                                                                                                  single-family residences.
                                                                                                  Rural and agricultural detached
                               AR-1           1 gross acres           75               1
                                                                                                  single-family residences.
                               RD-1             1 net acre            75               1          Detached single-family residences.
                               RD-2            20,000 s.f.            75               2          Detached single-family residences.
                               RD-3             10,000 s.f.           65               3          Detached single-family residences.
                                                                                                  Detached and attached single-
                               RD-4              8,500 s.f.           65               4
                                                                                                  family and two-family residences.
                                                                                                  Detached and attached single-
                               RD-5              5,200 s.f.           52               5
                                                                                                  family and two-family residences.
                                                                                                  Detached and attached single-
                               RD-6              4,000 s.f.           40               6          family and two-family residences
                                                                                                  and cluster developments.
                                                                                                  Detached and attached single-
                               RD-7           No minimum1       No minimum2            7          family and two-family residences
                                                                                                  and cluster developments.
                                                                                                  Detached and attached single-
                                                                                      7.1
                               RD-10         No minimum2        No minimum2                       family and two-family residences
                                                                               (minimum)–10
                                                                                                  and low-density multifamily.
                                                                                                  Small lot attached or detached
                                                                                                  single-family, two-family and/
                                                                                     10.1
                               RD-15         No minimum2        No minimum2                       or multifamily like townhomes,
                                                                                (minimum)–15
                                                                                                  condos, rowhouses and garden
                                                                                                  apartments.
                                                                                                  Multifamily developments and
                               RD-20
                                                                                      20          high-density attached single-
                               RD-25
                                             No minimum2             n/a              25          family homes. Apartments and
                               RD-30
                                                                                      30          condominiums are expected to be
                                                                                                  primary types in RD-30.
                               RM-1              5,200 s.f.           52             N/A          Mobile homes on individual lots.
                               1.
                                  The front yard setback may be reduced when separated sidewalks are utilized. The setback
                               reduction shall not exceed the width of the planter separating the sidewalk and the street.
                               2.
                                  Determined in the Design Review process. Source: City of Elk Grove 2013
H-64	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                    Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                                 Table 41
                                              Permitted Uses
                                      CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required                   N = Not
    P = Use Permitted                                                                        Permitted
                                       Permit by Residential Zoning District
                                                                                            Specific Use
        Land Use
                                                                                  RD-       Regulations
                           RD-1/2/3     RD-4/5/6       RD-7      RD-10/15      20/25/30
 Residential Use
 Listings
 Adult Day Care Home           P             P           P           P            CUP      Chapter 23.88
 Child Day Care
                               P             P           P           P             P
 Facility
 Dwelling, Multifamily         N             N           P           P             P
 Dwelling, Second
                               P             P           P           P             N       Chapter 23.90
 Unit
 Dwelling, Single-
                               P             P           P           P            CUP
 Family
 Dwelling, Two-Family          P             P           P           P             N
 Emergency Shelters1           N             N          CUP        CUP            CUP      Chapter 23.80
 Group Residential             N             N          CUP        CUP            CUP      Chapter 23.88
 Guest House                   P             P           P           P             N
 Home Occupations              P             P           P           P             P       Chapter 23.82
 Live-Work Facilities          N             N          CUP        CUP            CUP
 Manufactured Home             P             P           N           N             N
 Mobile home                   P             P           N           N             N
 Residential Care
                               P             P           P           P             N       Chapter 23.88
 Home (≤6)
 Residential Care
                               N             N           N           N             P
 Facilities (>6)
 Single-Room
 Occupancy (SRO)               N             N           N         CUP            CUP
 Facilities
 Supportive Housing2           P             P           P           P             P
 Transitional Housing  2
                               P             P           P           P             P       Chapter 23.80
 Source: Elk Grove Zoning Code 2012
 1
   Emergency shelters are permitted by right in the GC (General Commercial) and LI (Light Industrial)
 districts and with a CUP in RD-7 through RD-30.
 2
   Transitional and supportive housing are permitted as a residential use and only subject to those
 restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                               ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-65

Housing Element
                                                                                 Table 42
                                                                Residential Development Standards
                                                                                                                            Habitable
                                                                                          Medium
                                 Standard     Very Low Density        Low Density                         High Density      Accessory
                                                                                          Density                           Structures
                                                                                                                         Same as
                                Front Yard    20 ft.                18–22 ft.         No minimum         25 ft.          primary
                                                                                                                         structure
                                              5 ft. for interior-   5 ft. for
                                              side yards, 12.5      interior-side
                                Side Yard     ft. for street-side   yards, 12.5 ft.   No minimum         25 ft.
                                              yards (corner lots    for street-side                                      No minimum
                                              only)                 yards                                                to 5 ft. for
                                                                    15–20 ft., or                                        interior sides,
                                                                    15% of aver-                                         no minimum
                                                                    age lot depth,                                       to 12.5 ft. for
                                Rear Yard     25 ft.                to living area;   No minimum         20 ft.          street-side
                                                                    5–15 ft. to
                                                                    garage or
                                                                    secondary unit
                                Height        30 ft.                30 ft.            35 ft.             40 ft.          16 ft.
                                                                                      For single family: 2 spaces
                                                                                      per house. For multifamily: 1.5
                                                                                      spaces per unit for studio and
                                                                                      one-bedroom units, 2 spaces
                                                                                                                         1 space per
                                Parking       2 spaces per house                      per unit for two and three-
                                                                                                                         bed-room
                                                                                      bedroom units, 3 spaces per
                                                                                      unit for units with four or more
                                                                                      bedrooms; 1 guest space for
                                                                                      every four units.
                                Open
                                              n/a                   n/a               No minimum         25% of lot area n/a
                                Space
                                Elk Grove Zoning Code 2013.
                                Note: Specific Plan areas and Special Planning Areas may incorporate different development
                                standards.
                               The City’s parking requirements for residential projects vary by housing type. Table
                               42 also provides the parking requirements for residential developments. Single-family
                               residential units are required to have two off-street spaces per unit. The number of
                               parking spaces required for multiple-family residential units ranges from 1.5 off-street
                               spaces for one-bedroom or studio units to three spaces for units with four or more
                               bedrooms. An additional 0.25 parking spaces per unit are required to accommodate
                               guests in multifamily residential projects. Residential lots with a habitable accessory
                               structure must provide one off-street space for each bedroom. The Zoning Code allows
                               the required off-street parking spaces to be provided in a garage, under a carport, on
                               an open dust-free surface, or any combination of these.
                               Building setbacks, maximum height limits, and open space requirements are also
                               compulsory for all housing developments in the City. The requirements are minimal
                               but may constrain the full development of land to its maximum density. However, none
                               of these requirements are considered constraining to development, as exhibited by
                               the amount of housing development occurring in the City, and are used to ensure an
                               aesthetically pleasing project which allows for recreational uses and open space areas.
H-66	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                     Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
Specific Plan and Special Planning Areas
The City has Specific Plans and Special Planning Areas (SPA) that are each distinguished
by their location and unique development characteristics. While the Specific Plans, such
as the East Franklin and East Elk Grove Specific Plans, rely on the existing development
standards in the zoning ordinance, SPAs may establish development standards for
minimum lot area, building setbacks, lot width and depth, and building height that
differ slightly from citywide development standards. Specifically, SPAs are designed to
preserve and enhance certain resources of the City from incompatible land uses and to
preserve and protect areas with special and unique social, architectural, or environmental
characteristics that require special considerations not otherwise adequately provided
by regular zones. For example, the Elk Grove Old Town SPA residential standards require
front, back, and side yards to conform to the existing surrounding structures and allow
for a maximum height of two stories or 20 feet, whichever is less. However, in general,
the SPA intent is to allow a developer to receive relief from the development standards
and allow flexibility to the existing zoning. Developers are encouraged to cultivate a
variety of housing designs and densities for these areas, such as mixed-use commercial/
residential and carriage houses. Developers are required to maintain minimum densities
based on the established zoning for the area.
The SPAs and Specific Plans, in many cases, lessen the development standards required
of other areas in the City and allow for a variety of housing design and densities. The
SPAs and Specific Plans do not hamper housing development and, in reality, promote
housing development through the easing of these standards.
Overall, the City’s residential development standards do not constrain the development
of new housing or affordable housing. The overriding constraint to the development
of affordable housing involves high land costs, high construction costs, availability
of funding to cover the subsidy gap necessary to make affordable housing projects
achievable, and various market factors.
Design Guidelines
The City maintains design guidelines for multifamily housing units, nonresidential
development, and some single-family houses, along with a set of supplemental
guidelines in the Laguna Ridge area. These guidelines allow a variety of materials and
designs and are considered essential in keeping with the character of the City. Building
materials initially may be slightly more expensive; however, this nominal expense is
offset by the longevity and aesthetics of the more expensive building materials, and the
public availability of these guidelines helps to lessen the cost of building materials by
showing a developer what is acceptable early in the process.
These guidelines are intended to:
    •	 Encourage high-quality land planning and architecture.
    •	 Encourage development in keeping with the desired character of the City.
    •	 Ensure physical, visual, and functional compatibility between uses.
    •	 Ensure proper attention is paid to site and architectural design, thereby protecting
       land values.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-67

Housing Element
                               All new subdivisions are required to adhere to the land use Design Guidelines, which
                               include standards for streets, bikeways, open space and parks, and streetscape design.
                               Generally, new residential streets are required to comply with the City’s street standards
                               identified in Table 44, but allow for alternative designs such as sidewalks separated from
                               the street by landscaping, landscape medians, tree preservation within the right-of-way,
                               traffic circles, narrow sections/neck to slow traffic, and other approved traffic-calming
                               devices. To encourage the incorporation of separated sidewalks, minimum front and
                               street side yard setbacks may be modified. Street systems are required to be designed
                               in order to improve traffic circulation in and through the site.
                               Parks and open space should be consistent with current open space plans adopted
                               by the City. Specific locations of parks and open space are to be determined by the
                               Community Services District and City Council in conjunction with area plan or subdivision
                               map review.
                               Bikeways are required throughout the site and may be incorporated into the street
                               design or as separate bike/pedestrian pathways.
                               Streetscape design includes landscaping and lighting. The minimum width of landscape
                               corridors along arterial/thoroughfare streets is 36 feet. Except where houses front on
                               collector streets, the minimum width of landscape corridors along collector streets is 25
                               feet. Lighting is required to be on a pedestrian scale not more than 14 feet in height and
                               in character with the area.
                               Design review is required for master home plans developed for each neighborhood
                               or subdivision in the City, as well as for new multifamily developments. Design review
                               approval for master home plans and multifamily buildings is required prior to issuance
                               of building permits for model homes and all subsequent homes within the identified
                               development. Design Guidelines for home master plans and multifamily developments
                               are intended to achieve the following:
                                   •	Pedestrian-friendly streetscapes where homes are oriented to the street and to
                                      common open space areas.
                                   •	 Home designs that incorporate authentic architectural styles.
                                   •	 Variety in mass and scale of homes that is visually appealing from the street.
                                   •	 Landscape that softens the appearance of pavement and structures, and provides
                                      an eventual tree canopy along the street.
                               Design Guidelines for home master plans and multifamily developments include
                               requirements for a minimum number of floor plans depending on the number of units,
                               the placement of identical units, design techniques that minimize bulk and mass, the
                               placement of the building on the lot, unit architecture, architecture detailing/finish, roof
                               lines, the unit’s main entrance, garage placement, driveways, landscaping, and project
                               themes.
                               Design Guidelines for multifamily development do require the inclusion of at least one
                               on-site amenity, which may include a tot lot/play structure, community garden, picnic
                               tables and barbecue areas, pool, or indoor recreation facilities. The guidelines do not
                               require specific architectural types but are in place to ensure a project is cohesively
H-68	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
designed and of a standard that will be a good neighbor and good place for future
residents. These guidelines have been in place for a few years and have not impacted
the cost or feasibility of multifamily development in the City.
While the use of design guidelines may be considered a detriment to housing development
in some communities, the City’s Design Guidelines would have minimal impact and
promote sustainable housing by encouraging quality of design and pedestrian-friendly
neighborhoods.
To ensure the entitlement does not add any time constraints to a project, Design Review
is typically conducted concurrently with the various required processes including
improvement plan review, building permit application, and any requests for financial
assistance from the City. To further expedite the process, the Planning Director is
afforded the authority to approve Design Review for multifamily projects of 150 units or
less. The Planning Commission is the approving authority for multifamily projects larger
than 150 units. No specific materials or building techniques are required in the Design
Guidelines and a multitude of designs are acceptable to the City. The City encourages
neighborhood design patterns to utilize a mix of densities and lot sizes to create a
diversity of housing products. By adopting special standards that allow for flexibility
in design and an increase in density, the Design Guidelines promote the development
of housing affordable to lower-income households. The following standards have been
incorporated into the Design Guidelines to increase densities and promote affordability:
    •	 On corner lots, the minimum lot sizes and widths in the underlying zoning district
       shall apply to combined lots for duplexes and halfplexes.
    •	Minimum building setbacks in the RD-7 zoning districts have been reduced to 18
       feet for the front yard, and the rear yard setback was reduced to 10 feet for one-
       story structures and 15 feet for two-story structures.
    •	 Minimum lot sizes and widths have been eliminated in the RD-10 and RD-15 zoning
       districts allowing for greater densities and design flexibility.
Provision for a Variety of Housing Types
The Housing Element must identify adequate sites that are available to encourage the
development of various housing types for all economic segments of the population
through appropriate zoning and development standards. Housing types include single-
family residential housing, multifamily residential housing, residential accessory dwelling
units, mobile homes, duplexes and halfplexes, and residential care homes. Table 43
shows the housing types permitted in the City’s various residential zoning districts.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-69

Housing Element
                                                                            Table 43
                                                         Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District
                                            Housing Type                                            Zone
                                                             Agricultural Residential Zoning Districts
                                                                           AG-80         AG-20       AR-5/10  AR-2      AR-1
                               Single-Family Dwelling                        P             P             P      P        P
                               Mobile Home                                   P             P             P      P        P
                               Manufactured Home                             P             P             P      P        P
                               Residential Care Home                         P             P             P      P        P
                               Residential Care Facility                    CUP           CUP          CUP    CUP       CUP
                               Second Dwelling Unit                          P             P             P      P        P
                               Group Residential                            CUP           CUP            N      N        N
                                                            Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts
                                                                                  RD-1/2/3                   RD-4/5/6
                               Single-Family Dwelling                                  P                        P
                               Duplex, Halfplex1
                                                                                       P                        P
                               Apartments                                             N                         N
                               Mobile Home                                             P                        P
                               Manufactured Home                                       P                        P
                               Residential Care Home                                   P                        P
                               Residential Care Facility                              N                         N
                               Second Dwelling Unit                                    P                        P
                               Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Facilities                 N                         N
                                                            Multiple-Family Residential Zoning Districts
                                                                                RD-7                RD-10/15    RD 20/25/30
                               Single-Family Dwelling                             P                      P          CUP2
                               Duplex, Halfplex1                                  P                      P            N
                               Apartments                                         P                      P            P
                               Mobile Home                                        N                     N             N
                               Manufactured Home                                  N                     N             N
                               Residential Care Home                              P                      P            P
                               Residential Care Facility                          N                     N             P
                               Second Dwelling Unit                               P                      P            N
                               Single-Room Occupancy (SRO)
                                                                                  N                    CUP          CUP
                               Facilities
                                                             Mobile Home Residential Zoning Districts
                                                                                     RM-1                      MHP
                               Single-Family Dwelling                                  P                         P
                               Duplex, Halfplex                                        P                         P
                               Apartments                                              P                         N
                               Mobile Home                                             P                         P
                               Mobile Home Park                                        N                       CUP
                               Caretaker Housing                                       N                         P
H-70	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015
Housing Element
               Housing Type                                            Zone
                                Commercial Zones Allowing Residential
                                                     GC                    LI                  HI
 Apartment                                          CUP3                   N                    N
 Emergency Shelter                                    P                    P                    N
 Group Residential                                  CUP  3
                                                                           N                    N
 Residential Care Home                                P                    N                    N
 Residential Care Facility                          CUP                    N                    N
 Single-Room Occupancy (SRO)
                                                      P                    N                    N
 Facilities
 Transitional Housing                                 P                    P                    N
 Caretaker Housing                                   P 4
                                                                          CUP                 CUP
 Source: City of Elk Grove 2013
 P = Permitted use, CUP = Permitted use subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit, N= Not
 permitted
 1
   Duplexes and halfplexes are permitted (P) by right on corner lot but require a CUP for interior lots.
 2
   In the RD-20 zone only.
 3
   Use only allowed in conjunction with nonresidential development.
 4
   Limited to one unit in conjunction with a primary nonresidential use.
Code Enforcement
The City, in accordance with the State housing law, establishes certain minimum
requirements for residential construction. The Elk Grove Building Department has
adopted by reference and enforces the 2013 California Building Code; 2013 Residential
Code; 2013 California Plumbing Code; 2013 California Mechanical Code; 2013 California
Electrical Code; and the 2013 California Building Standards Administrative Code.
Enforcement of development and building standards does not constrain the production
or improvement of housing in the City. The presence of an active code enforcement
effort serves to maintain the condition of the City’s housing stock.
The City maintains a Code Enforcement Division, which oversees housing code
enforcement responsibility. Code enforcement works on a reactive basis with the
majority of code enforcement violations originating from renter complaints. There is
no official link between the City’s code enforcement activities and its rehabilitation
program. Instead, the City relies on periodic housing condition surveys to stay apprised
of rehabilitation needs in the City.
Site Improvements, Development Impact Fees, and Processing Fees
Costs associated with site improvements are an important component of new residential
development costs. Site improvement costs are applied to provide sanitary sewer and
water service to a project, to make necessary transportation improvements, and to
provide other infrastructure to the project. In addition, the City may require payment
for various off-site improvements as part of project mitigation measures (e.g., payment
toward an off-site traffic signal).
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                               ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-71

Housing Element
                               Developers of new residential projects are also required to construct all on-site streets,
                               sidewalks, curb, gutter, and affected portions of off-site arterials, and to meet Public
                               Works Improvement Standards. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks are also required in new
                               subdivision development. Generally, new residential streets shall comply with the City’s
                               street standards as outlined in Title 22 of the Municipal Code and as adopted in the
                               current improvement standards. A minor residential street is required to have a right-of-
                               way of 42 feet (46 feet when densities are equal or greater than 7 du/ac), a pavement
                               width of 32 feet (36 feet in the higher-density scenario), and 5-foot-wide sidewalks.
                               Minor residential streets are used when serving 99 or fewer single-family residential
                               units. Primary residential streets are required to have a 48-foot right-of-way and a
                               pavement width of 38 feet, and serve between 100 and 399 single-family and duplex
                               units. Residential collector streets, serving areas with 400 or more units, are required
                               to have a 50-foot pavement width and 5-foot-wide sidewalks separated by 6-foot-wide
                               landscape corridors. Table 44 details all road improvement standards. These standards
                               are considered necessary in order to sustain and improve the quality of life in the City.
                               However, alternative designs to improve aesthetics, pedestrian experience, or circulation
                               are encouraged with the condition that minimum pavement width for both public and
                               private streets shall be consistent with the City’s adopted residential street standards.
                               Examples of alternative designs include, but are not limited to, sidewalks separated from
                               the back of curb by a landscape planter strip, landscape medians, tree preservation
                               within the right-of-way, traffic circles, narrow sections/neck to slow traffic, and other
                               approved traffic-calming devices.
                                                                               Table 44
                                                                         Site Improvements
                                       Type                        Service             Street width   Sidewalk width    Total
                                Minor Residential     Up to 99 single-family(< 7 du/       32 ft.          5ft.         42 ft.
                                                      ac)
                                                      Up to 99 single-family (7 du/        36 ft.          5 ft.        46 ft.
                                                      ac or more)
                                Primary               100 to 399 single-family and         38 ft.          5 ft.        48 ft.
                                Residential           duplexes
                                Collector Street      400 or more residential units,   50 ft. + 6 ft.      5 ft.        61 ft.
                                                      industrial, commercial, and        corridor
                                                      multifamily
                                Collector             400 or more residential units,       56 ft.          5 ft.        62 ft.
                                Approach Street       industrial, commercial, and
                                                      multifamily
                                Arterial Street       When required by the project         72 ft.          6 ft.        84 ft.
                                                      traffic analysis
                                Thoroughfare          When required by the project         96 ft.          6 ft.       108 ft.
                                Street                traffic analysis
                                Special               When shown on the City of Elk        118 ft.         6 ft.       130 ft.
                                Thoroughfare          Grove General Plan
                                Street
                                Source: City of Elk Grove Improvement Standards, Public Works Department, October 2007
                               The cost for site improvements varies with each project. Therefore, it is difficult to
                               estimate what a “typical” per-unit cost would be for site improvements. Even for infill
                               projects where infrastructure may already be available, there is often a need to upgrade
                               and/or expand the existing improvements to serve new residential development.
H-72	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                      Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
The City collects fees from new development projects to cover the costs of planning
review and processing permits, which includes plan checks and inspection fees. Further
discussion of the development permit and approval processing is provided below.
A variety of development impact fees are often assessed on new residential projects
that include City-controlled fees (such as development application fees and building
permit fees) and non-City-controlled fees (such as school impact fees and utility
connection fees). Another component of project costs involves utility service connection
fees (e.g., sewer and water connection fees). There are six citywide development
impact fee programs collected and/or administered by the City. Those programs are:
capital facilities fee to fund the Civic Center, police facilities, Corporation Yard, library
facilities, and transit; affordable housing fees; roadway fees; fire fees; and Measure A
Transportation Mitigation Fees to fund regional transportation facilities, which the City
collects on behalf of the Sacramento Transportation Authority.
The various planning review and processing fees, development impact fees, and utility
service connection fees collectively can add significant costs to housing. The City
has adopted citywide impact fees for all developments including single-family and
multifamily units. Table 45 lists the application and environmental fees for development
review in effect as of October 2013; the fees may change at any time based on Council
action. The fee tables (Tables 45-47) may not be updated in this document as timely as
they are updated by resolution. Therefore, to obtain the most recent City fee information,
please view the Fee Booklet on the City website (http://www.elkgrovecity.org/finance/
pdfs/fee-booklet.pdf). The amount of the fee charged is sometimes a flat rate, but may
also be a deposit to be used toward the time and materials or task order required to
process it, which is indicated by footnote reference in the table. Table 46 illustrates the
cost for a typical single-family unit to be constructed due to City impact fees, and Table
47 shows the same costs for a typical multifamily unit.
                                              Table 45
                                  Entitlement Processing Fees
                                                                      Approving
                            Application Type                                         Fee
                                                                        Body
                                               Appeals
 Appeal of Planning Director Decision to Planning Commission             PC        $3,0001
 Appeal of Planning Commission Decision to City Council                  CC        $5,0001
                                        Permits and Variances
                                                                         PC        $8,8001
 Conditional Use Permit
                                                                         CC        $10,0001
                                                                         PC        $1,0002
 Conditional Use Permit Amendments
                                                                         CC        $1,0002
                                                                         PD         $3,300
 Minor Deviation
                                                                         PC        $4,000
                                                                         PC        $6,0001
 Variance
                                                                         CC        $6,0001
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-73
Housing Element
                                                                                                                 Approving
                                                             Application Type                                                       Fee
                                                                                                                   Body
                                                                      Design and Site Plan Review
                                                                                                                     PD          $1,0002
                               Design/Site Plan Review Amendment                                                     PC          $1,0002
                                                                                                                     CC          $1,0002
                               City Council Review                                                                   CC          $13,000
                               Planning Commission Review                                                            PC          $12,0001
                               Planning Director Review                                                              PD           $3,1001
                               Development Agreement                                                                 CC          $10,500
                               Development Agreement Amendment                                                       CC           $5,250
                                                                                  Zoning
                               Zoning Amendment                                                                      CC          $1,0002
                               Plans and Plan Amendments
                               General Plan Amendment                                                                CC          $1,0002
                               Specific Plan/Specific Planning Area Amendment (residential only)                    N/A          $1,0002
                               Specific Plan/Specific Planning Area Initiation (commercial only)                    N/A         $10,0001
                                                                                                                     PD           $3,300
                               Minor Deviation
                                                                                                                     PC          $4,000
                                                                          Maps and Boundaries
                               Annexation Request                                                                    CC          $18,800
                               Boundary Line Adjustment                                                              PD           $2,800
                               Lot Merger/Certificate of Compliance                                                 N/A            $500
                               Tentative Parcel Map (residential)                                                   N/A          $8,8001
                               Tentative Parcel Map (commercial)                                                    N/A          $12,3001
                               Tentative Parcel Map Amendment                                                       N/A          $1,0002
                               Tentative Parcel Map Extension                                                       N/A           $1,500
                               Tentative Parcel Map Waiver for Condos                                                PC           $4,850
                               Tentative Subdivision Map (<25 lots)                                                 N/A          $10,5001
                               Tentative Subdivision Map (25–99 lots)                                               N/A          $12,5001
                               Tentative Subdivision Map (100–200 lots)                                             N/A          $14,5001
                               Tentative Subdivision Map (>200 lots)                                                N/A          $18,0001
                               Tentative Subdivision Map Amendment                                                   PC          $1,0002
                                                                                                                     PC           $1,500
                               Tentative Subdivision Map Extension
                                                                                                                     CC           $1,500
                                                                              Other Actions
                               CEQA Review                                                                          N/A           Varies
                               Combined Entitlements                                                                N/A           Varies
                               Development Agreement                                                                 CC          $5,2501
                               Development Agreement Amendment                                                       CC          $1,0001
                               Williamson Act                                                                        CC          $2,0001
                               Source: City of Elk Grove Fee Schedule. All fees are subject to change without revision to the Housing
                               Element. Fees may be revised pursuant to resolution and are effective immediately. Therefore, you
                               may not rely on this table for the current fees. To obtain the most recent City fees, please view the Fee
                               Booklet on the City’s website at http://www.elkgrovecity.org/finance/pdfs/fee-booklet.pdf.
                               Note: CC - City Council, PC - Planning Commission, PD - Planning Director, HPC – Historic Preservation
                               Committee
                               1
                                 Amount noted is a deposit. Applicant will be billed time and materials for staffing and expenses
                               required to process request.
                               2
                                 Amount noted is a deposit. A task order with a consultant will be executed in order to process the
                               request.
H-74	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                     Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
                                                 Table 46
         Estimate of Development Impact and Other Fees for Single-Family Home,
                                             December 2012
                              Fee Program                               Fees Due Per Single-Family Unit
                                                                             Lowest            Highest
 Development Impact Fees1
 City Administered Fees
 Capital Facilities Fee Program                                              $2,432
 Affordable Housing Fee Program2                                             $2,884
 Elk Grove Roadway Fee Program                                               $3,120             $5,992
 Various Plan Area Park Fees                                                   $0              $13,091
 East Franklin Fees (excludes park fee)                                        $0               $1,703
 East Franklin Reclaimed Water                                                 $0                $402
 Technology Fee (due at permit to the City)                                    $86                $86
 General Plan Update Fee(due at permit to the City)                            $49                $49
 Total City Administered Fees                                                $8,571            $26,639
 Elk Grove Fire Fee Program                                                  $1,587              $1,731
 Zone 40 Water Fee Program                                                   $13,166
 Zone 11A Drainage Fee Program                                               $2,560             $2,907
 CSD-1 Sewer (4” line and tap)                                               $2,539             $3,039
 SRCSD (regional sewer treatment)                                            $2,800             $7,450
 School ($4.66/s.f./2,200 s.f.)                                             $10,252
 Sacramento County Transportation Mitigation Fee                             $1,093
 Subtotal Development Impact Fees                                           $42,568            $66,277
 Other Fees (due at Permit to the City)
 Building Permit                                                             Varies
 Plan Check                                                                  Varies
 Zoning Check (5% of plan check fees)                                        Varies
 Subtotal in Other Fees to City                                               $1353              $1353
 Total Fees                                                                 $42,703            $66,412
 Source:
 City of Elk Grove Fee Schedule. All fees are subject to change without revision to the Housing
 Element. Fees may be revised pursuant to resolution and are effective immediately. Therefore, you
 may not rely on this table for the current fees. To obtain the most recent City fees, please view the Fee
 Booklet on the City’s website at http://www.elkgrovecity.org/finance/pdfs/fee-booklet.pdf.
 Note: Excludes plan check/permit fees from other agencies, environmental fees, and City processing/
 application fees. Fees assume RD-5, 2,200-square-foot house with 450-square-foot garage and
 construction valuation of $246,227.
 1
   The development impact fees are charged by the City and other agencies.
 2
   This fee is waived for affordable housing projects. The fee noted is as of early 2013.
 3
   Not including variable fees.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-75

Housing Element
                                                                                 Table 47
                               Estimate of Development Impact and Other Fees for Multifamily Unit, December 2012
                                Fee Program or Fee Component                                                   Lowest           Highest
                                Development Impact Fees1
                                City Administered Fees
                                Capital Facilities Fee Program                                                           $1,715
                                Affordable Housing Fee Program      2
                                                                                                                        $2,264
                                Elk Grove Roadway Fee Program                                                  $2,183            $5,992
                                Various Plan Area Park Fees                                                       $0             $8,728
                                East Franklin Fees (excludes park fee)                                            $0              $884
                                East Franklin Reclaimed Water                                                     $0              $223
                                Technology Fee (due at permit to the City)                                       $43               $43
                                General Plan Update Fee (due at permit to the City)                              $25               $25
                                Total City Administered Fees                                                   $6,230           $19,874
                                Elk Grove Fire Fee Program                                                     $1,098            $1,139
                                Zone 40 Water Fee Program                                                      $13,166
                                Zone 11A Drainage Fee Program                                                  $1,200
                                CSD-1 Sewer (4” line and tap)                                                   $539
                                SRCSD (regional sewer treatment)                                               $2,100            $5,588
                                School ($4.66/s.f.)                                                            $8,444
                                Sacramento County Transportation Mitigation Fee                                 $765
                                Subtotal Development Impact Fees                                              $33,542           $50,715
                                Other Fees (due at Permit to the City)
                                Building Permit                                                                Varies
                                Plan Check                                                                     Varies
                                Zoning Check (5% of plan check fees)                                           Varies
                                Subtotal in Other Fees to City                                                   $681             $681
                                Total Burden per Unit                                                         $33,610           $50,783
                                Source: City of Elk Grove Fee Schedule. All fees are subject to change without revision to the Housing
                                Element. Fees may be revised pursuant to resolution and are effective immediately. Therefore, you
                                may not rely on this table for the current fees. To obtain the most recent City fees, please view the
                                Fee Booklet on the City’s website at http://www.elkgrovecity.org/finance/pdfs/fee-booklet.pdf.
                                Note: Excludes plan check/permit fees from other agencies, environmental fees. Assumes 60 units,
                                3 units per building, 14.4 units per acre, 5,436 square feet per building and 4,270 square feet of living
                                area per building; .21 net acres per building, and $319,608 in per building valuation.
                                1
                                  Not including variable fees.
                                2
                                  This fee is waived for affordable housing projects. The fee noted is as of early 2013.
                               An affordable housing nexus study completed in 2012 indicated that Elk Grove’s impact
                               fees are in line with other jurisdictions in the region. At the time, Elk Grove’s fees were
                               about $19,600 for single-family homes and $12,000 for multifamily units. Of the five
                               comparable jurisdictions studied, fees for single-family homes ranged from $12,000
                               in Sacramento (not including the cost of building inclusionary units) to $28,000 in
                               Sacramento County. Similar variation existed for multifamily units, but in both cases, the
                               City’s impact fees were in the middle of the group of jurisdictions reviewed. Variations
H-76	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                       Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
in fees due at the time of building reflect, in part, differing strategies to financing public
improvements and maintenance obligations—while some jurisdictions charge fees
upfront, others charge fees in the form of long-term assessments against new homes.
The City offers some programs to assist developers of affordable housing with fees. The
City’s affordable housing impact fee does not apply to deed-restricted affordable units,
currently saving developers $1,700 to $2,900 per unit. Most of the City’s impact fees
for new development are lower for multifamily units and age-restricted properties. The
Sacramento County Regional Sanitation District also waives or defers fees for affordable
housing.
The City also has a fee deferral program that allows certain impact fees to be deferred
up to the close of escrow (24 month maximum) for single-family homes and until the
close of permanent financing for affordable multifamily projects. The City’s Affordable
Housing Fund loans often end up being used toward the payment of permit and impact
fees, whether or not those fees are deferred.
Development Permit and Approval Process
The development review and permitting process is utilized to receive, evaluate, and
approve new development applications. The development review and permitting process
ensures that new residential projects reflect the goals and policies of the General Plan
and meet the intent and requirements of the Zoning Code.
Applications for development permits are made in writing to the Development Services
Department. Applications vary depending on the permit being requested. In addition,
some projects require public hearings. Development permit approval processing in the
City does not create any unnecessary delays or increases to the cost of housing because
applications are processed as expeditiously as possible depending on the complexity of
the project and timeframes that are instituted by law.
There are different steps in the approval process a housing development must go
through depending on the type and conditions of the development. Small single-family
developments which do not require a zone change only need building permits. Single-
family subdivisions and master home plans are required to conform to the Design
Guidelines and are subject to staff review and either City Planning Director approval
or Planning Commission approval depending on the type of project. Multifamily
developments that are 150 units or fewer require staff review and are subject to
development plan review by the Planning Director. Multifamily developments of more
than 150 units require both staff and Planning Commission review. Specific Plans,
rezones, subdivisions, and variances require staff, Planning Commission, and City Council
review. Multifamily development in commercial and business zones requires the same
procedures as in a residential zone.
Emergency and transitional shelters are permitted by right in the General Commercial
and Light Industrial zones and are subject to the stipulations under Title III, Chapter 20,
Article 4 of the Zoning Ordinance. Emergency shelters do not require a use permit if they
adhere to the development standards or special processing procedures. Title III, Chapter
20, Article 4 requires basic development standards such as providing a telephone for
use by clients, onsite personnel during hours of operation, providing adequate lighting,
a maximum number of beds, and locating near transit corridor, etc.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-77

Housing Element
                               Project application review is completed within 30 days of accepting an application.
                               Determination of approval is usually based on consistency with the General Plan,
                               character of adjacent land uses, adequate size and shape of lots, zoning compliance, and
                               conformance with design standards. Many other components can also factor into the
                               determination of approval, such as public interest that may require additional outreach.
                               An approved development plan is in effect for three years.
                               Various development review activities, such as general plan amendments, rezones,
                               and specific plans, require the preparation of an environmental document (e.g.,
                               environmental impact report or negative declaration) before a project can be approved.
                               The requirement to prepare an environmental document can substantially lengthen
                               the development review process, sometimes taking up to one year to obtain project
                               approval. However, the cost associated with preparing an environmental document
                               is not considered to disproportionately affect constraints on residential development
                               in the City. The costs associated with development project review will vary between
                               projects. The City utilizes an efficient and comprehensive approach toward development
                               review and permitting that allows for quick response to applicants. The City utilizes
                               many practices to expedite application processing, reduce costs, and clarify the process
                               to developers and homeowners. Increased development costs resulting from delays in
                               the City’s development review and permitting process are not considered a constraint
                               on housing development.
                                                                               Table 48
                                                        Typical Processing Procedures by Project Type
                                                                                       Single-Family Unit
                                                       Single-Family Subdivision                                      Multifamily
                                                                                         (no subdivision)
                                                       Tentative Subdivision Map        Design Review for        Design Review (2–6
                                                             (6–12 months)            homes (1–2 months)               months)
                                                                                        Master Home Plan
                                                        Improvement Plans (2–3                                   Building Permit (4–6
                                                                                      Building Permit (2–4
                                                                months)                                                 weeks)
                                                                                              weeks)
                                List of Typical
                                Approval                 Final Map (1–2 months)      Batch permit (10 days)
                                Requirements         Design Review for homes (1–2
                                                                months)
                                                      Master Home Plan Building
                                                           Permit (2–4 weeks)
                                                         Batch permit (10 days)
                                                         20 months (excluding
                                 Estimated Total                                                                7–8 months (excludes
                                                      improvement construction              3 months
                                Processing Time                                                                   plan preparation)
                                                         and plan preparation)
                                Source: City of Elk Grove 2013
                                * Actual development processing time shall vary based on multiple factors, including environmental
                                review, applicant responsiveness, public outreach, and a multitude of other factors based on each
                                project’s specific needs.
H-78	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                      Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
8. OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION
Energy-related costs could directly impact the affordability of housing in the City,
particularly with California in the midst of an energy crisis. Title 24 of the California
Administrative Code sets forth mandatory energy standards for new development and
requires the adoption of an “energy budget.” Subsequently, the housing industry must
meet these standards and the City is responsible for enforcing the energy conservation
regulations. Alternatives that are available to the housing industry to meet the energy
standards include:
    •	 A passive solar approach that requires suitable solar orientation, appropriate levels
       of thermal mass, south-facing windows, and moderate insulation levels.
    •	Higher levels of insulation than what was previously required, but not requiring
       thermal mass or window-orientation requirements.
    •	 Active solar water heating in exchange for less stringent insulation and/or glazing
       requirements.
The utility companies serving the City, including Sacramento Municipal Utility District
(SMUD) and Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), offer various programs to
promote the efficient use of energy and assist lower- income customers.
SMUD provides electricity to the Sacramento metropolitan area. SMUD has a free
shade tree program where homes with eastern, western, or southern exposure that
heat up during the day can receive free trees from SMUD. In addition, SMUD provides
rebates and financing assistance for the replacement and installation of energy-
efficient equipment and materials. Examples of these rebates and financing assistance
include energy-efficient appliance buy-downs and financing, aeroseal duct sealing,
duct improvements, compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs), ceiling fans with CFLs, central
air conditioning replacement, clothes washers, roof replacements, dishwashers, heat
pumps, pools and spas, refrigerators, residential and commercial photovoltaic systems,
room air conditioners, and solar water heaters. The installation of central air conditioning,
Energy Star sun-reflecting coating, insulation, or a solar water heater is also potentially
eligible for a rebate. In an effort to promote the use of renewable energy sources, SMUD
customers are now able to have their homes powered by renewable energy sources for
a small fee with the SMUD Greenergy Program.
PG&E provides natural gas to consumers in the City as well as a variety of energy
conservation services for residents. In addition, PG&E offers energy assistance programs
for special needs and lower-income households to help households conserve energy and
control utility costs. These programs include the California Alternate Rates for Energy
(CARE), the Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH), Family
Electric Rate Assistance (FERA), and the Energy Partners Program.
The CARE program provides a 20 percent monthly discount on gas and electric rates
to households with qualified incomes, certain nonprofit organizations, homeless
shelters, hospices, and other qualified nonprofit group living facilities. CARE offers
assistance to single-family households, submetered tenants, agricultural, and migrant
farmworker housing.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-79

Housing Element
                               The REACH program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who have
                               no other way to pay their energy bill. The intent of REACH is to assist low-income
                               households, particularly the elderly, disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed,
                               that experience hardships and are unable to pay for their necessary energy needs.
                               Individuals who experience an uncontrollable or unforeseen hardship can receive credits
                               to pay their energy bills.
                               The FERA program provides utility assistance to households with three or more members
                               that are low- or middle-income. This program allows these households to be billed at
                               Tier 2 rates for Tier 3 power usage.
                               The Energy Partners Program provides free weatherization measures and energy-
                               efficient appliances to low-income households.
                               In addition, the California Department of Community Services and Development funds the
                               Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP). HEAP provides financial assistance to eligible
                               low-income persons to offset the costs of heating and/or cooling their housing unit.
                               9. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
                               State law requires that “the general plan and elements and parts thereof comprise an
                               integrated, internally consistent, and compatible statement of policies.” The purpose of
                               requiring internal consistency is to avoid policy conflict and provide a clear policy guide
                               for the future maintenance, improvement, and development of housing within the City.
                               This Housing Element was originally prepared as part of the City’s first comprehensive
                               General Plan in 2003. The City performed a comprehensive update of its Zoning Code
                               (Title 23) to ensure consistency with the General Plan. This Housing Element update
                               was developed with close consideration of these updates as well as other General Plan
                               elements. City staff will monitor consistency with other General Plan elements as the
                               programs contained in the Housing Elements are implemented.
                               In addition, per Assembly Bill 162 (Government Code Section 65302), the City will evaluate
                               and amend as appropriate the Safety and Conservation Elements of the General Plan to
                               include analysis and policies regarding flood hazard and management information.
                               10. REVIEW OF PREVIOUS ELEMENT
                               HOUSING ELEMENT ACTION ITEM IMPLEMENTATION
                               In order to develop an effective housing plan for the 2013–2021 period, the City must
                               assess the effectiveness of its existing housing programs and determine the continued
                               appropriateness of such programs in addressing housing adequacy, affordability, and
                               availability issues.
                               This section evaluates the accomplishments of each program against the objectives
                               established in the 2008–2013 Housing Element, explains any discrepancy in program
                               achievements, and recommends programmatic changes to the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
H-80	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
The City has diligently implemented the actions identified in its Housing Element. The
status of each action item and the effectiveness of implementing that item are discussed
in Table 49.
                                                                        Table 49
                                                          Review of 2008 Housing Element
     Action                                    Implementation                                    Result/Effectiveness     Continue/Modify /Delete
 Housing Goal 1: Provide adequate sites, including land suitable for multifamily rental housing, manufactured housing, mobile homes, housing
 for agricultural employees, emergency shelters, and transitional housing, to accommodate the City’s share of regional housing needs through
 appropriate zoning and development standards.
 H1 Action 1      To ensure adequate sites are available     Time Frame: Development      Planning staff completed a     Continue, but update
                  throughout the planning period to          of evaluation procedure      comprehensive review of the    language to reflect review
                  meet the City’s RHNA, the City will        for mixed use zones to       land inventory in 2010, 2011,  practices.
                  continue to annually update, as legally    implement Government         and 2012 to ensure there
                  required, an inventory that details        Code section 65863 by        were adequate sites to meet
                  the amount, type, and size of vacant       July 1, 2009                 the City’s RHNA. The City
                  and underutilized parcels to assist        Responsibility:              continued to have adequate
                  developers in identifying land suitable    Development Services         sites throughout the planning
                  for residential development and that                                    period.
                  also details the number of extremely       Funding Source: City
                  low, very low, low, and moderate           Development Services
                  income units constructed annually. If      Fund
                  the inventory indicates a shortage of
                  available sites, the City shall rezone
                  sufficient sites to accommodate the
                  City’s RHNA. The City has identified
                  residential capacity within the mixed
                  use zone to accommodate 2,868 units
                  of the City’s RHNA for lower income
                  households. To ensure sufficient
                  residential capacity is maintained
                  within this zone to accommodate the
                  identified need, the City will develop
                  and implement a formal ongoing
                  (project by project) evaluation
                  procedure pursuant to Government
                  Code Section 56863. Should an
                  approval of commercial development
                  result in a reduction of capacity within
                  mixed use zones below the residential
                  capacity needed to accommodate
                  the remaining need for lower income
                  households, the City will identify and
                  zone sufficient site to accommodate
                  the shortfall on land zones exclusively
                  zoned exclusively for multifamily use at
                  a minimum density of 20 du/acre.
 H1 Action 2      Consider amending the Zoning Code          Time Frame: Annually         The City completed an annual   Delete. The City may
                  to include an RD40 zone to assist in       Responsibility:              review to ensure the City was  pursue this program
                  meeting the regional housing needs.        Development Services         meeting the RHNA during this   in the future as a
                  As the City annually updates its vacant    Funding Source: City         planning period and did not    transit oriented design
                  land inventory the City will evaluate the  Development Services         amend the Zoning Code to       strategy. At this point
                  need for an RD40 zone and/or identify      Fund                         create an RD40 zone.           in time, feedback from
                  an additional methodology to meet the                                                                  developers indicates that
                  RHNA shortfall.                                                                                        this zoning is difficult to
                                                                                                                         achieve without excess
                                                                                                                         construction costs.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	             H-81

Housing Element
    Action                                 Implementation                                   Result/Effectiveness        Continue/Modify /Delete
 H1 Action 3  Projects shall continue to consider the    Time Frame: The City will   The 2003 General Plan             Modify. This program
              City’s housing needs and designate         review its housing needs    identified a number of planning   will be revised to include
              residential sites at densities consistent  as projects are received by areas that require master         future land opportunities
              with the City’s identified housing         Development Services.       planning prior to subsequent      within the SEPA (aka
              needs through a Specific Plan,             Responsibility:             entitlements. All but one of      Meridian).
              rezoning, Special Planning Area, and/or    Development Services        these areas have been master
              annexation prezoning.                                                  planned. The remaining area,
                                                         Funding Source: City        the Southeast Policy Area
                                                         Development Services        (SEPA), covers 1,200 acres and
                                                         Fund                        is at the southern end of the
                                                                                     City between Kammerer Road
                                                                                     and Bilby/Poppy Ridge Road.
                                                                                     In July 2012, the City Council
                                                                                     authorized the preparation of
                                                                                     a master plan for the area as
                                                                                     a City project. A portion of
                                                                                     the 2013–2021 RHNA will be
                                                                                     targeted for the SEPA (aka
                                                                                     Meridian) as part of that effort.
                                                                                     Adoption of the master plan is
                                                                                     targeted for spring 2014.
 H1 Action 4: Continue to exempt high density            Time Frame: Ongoing         The City exempted two             Delete. As of October
              projects from the infrastructure           Responsibility:             affordable housing projects, the  2010, the City no
              requirements that are typically required   Development Services        Ridge Apartments and Seasons      longer requires
              in phasing plans for larger residential                                Apartments.                       upfront infrastructure
              development projects. This approach        Funding Source: City                                          construction for the
              results in less up front costs for high    Development Services                                          entire phase. This is now
              density developments because the           Fund                                                          a phased infrastructure
              infrastructure requirements are based                                                                    approach.
              on the needs of the individual high
              density project instead of the entire
              planned development.
 H1 Action 5  Continue to encourage the                  Time Frame: Ongoing         Within the City, the Vintage      Delete. The City no
              development of affordable multifamily      Responsibility:             at Laguna II affordable           longer plans to rely
              projects in the newly created              Development Services        housing project (69 units) was    significantly on the
              multifamily overlay (MF) zoning                                        developed in the MF overlay       multifamily overlay zone
              designation, which allows multifamily      Funding Source: City        zone. The City provided           in order to meet its
              uses of 15.1 to 30 units per acre on       Development Services        assistance in the form of a       RHNA.
              sites that are identified for other uses,  Fund                        $5.6 million loan in 2011 and
              including commercial and office uses.                                  construction was completed in
              In order to facilitate development of                                  September 2012.
              housing affordable to lower income                                     The City provides this
              housing within the overlay, the City will                              information as requested.
              prioritize assistance from Programs
              H4 Action 1, H4 Action 2, H6 Action
              1, H6 Action 2, and H6 Action 5 to
              housing within the mixed use zones.
              In addition, the City will provide
              information about available parcels
              on its website to encourage the use of
              these sites.
 H1 Action 6  Continue to permit transitional housing    Time Frame: Ongoing         The City continued to permit      Delete. This program has
              and emergency shelters as a permitted      Responsibility:             transitional housing and          been completed.
              use in the GC and M1 zoning districts in   Development Services        emergency shelters in the
              the Elk Grove Zoning Code.                                             GC and M1 zoning districts.
                                                         Funding Source: City        No transitional housing or
                                                         Development Services        emergency shelter facilities
                                                         Fund                        were opened in these zones
                                                                                     during the planning period.
H-82	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                             Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    Action                                Implementation                           Result/Effectiveness         Continue/Modify /Delete
 H1 Action 7  Continue to allow emergency shelters      Time Frame: Ongoing  The City continued to allow       Delete. This program has
              and transitional housing with a           Responsibility:      emergency shelters and            been completed.
              conditional use permit in the RD7         Development Services transitional housing with a
              through 30 zones.                                              conditional use permit in the
                                                        Funding Source: City RD7 through 30 zones. There
                                                        Development Services were no transitional housing
                                                        Fund                 or emergency shelter facilities
                                                                             opened in these zones during
                                                                             the planning period. In 2012,
                                                                             the City did purchase a
                                                                             property within an RD5 zone
                                                                             to use as a small transitional
                                                                             house (five homeless plus one
                                                                             onsite manager).
 H1 Action 8  Continue to permit housing for            Time Frame: Ongoing  No interested developers          Delete. Farmworker
              agricultural employees as a permitted     Responsibility:      or persons have requested         housing is permitted in
              use in agricultural zones and housing     Development Services approval of farmworker            the City’s agricultural
              serving six or fewer employees as a                            housing.                          zone.
              permitted use in all residential zones,   Funding Source: City
              in accordance with Health and Safety      Development Services
              Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6.        Fund
 H1 Action 9  Continue to provide for the               Time Frame: Ongoing  No interested developers          Delete. Mobile homes are
              development of mobile home parks by       Responsibility:      or persons have requested         permitted through the
              retaining the Mobile home Park zoning     Development Services approval of mobile home parks.    zoning code.
              district in the Elk Grove Zoning Code.
                                                        Funding Source: City
                                                        Development Services
                                                        Fund
 H1 Action 10 Continue to allow the placement of        Time Frame: Annually No interested developers          Delete. Manufactured
              manufactured housing on single-family     Responsibility:      or persons have requested         homes are allowed on
              lots in residential zones.                Development Services approval of placement of          single family lots per the
                                                                             manufactured housing on           City’s zoning code.
                                                        Funding Source: City single family lots in residential
                                                        Development Services zones.
                                                        Fund
 H1 Action 11 Continue to require new development       Time Frame: Ongoing  The City continues to require     Delete. This is
              to be consistent with the development     Responsibility:      new development be consistent implemented through the
              standards described in the City’s         Development Services with the development              Public Works Department.
              National Pollutant Discharge                                   standards described in the
              Elimination System (NPDES) permit         Funding Source: City City’s National Pollutant
              as described in the Conservation and      Development Services Discharge Elimination System
              Safety Elements of the General Plan.      Fund                 (NPDES) permit.
 H2 Action 1  Continue to provide the opportunities     Time Frame: Ongoing  The City continues to provide     Delete. Density bonuses
              for encourage the utilization of          Responsibility:      density bonus consistent with     are promoted through the
              the City’s density bonus and the          Development Services State law.                        Planning Department and
              construction of higher density                                                                   requirements are called
              residential projects by notifying         Funding Source: City                                   out in the Zoning Code.
              developers of the City’s new lot size     Development Services
              standards adopted in 2006.                Fund
 H2 Action 2  Continue to allow corner duplexes in      Time Frame: Ongoing  No interested developers          Continue.
              single family residential developments    Responsibility:      or persons have requested
              without a use permit.                     Development Services approval of corner duplexes
                                                                             in single family residential
                                                        Funding Source: City developments.
                                                        Development Services
                                                        Fund
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	              H-83

Housing Element
    Action                                  Implementation                                 Result/Effectiveness          Continue/Modify /Delete
 H3 Action 1   Continue to encourage multifamily          Time Frame: Ongoing        The City and the Affordable        Modify. This program will
               opportunities on sites meeting the         Responsibility:            Housing Loan Committee             be modified to address
               following criteria: (a) proximity          Development Services       continue to encourage              the role of reviewers in
               to public transit or bus service;                                     multifamily housing on sites       the affordable housing
               (b) proximity to commercial and            Funding Source: City       meeting these criteria by          project approval process.
               social services; (c) parcel size and       Development Services       evaluating them as a part of       It will be combined with
               configuration which enhances the           Fund                       considering funding requests.      H3 Action 2.
               feasibility of development; (d)
               lack of physical constraints (noise,
               wetlands); (e) provision for a variety of
               housing types and affordable housing
               opportunities; (f) generally be no
               smaller than eight (8) acres and no
               larger than fifteen (15) acres unless
               a development request for rezone
               has been submitted that reasonably
               identifies that a smaller parcel will
               serve a special needs group or meet
               an affordable housing need and that
               the size of the parcel is appropriate to
               meet the housing need. This guideline
               will not serve as the primary basis of
               denial of a multifamily project and
               (g) other criteria deemed appropriate
               including integration of multifamily
               units within the larger adjacent
               neighborhood. Although not required,
               these criteria should be considered
               in the review of applications and
               proposals and for long-term general
               planning purposes for the siting of
               multifamily opportunity sites and will
               not be used to limit or constrain the
               development of multifamily projects.
               Note: Policy LU6 in the Land Use
               Element includes criteria to be followed
               in determining multifamily sites.
               Applicant initiated requests for rezone
               are subject to the City’s Zoning Code
               and can be requested at any time.
 H3 Action 2   Support high density residential           Time Frame: Ongoing        Both of the City’s recently built  Modify. This action will
               development along transit (e.g.,           Responsibility:            affordable housing projects,       be combined with H3
               light rail) corridors that provide         Development Services       Ridge Apartments and Vintage       Action 1.
               regular service by placing high                                       at Laguna II, are close to transit
               density residential or mixed use sites     Funding Source: City       and transit connections.
               near transit opportunities, where          Development Services
               appropriate and feasible, when             Fund
               developing a new Specific Plan or
               Special Planning Area.
 Housing Goal 2: Assist in the development and provision of adequate housing stock to meet the needs of extremely low, very low, low, and
 moderate income households and special needs groups.
H-84	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                             Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    Action                                 Implementation                                Result/Effectiveness         Continue/Modify /Delete
 H4 Action 1  Continue to focus efforts for the          Time Frame: Ongoing       The City processed two            Modify.
              provision of affordable housing by         Responsibility:           affordable multifamily projects
              maintaining the City’s commitment to       Development Services      (a total of 271 affordable units)
              processing development projects as                                   during the planning period.
              efficiently as possible and by giving      Funding Source: City
              preference in the allocation of City       Development Services
              resources (including funding and           Fund, Building and
              staff time) first to multifamily housing   Planning Fees
              affordable to extremely low , very low,
              and low income households, then to
              zero lot line, or reduced setback, single
              family housing, corner duplexes, and
              second dwelling units affordable to
              very low and low income households.
 H4 Action 2  Continue to support affordable housing Time Frame: Ongoing           The City committed $15.3          Continue.
              development through direct financial       Responsibility:           million to two affordable
              assistance and regulatory incentives.      Development Services      multifamily projects in 2011.
                                                                                   Funds used were the City’s
                                                         Funding Source: City      Affordable Housing Fund and
                                                         Development Services      the Very Low Income Housing
                                                         Fund, CDBG Program        Trust Fund.
                                                         Funds (when available),
                                                         Affordable Housing Trust
                                                         Fund, Very Low Income
                                                         Housing Trust Fund
 H5 Action 1  Continue to encourage affordable           Time Frame: Ongoing       Vintage at Laguna I, built in     Delete. The efforts of this
              housing and mixed use development          Responsibility:           2003, used the City’s density     program are addressed in
              by offering a density bonus of up to 35    Development Services      bonus program. No other           H2 Action 1.
              percent for single family uses and/or                                eligible projects have requested
              multifamily uses to developments that      Funding Source: City      a density bonus.
              provide more than the required number      Development Services
              of affordable units.                       Fund
 H6 Action 1  Continue to assign Very Low Income         Time Frame: Ongoing       The City committed $15.3          Continue.
              Housing Trust Funds, Affordable            Responsibility:           million to two affordable
              Housing Trust Funds, and pursue            Development Services      multifamily projects in 2011.
              CDBG/HOME funds and other                                            Funds used were the City’s
              affordable housing subsidies for           Funding Source: Very Low  Affordable Housing Fund and
              housing projects affordable to very low    Income Housing Trust      the Very Low Income Housing
              and low income households.                 Fund, Affordable Housing  Trust Fund. The projects also
                                                         Trust Fund, CDBG and      received funding through the
                                                         HOME Funds                California Debt Limit Allocation
                                                                                   Committee and the Tax Credit
                                                                                   Allocation Committee.
 H6 Action 2  Continue to offer predevelopment           Time Frame: Ongoing       No predevelopment financing       Delete. The City will
              financing assistance as needed             Responsibility:           was requested by qualified        use federal, State, local,
              through available federal, state,          Development Services      nonprofit housing corporations    and private sources
              local, and private sources, including                                during the planning period.       to produce affordable
              the HOME and CDBG programs, to             Funding Source: City                                        projects.
              assist affordable or special needs         Development Services
              housing development being carried          Fund, CDBG and HOME
              out by qualified nonprofit housing         Funds (when available)
              corporations.
 H6 Action 3  Continue to provide waivers of select      Time Frame: Ongoing       The City provides a waiver of     Continue.
              fees to all affordable housing projects    Responsibility:           the affordable housing fee on
              and participate in the Sacramento          Development Services      affordable housing projects and
              County Regional Sanitation Board’s                                   continues to participate in the
              fee waiver and deferral program to         Funding Source: City      Sacramento County Regional
              reduce impact fees for affordable          Development Services      Sanitation District’s fee waiver
              housing development, prioritizing          Fund, Sacramento County   and deferral program to reduce
              developments that offer first time         Regional Sanitation Board impact fees for affordable
              homebuyer units.                                                     housing development.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                              ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	             H-85

Housing Element
    Action                               Implementation                                    Result/Effectiveness       Continue/Modify /Delete
 H6 Action 4  Continue to offer affordable housing       Time Frame: Ongoing        The funds were offered in this   Modify. The City now
              funding sources on a first come, first     Responsibility:            manner for the two affordable    offers funding through
              served basis consistent with the City’s    Development Services       projects approved in 2011. In    the issuance of an RFP
              Affordable Housing Fund guidelines.                                   August 2011, the City amended    process.
                                                         Funding Source: City       its Affordable Housing Program
                                                         Development Services       Guidelines to allow for issuance
                                                         Fund                       of an RFP when the affordable
                                                                                    funds balances reach a total of
                                                                                    $5 million, although exceptions
                                                                                    may be made to the threshold
                                                                                    by the Council. This will better
                                                                                    allow the City to encourage
                                                                                    deeper rental subsidies and
                                                                                    development consistent with
                                                                                    the policies in H3, Action 1.
 H6 Action 5  Continue to offer assistance to            Time Frame: Ongoing        The City committed $15.3         Delete. Already addressed
              developers to encourage affordable         Responsibility:            million to two affordable        through financial
              housing development through the use        Development Services       multifamily projects in 2011.    assistance programs.
              of the Affordable Housing Fund and                                    Funds used were the City’s
              Very Low income Housing Trust Fund,        Funding Source: City       Affordable Housing Fund and
              density bonuses, and fee waivers.          Development Services       the Very Low Income Housing
                                                         Fund, Building and         Trust Fund.
                                                         Planning Fees
 H7 Action 1  Evaluate best practices for filling the    Time Frame: Annually       The City worked with             Delete. Program is
              affordability gap for potential first time Responsibility:            NeighborWorks, HCD, and          complete.
              home buyers.                               Development Services       HUD to explore the most
                                                                                    feasible options for offering
                                                         Funding Source: City       down payment assistance to
                                                         Development Services       first time homebuyers within
                                                         Fund                       the regulatory confines of
                                                                                    individual funding sources.
 H7 Action 2  Continue to obtain HOME funds              Time Frame: Ongoing        Prior to 2011, the City was      Modify. The City is no
              through the Sacramento Housing             Responsibility:            determined to be ineligible      longer a part of the SHRA
              Redevelopment Agency agreement             Development Services       for continued participation in   HOME Consortium. The
              process to encourage homeownership                                    the SHRA HOME Consortium.        City now obtains funds
              through access to these funds for down     Funding Source: CDBG       However, the City pursued        though through HCD.
              payment assistance and by continuing       and HOME Funds,            HOME funding through
              the Affordable Home Ownership              Affordable Housing Trust   HCD, and in 2012 received a
              program, which provides fee waivers        Fund                       $700,000 HOME award to
              for affordable housing projects.                                      provide homebuyer assistance.
              Information on these programs will be                                 The Affordable Homeownership
              available on the City’s website.                                      Program continued to be
                                                                                    available to developers who
                                                                                    requested it; the City received
                                                                                    one request for information
                                                                                    regarding the program in 2011,
                                                                                    and the developer ultimately
                                                                                    decided not to pursue
                                                                                    participation in the program.
 H7 Action 3  Continue to partner with                   Time Frame: Ongoing        The City continued to partner    Continue.
              NeighborWorks to provide                   Responsibility:            with NeighborWorks to provide
              homeownership services such as             Development Services       access to homebuyer education
              homebuyer workshops currently                                         and foreclosure counseling.
              hosted by the City on an as needed         Funding Source: City       Although no workshops
              basis.                                     Development Services       were hosted by the City,
                                                         Fund                       many residents participated
                                                                                    in the workshops held by
                                                                                    NeighborWorks weekly at its
                                                                                    Alhambra Boulevard location in
                                                                                    Sacramento.
H-86	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                            Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    Action                                  Implementation                                Result/Effectiveness         Continue/Modify /Delete
 H8 Action 1  Continue to require all affordable          Time Frame: Ongoing      The two affordable housing         Delete. Project financing
              housing developments subsidized by          Responsibility:          developments funded by             requires the specific deed
              the City or required by the City to be      Development Services     the City in 2011 will both be      restricted time frame.
              deed restricted for a period of at least                             affordable for 55 years, per
              45 years and monitor as necessary.          Funding Source: City     the terms of their tax credit
                                                          Development Services     financing.
                                                          Fund, Building and
                                                          Planning Fees, Very Low
                                                          Income Housing Trust
                                                          Fund, Affordable Housing
                                                          Trust Fund
 H9 Action 1  Continue to promote and support             Time Frame: Ongoing      The developers of affordable       Continue.
              energy efficiency in new construction       Responsibility:          multifamily housing were
              by encouraging developers to                Development Services     encouraged to work with SMUD
              utilize SMUD’s Energy Efficient New                                  and other utility providers to
              Construction Program and other              Funding Source: City     improve energy efficiency in
              energy efficiency programs.                 Development Services     their projects.
                                                          Fund
 H9 Action 2  Continue to require housing developers      Time Frame: Ongoing      The current baseline standards     Delete. City projects are
              (both single family and multifamily) to     Responsibility:          provide the same level of          meeting or exceeding
              build a minimum percentage of units         Development Services     efficiency as Title 24 Tier II and Title 24 energy standards.
              that meet Title 24, Tier II, or Tier III                             Tier III; therefore the City only
              energy standards.                           Funding Source: City     uses its baseline standards.
                                                          Development Services
                                                          Fund, Building and
                                                          Planning Fees
 H9 Action 3  Continue to encourage participation         Time Frame: Ongoing      There have been 429 PV             Continue.
              in SMUD’s PV (photovoltaic) Pioneer         Responsibility:          permits issued since 2008.
              program by issuing PV system permits        Development Services
              at no charge upon SMUD’s approval.
                                                          Funding Source: City
                                                          Development Services
                                                          Fund
 H10 Action 1 Continue to allow flexibility in            Time Frame: Ongoing      The City allowed for flexible      Continue.
              development standards such as smaller       Responsibility:          development standards on
              unit sizes and parking reduction for        Development Services     the following senior projects:
              senior projects and by supporting                                    Seasons Apartments, Vintage
              development using universal design          Funding Source: Building at Laguna II Apartments,
              measures.                                   and Planning Fees        Carlton Plaza, and Camden
                                                                                   Springs.
 H10 Action 2 Continue to encourage housing               Time Frame: Ongoing      In 2011, the City committed $5.6   Delete. Affordable
              projects targeted to senior households      Responsibility:          million from the Affordable        housing projects will be
              by committing Affordable Housing            Development Services     Housing Fund to the Vintage        reviewed on a project by
              Funds to projects for senior citizens.                               at Laguna II project, a 69unit     project basis.
                                                          Funding Source: City     affordable senior project. The
                                                          Development Services     City’s inventory now includes
                                                          Fund                     595 units in affordable senior
                                                                                   complexes (29 percent of
                                                                                   total affordable housing units).
                                                                                   Additionally, many family
                                                                                   complexes have one and two
                                                                                   bedroom apartments that are
                                                                                   suitable for seniors.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                               ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	            H-87

Housing Element
    Action                                 Implementation                                Result/Effectiveness        Continue/Modify /Delete
 H10 Action 3 Continue to contribute funding and         Time Frame: Ongoing      In 2011, the City continued to    Continue.
              work closely with other entities, such     Responsibility:          fund Sacramento Self Help
              as Sacramento SelfHelp Housing, to         Development Services     Housing, increasing its funding
              assess homeless needs and develop                                   level for the 2011–12 fiscal
              plans to address homelessness at a         Funding Source: CDBG     year in order to respond to
              regional level. The City will annually     and HOME Funds (when     increasing demand. The City
              meet with local service providers as       available)               also participates in an informal
              well as with surrounding jurisdictions                              Homeless Solutions Committee
              to assess the homeless needs of the                                 that is focused on local
              region.                                                             solutions to homelessness as
                                                                                  well as regional coordination;
                                                                                  meetings are open to all
                                                                                  but primarily attended by
                                                                                  nonprofits and members of the
                                                                                  faith based community. The
                                                                                  City holds an annual meeting
                                                                                  to solicit feedback on the
                                                                                  community’s needs related to
                                                                                  low income persons (including
                                                                                  the homeless).
 H10 Action 4 Continue to procure funding sources        Time Frame: Ongoing; as  The City continued to receive     Modify to remove
              such as CDBG that will allow the City      NOFAs released           CDBG funding throughout the       references to specific
              to contribute to agencies that provide     Responsibility:          planning period and also made nonprofits.
              services for persons with special          Development Services     available local funding for
              housing needs including the homeless.                               several organizations serving
              As funding is available, the City will     Funding Source: CDBG,    special needs populations. In
              continue to support organizations          HOME and other funds if  2012, the City funded housing
              serving people with special needs          available                counseling through Sacramento
              such as Sacramento SelfHelp Housing,                                Self Help Housing, fair housing
              the Elk Grove Adult Community                                       advice and investigation
              Training (EGACT), the Human Rights                                  through the Human Rights/Fair
              Fair Housing Commission, Elk Grove                                  Housing Commission, senior
              Senior Center, and Sacramento County                                services (including meals and
              Department of Human Assistance                                      transportation) through the
              (Meals on Wheels).                                                  senior center, senior home
                                                                                  delivered meals through Meals
                                                                                  on Wheels by ACC (a successor
                                                                                  to the County agency), and
                                                                                  improvements to the Elk Grove
                                                                                  Adult Community Training
                                                                                  facility. The City also continued
                                                                                  work on the Grace House, a
                                                                                  five bed transitional house that
                                                                                  opened in 2013.
 H10 Action 5 Continue to provide assistance to          Time Frame: Ongoing      The City continued to fund        Continue.
              agencies, such as Sacramento SelfHelp      Responsibility:          Sacramento Self Help Housing,
              Housing, that provide emergency            Development Services     which provides housing
              shelter facilities for the homeless                                 counseling to homeless and
              population, including alcohol and drug     Funding Source: CDBG     at risk homeless persons; a
              recovery programs, through the County      and HOME Funds           portion of its funding was set
              Department of Human Assistance                                      aside for motel vouchers for
              (DHA) and nonprofit service providers.                              those in need of emergency
                                                                                  shelter. The City also funded
                                                                                  the Elk Grove Food Bank, which
                                                                                  provides a variety of social
                                                                                  services and casework under its
                                                                                  Support Works program. Local
                                                                                  agencies make referrals to
                                                                                  County programs as needed.
H-88	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                          Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    Action                                   Implementation                                 Result/Effectiveness        Continue/Modify /Delete
 H10 Action 6    Continue to support the creation          Time Frame: Ongoing       In 2012, the City purchased       Modify. This action is
                 and operation of transitional housing     Responsibility:           a five bedroom home to be         combined with H10
                 programs operated by Sacramento           Development Services      used for transitional housing.    Action 7.
                 SelfHelp Housing and other nonprofit                                Sacramento Self Help Housing
                 housing groups.                           Funding Source: CDBG      owns and manages the
                                                           and HOME Funds            transitional house, which
                                                                                     opened in 2013.
 H10 Action 7    Continue to assist Sacramento SelfHelp    Time Frame: Ongoing       The City provided information     Modify. This action is
                 Housing in identifying sources of         Responsibility:           on available affordable housing   combined with H10
                 decent, suitable, and affordable shelter  Development Services      resources to Sacramento           Action 6.
                 for homeless individuals and families                               Self Help Housing. In 2012,
                 sufficient to meet the City’s identified  Funding Source: CDBG      the City transferred two
                 needs.                                    and HOME Funds            condo units to a subsidiary of
                                                                                     Sacramento Self Help Housing
                                                                                     for use as permanent housing
                                                                                     for extremely low income
                                                                                     households.
 H11 Action 1    Continue to update the affordable         Time Frame: Ongoing       A list of the affordable housing  Continue.
                 housing unit database and continue        Responsibility:           opportunities in the City
                 to provide information regarding          Development Services      (including rental complexes
                 affordable housing opportunities, both                              and the homebuyer assistance
                 through direct response to inquiries      Funding Source: City      programs) is available on the
                 and making information available on       Development Services      City’s website and accessible
                 the City’s website.                       Fund                      to the public. The City’s
                                                                                     Housing Program Manager and
                                                                                     AskElkGrove team respond to
                                                                                     public inquiries.
 H12 Action 1    Continue to support affordable housing    Time Frame: Ongoing       Changes in the economy and        Delete. Currently there
                 development and also encourage a          Responsibility:           the housing market in recent      is not a market for this
                 diverse blend of housing options to       Development Services      years have led to increased       program.
                 promote the retention of households                                 affordability of much of the
                 through the development of moveup         Funding Source: City      City’s housing stock. In 2011 and
                 housing for first time homebuyers.        Development Services      2012, there were many homes
                                                           Fund                      for sale at prices affordable
                                                                                     to low income and moderate
                                                                                     income households, and there
                                                                                     continued to be an adequate
                                                                                     supply of housing for above
                                                                                     moderate income households.
 Housing Goal 3: Identify and, where appropriate, remove governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of
 housing, including housing for all income levels and special needs groups.
 H13 Action 1    Encourage the utilization of adopted      Time Frame: Ongoing       The City did adopt changes to     Delete. The City currently
                 changes to the development standards      Responsibility:           the development standards,        works with developers
                 that accommodate and encourage a          Development Services      which proved not effective at     to process developments
                 variety of housing development types                                incentivizing multifamily and     quickly and efficiently.
                 including multifamily, low income         Funding Source: City      low income housing. Feedback
                 housing, and to identify incentives to    Development Services      from developers suggests
                 be offered in association with density    Fund                      that they prefer uniformity
                 bonuses. Modifications may include                                  and predictability in costs and
                 reduced requirements for a Special                                  time frames to approval and
                 Planning Area (SPA) including an                                    completion over the incentives
                 affordable housing component and                                    offered.
                 changes to curb, gutter, and sidewalk
                 requirements, setbacks, and lot
                 coverage.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	             H-89

Housing Element
    Action                                  Implementation                                Result/Effectiveness        Continue/Modify /Delete
 H13 Action 2 Amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure        Time Frame: December      In May 2011, the City Council    Delete. This program has
              that transitional housing is considered     2009                      adopted major updates to the     been completed.
              a residential use and is subject only to    Responsibility:           Zoning Code to comply with
              those restrictions that apply to other      Development Services      Government Code Section
              residential uses of the same type in the                              65589.5 requirements.
              same zone, consistent with Sections         Funding Source: City
              65582, 65583, and 65589.5 of the            Development Services
              California Government Code.                 Fund
 H13 Action 3 Amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure        Time Frame: December      In May 2011, the City Council    Delete. This program has
              that supportive housing types are           2009                      adopted major updates to the     been completed.
              defined according to Section 50675.14       Responsibility:           Zoning Code to comply with
              of the Health and Safety Code, are          Development Services      Government Code Section
              considered a residential use, and are                                 65589.5.
              subject only to those restrictions that     Funding Source: City
              apply to other residential uses of the      Development Services
              same type in the same zone, consistent      Fund
              with Sections 65582, 65583 and
              65589.5 of the California Government
              Code.
 H13 Action 4 Pursuant to SB 520 enacted January          Time Frame: December      In May 2011, the City Council    Delete. This program has
              1, 2002, amend the Zoning Ordinance         2009                      adopted major updates to the     been completed.
              to include a definition of family that      Responsibility:           Zoning Code to comply with
              provides zoning code occupancy              Development Services      Government Code Sections
              standards specific to unrelated adults.                               65583(a)(4) and 65583(c)(3),
              In addition, the City will periodically     Funding Source: City      including adding an updated
              analyze and determine whether there         Development Services      definition of family and adding
              are constraints on the development,         Fund                      procedures for reasonable
              maintenance and improvement of                                        accommodations for persons
              housing intended for persons with                                     with disabilities.
              disabilities. The analysis will include an
              evaluation of existing land use controls,
              permit and processing procedures,
              zoning and building codes. If any
              constraints are found in these areas,
              the City will initiate actions to address
              these constraints, including removing
              the constraints or providing reasonable
              accommodation for housing intended
              for persons with disabilities
 H13 Action 5 Continue to review the appropriateness      Time Frame: Ongoing       The City provides a waiver of    Modify. This program will
              of reducing, waiving, and/or deferring      Responsibility:           the affordable housing fee on    be modified to include
              fees for units affordable to extremely      Development Services      affordable housing projects and  the incentives that the
              low, very low, and low income                                         continues to participate in the  City provides, including
              households, including second dwelling       Funding Source: City      Sacramento County Regional       regulatory incentives.
              units, senior housing, and apartment        Development Services      Sanitation District’s fee waiver
              units, and housing for special              Fund, Very Low Income     and deferral program to reduce
              needs groups, including agricultural        Housing Trust Fund,       impact fees for affordable
              employees, emergency/ transitional          Affordable Housing Trust  housing development.
              housing, and housing for persons with       Fund
              disabilities, and take subsequent action,
              as appropriate, based upon this review
              to make the development of such units
              more financially feasible.
 H13 Action 6 Amend the Zoning Ordinance to               Time Frame: December      In May 2011, the City Council    Delete. This program has
              include a definition of single room         2009                      adopted major updates to the     been completed.
              occupancy units (SROs) in accordance        Responsibility:           Zoning Code to define and
              with AB 2634, which requires                Development Services      allow for SROs within the code.
              jurisdictions to explicitly allow SRO’s in
              their zoning codes.                         Funding Source: City
                                                          Development Services
                                                          Fund
H-90	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                             Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    Action                                 Implementation                           Result/Effectiveness        Continue/Modify /Delete
 H13 Action 7 To ensure continued compliance with        Time Frame: December In May 2011, the City Council     Delete. This program was
              the Employee Housing Act especially        2009                 adopted major updates to          completed.
              California Health and Safety Code          Responsibility:      the Zoning Code to comply
              Section 17021.5 and 17021.6, the City will Development Services with all employee housing
              review the zoning code for the following                        requirements outlined in the
              concerning employee housing:               Funding Source: City action.
                                                         Development Services
              Employee housing providing                 Fund
              accommodations for six or fewer
              employees shall be deemed a single
              family structure with a residential land
              use designation; For the purpose of
              all local ordinances, employee housing
              shall not be included within the
              definition of a boarding house, rooming
              house, hotel, dormitory, or other term
              that implies the employee housing is a
              business run for profit or differs in any
              other way from a family dwelling;
              No conditional use permit, zoning
              variance, or other zoning clearance shall
              be required of employee housing that
              serves six or fewer employees that is
              not required of a family dwelling of the
              same type in the same zone;
              The use of a family dwelling for
              purposes of employee housing serving
              six or fewer persons shall not constitute
              a change of occupancy;
              The review will ensure consistency with
              the following concerning employee
              housing consisting of no more than
              36 beds in group quarters or 12 units
              or spaces designed for use by a single
              family or household: Employee housing
              shall not be deemed a use that implies
              that the employee housing is an activity
              that differs in any other way from an
              agricultural use; No conditional use
              permit, zoning variance, or other zoning
              clearance shall be required of this
              employee housing that is not required
              of any other agricultural activity in
              the same zone; and The permitted
              occupancy in employee housing in
              an agricultural zone shall include
              agricultural employees who do not work
              on the property where the employee
              housing is located.
 H14 Action 1 Continue to designate a staff planner to   Time Frame: Ongoing  All projects are assigned a staff Continue.
              guide affordable housing development       Responsibility:      person to guide the developer
              projects though the planning process       Development Services through the planning process.
              and implement housing related                                   The Housing Program Manager
              programs and policy initiatives.           Funding Source: City implements all housing related
                                                         Development Services programs and policy initiatives.
                                                         Fund
 H14 Action 2 Continue to empower the Planning           Time Frame: Ongoing  Within the planning period,       Continue.
              Director as the approving authority on     Responsibility:      the Planning Director
              all multifamily projects of 150 units or   Development Services administratively approved
              less, including affordable projects, that                       the Vintage at Laguna II and
              are consistent with General Plan and       Funding Source: City Camden Springs projects.
              zoning requirements.                       Development Services
                                                         Fund
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	            H-91
Housing Element
    Action                                 Implementation                                    Result/Effectiveness         Continue/Modify /Delete
 H14 Action 3  Continue to conduct interdepartmental     Time Frame: Ongoing          The City’s Development             Continue.
               coordination meetings to coordinate       Responsibility:              Services team met monthly to
               the early review of development           Development Services         discuss issues related to new
               projects and address policy concerns.                                  developments, with the goal of
                                                         Funding Source: City         streamlining the process from
                                                         Development Services         the developer’s perspective.
                                                         Fund, Planning and
                                                         Building Fees
 H15 Action 1  Continue to encourage more creative       Time Frame: Ongoing          The City continues to allow for    Continue.
               and flexibly designed projects with an    Responsibility:              flexibility, but no recent project
               affordable housing component through      Development Services         has needed it.
               the use of the recently established
               Design Review Process, which              Funding Source: City
               eliminated minimum lot width and          Development Services
               public street frontage requirements,      Fund
               thus creating more flexibility for higher
               density projects.
 H16 Action 1  Publish the drafted summary               Time Frame: 2009             This information is available on   Delete. The City will
               information handouts for residential      Responsibility:              the City’s website or in printed   continue to provide
               developers to explain applicable          Development Services         form upon request.                 this information on a by
               Zoning Ordinance and General Plan                                                                         request basis and on the
               requirements. Provide specific            Funding Source: City                                            City’s website.
               examples of projects meeting these        Development Services
               requirements. Continue to train staff in  Fund
               the residential project review process
               to ensure consistency in the application
               of all City standards.
 H17 Action 1  Continue to annually review the           Time Frame: Ongoing          The City annually reports on       Continue.
               Housing Element to determine its          Responsibility:              the progress of the Housing
               effectiveness and its consistency with    Development Services         Element and submits the
               the General Plan, as part of the annual                                annual report to HCD.
               review required by Government Code        Funding Source: City
               Section 65400. Report to the Planning     Development Services
               Commission and City Council the           Fund
               findings of this review and suggest
               changes if needed.
 Housing Goal 4: Conserve and improve the condition of existing affordable housing stock.
 H18 Action 1  Continue to operate the Owner             Time Frame: Ongoing          The City continued to offer        Modify. The City no
               Occupied Housing Rehabilitation           Responsibility:              the Owner Occupied Housing         longer has an Owner
               Program that assists very low and low     Development Services         Rehabilitation program through     Occupied Housing Rehab
               income households occupying housing                                    June 30, 2012, and advertised      Program. The program
               in need of repair.                        Funding Source: City         it through the City newsletter     will be revised to include
                                                         Development Services         (delivered to all households in    the Minor Home Repair
                                                         Fund, CDBG and HOME          the City) and through waste        program.
                                                         Funds                        bill inserts. Despite this, the
                                                                                      City received only one eligible
                                                                                      application. On July 1, 2012,
                                                                                      the City rolled out a new
                                                                                      Minor Home Repair program
                                                                                      that offers forgivable loans of
                                                                                      up to $10,000 to low income
                                                                                      homeowners whose homes
                                                                                      have one or more health and
                                                                                      safety hazards.
H-92	      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                            Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    Action                                 Implementation                               Result/Effectiveness        Continue/Modify /Delete
 H18 Action 2 Continue to refer individuals interested   Time Frame: Ongoing     The City continued to refer       Continue.
              in utility assistance to the appropriate   Responsibility:         persons needing utility
              local energy provider, usually SMUD,       Development Services    assistance to SMUD and
              which offers many programs to assist                               PG&E programs. The City
              with utility costs.                        Funding Source: City    also referred people who had
                                                         Development Services    received a three day shutoff
                                                         Fund                    notice to South County
                                                                                 Services, which receives federal
                                                                                 funding to provide emergency
                                                                                 utility assistance.
 H18 Action 3 Continue to market the Emergency           Time Frame: quarterly   The City published two articles   Modify. The program will
              Repair program to senior households        Responsibility:         on the housing repair programs    be marketed to all City
              by sending program information in          Development Services    in the City’s newsletter in 2011, residents who qualify.
              the City’s monthly newsletter and by                               and continued to advertise
              posting information on community           Funding Source: CDBG    housing repair programs in
              boards especially in mobile home park      and HOME Grants         2012. Over the planning period,
              communities.                                                       the City made eleven housing
                                                                                 repair loans, six of them to
                                                                                 seniors.
 H18 Action 4 Continue to perform a biannual review      Time Frame: 2009, 2011, Pursuant to HUD direction, the    Delete. The City evaluates
              of City neighborhoods to identify          2013; as needed         City advertised the housing       the housing stock through
              areas that appear to be in decline         Responsibility:         rehab programs Citywide in        the Code Enforcement
              and provide information on available       Development Services    order to have the greatest        Department.
              housing rehabilitation programs to                                 potential audience. The
              neighborhood residents.                    Funding Source: CDBG    City’s Code Enforcement
                                                         Funds                   staff is aware of the City’s
                                                                                 housing repair programs and
                                                                                 encourages homeowners
                                                                                 with violations to apply for
                                                                                 assistance.
 H18 Action 5 Continue to enforce the City code,         Time Frame: Ongoing     The City continued to enforce     Delete. The building
              including the building code on a case      Responsibility:         the Building Code and other       code is enforced by the
              by case basis for market rate units and    Development Services    codes on all residential          Building Department.
              affordable projects.                                               development.
                                                         Funding Source: City
                                                         Development Services
                                                         Fund, CDBG Funds
 H18 Action 6 Continue to carry out Neighborhood         Time Frame: Ongoing     The City’s Code Enforcement       Delete. The City has
              Preservation activities to ensure the      Responsibility:         staff continued to enforce        expended its NSP funds.
              quality of the housing stock and           Development Services    the City’s code relative to
              residential neighborhoods. Remove                                  housing quality and safety in
              unsafe or dilapidated housing through      Funding Source: CDBG    all residential neighborhoods.
              the Neighborhood Preservation              and HOME Funds          The City implemented its
              Program.                                                           Neighborhood Stabilization
                                                                                 Program (NSP) grant, a portion
                                                                                 of which was used to acquire
                                                                                 foreclosed homes in poor
                                                                                 condition and rehab them
                                                                                 prior to resale to low income
                                                                                 households.
 H18 Action 7 Explore available mechanisms that          Time Frame: December    The City was unable to identify Delete. This is currently
              prohibit tax deductions for owners of      2009                    any such mechanism during the being addressed
              substandard rental units cited for code    Responsibility:         current planning period.          through the City’s Code
              violations.                                Development Services                                      Enforcement Department.
                                                         Funding Source: City
                                                         Development Services
                                                         Fund
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                            ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	            H-93

Housing Element
    Action                                     Implementation                                 Result/Effectiveness            Continue/Modify /Delete
 H19 Action 1     The City Public Works staff will           Time Frame: Ongoing        The City’s Public Works and          Delete. This is
                  continue its regular inspections of all    Responsibility:            Facilities staff continued its       implemented though the
                  City owned infrastructure facilities to    Development Services       inspection and maintenance           Public Works Department.
                  ensure that the systems are adequately                                efforts related to City owned
                  maintained and do not contribute to        Funding Source: City       infrastructure throughout the
                  the deterioration of neighborhoods.        Development Services       planning period.
                                                             Fund
 H20 Action 1     If the one mobile home park in the City    Time Frame: Work with      There has been no indication         Continue.
                  is in danger of being removed from         tenant associations as     that the City’s only mobile
                  the housing stock, partner with tenant     need arises                home park was in danger
                  associations or a nonprofit organization   Responsibility:            of being removed from the
                  to provide assistance to mobile home       Development Services       housing stock. The homes in
                  park tenants in preserving their homes                                the park are generally well
                  through the state Mobile home Park         Funding Source: MPROP,     maintained and the park
                  Resident Ownership Program (MPROP)         CDBG and HOME Funds        ownership and management
                  when appropriate.                                                     appears to be stable.
 H21 Action 1     Monitor and evaluate the conversion of     Time Frame: Annually       There were no condominium            Continue.
                  rental housing units to condominiums       Responsibility:            conversions during the
                  in order to assist in amending of the      Development Services       planning period.
                  land use plan to provide for additional
                  multifamily areas if necessary.            Funding Source: City
                                                             Development Services
                                                             Fund
 H21 Action 2     Continue to utilize the condominium        Time Frame: Ongoing        No condominium conversions           Delete. There is not a
                  conversion ordinance as necessary.         Responsibility:            were proposed during the             market for condominium
                  Requirements and evaluation factors        Development Services       planning period. Given               conversions.
                  of the ordinance include rental                                       the current market, many
                  vacancy rate (the vacancy rate shall be    Funding Source: City       condominiums have been
                  determined through an annual market        Development Services       converting to apartments.
                  rate rental survey), maximum number        Fund
                  of units allowed to convert annually,
                  relocation assistance to tenants, and
                  affordability of units.
 Housing Goal 5: Promote housing opportunities for all persons, regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color,
 familial status, or disability.
 H22 Action 1     Continue to provide information about      Time Frame: Ongoing        The City continued to refer          Modify this program to
                  fair housing choices to residents by       Responsibility:            persons with fair housing            remove any mention of
                  distributing the fair housing brochures    Development Services       questions to the Human Rights/ specific organizations.
                  produced by the Sacramento Human                                      Fair Housing Commission. The
                  Rights/Fair Housing Commission to          Funding Source: City       commission, due to budgetary
                  all rental units and public locations      Development Services       constraints, no longer prints
                  throughout the City. The brochures will    Fund                       large quantities of the Fair
                  also be supplied to the Elk Grove Police                              Housing Handbook, but the
                  Department for distribution.                                          handbook is available on the
                                                                                        commission’s website and the
                                                                                        City will print it on demand for
                                                                                        interested persons.
 H22 Action 2 Continue to comply with federal and            Time Frame: Ongoing        The City continued to comply         Delete. Will be combined
                  state antidiscrimination laws.             Responsibility:            with federal and State               with H22 Action 1.
                                                             Development Services       antidiscrimination laws.
                                                             Funding Source: City
                                                             Development Services
                                                             Fund
H-94	        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                              Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
   Action                                    Implementation                               Result/Effectiveness       Continue/Modify /Delete
 H22 Action 3 Promptly address complaints of               Time Frame: Ongoing      The City continued to provide    Delete. Will be combined
               discrimination in the sale, rent, and       Responsibility:          funding to the Human Rights/     with H22 Action 1.
               development of housing. Continue to         Development Services     Fair Housing Commission; in
               fund the Fair Housing Commission and                                 2011, the commission received
               work closely with Sacramento Human          Funding Source: City     $25,000 and in 2012, it
               Rights/Fair Housing Commission to           Development Services     received $10,000. In addition
               address fair housing complaints.            Fund                     to investigating complaints, the
                                                                                    commission used its funding
                                                                                    to conduct proactive audits of
                                                                                    rental property discrimination
                                                                                    as well as to provide tenant/
                                                                                    landlord advice.
 H22 Action 4 Continue to enforce the City’s Design        Time Frame: Ongoing      The City continues to enforce    Delete. Addressed
               Guidelines, which require a minimum         Responsibility:          the Design Guidelines, which     through the City’s Design
               of one onsite amenity for multifamily       Development Services     require a minimum of one         Guidelines.
               development. These amenities may                                     onsite amenity for multifamily
               include childcare centers, clubhouses,      Funding Source: City     development. Amenities
               or other recreational facilities.           Development Services     associated with recent
                                                           Fund, Planning and       multifamily projects include:
                                                           Building Fees
                                                                                    Ridge Apartments: pool,
                                                                                    clubhouse, playground,
                                                                                    business center
                                                                                    Vintage at Laguna II: clubhouse,
                                                                                    fitness center, spa
                                                                                    Carlton Plaza: community
                                                                                    rooms (assisted living)
                                                                                    Camden Springs: movie theater,
                                                                                    recreation center, many other
                                                                                    amenities
 Housing Goal 6: Preserve assisted (subsidized) housing developments for lower income households.
 H23 Action 1  Maintain and update the City’s              Time Frame: Annually     The City continued to maintain   Continue.
               affordable housing database as a            Responsibility:          the affordable housing
               mechanism to monitor and identify           Development Services     database. No units were
               units at risk of losing their affordability                          identified as being at risk of
               subsidies or requirements.                  Funding Source: City     losing their affordable housing
                                                           Development Services     status during the planning
                                                           Fund                     period.
 H23 Action 2 Continue to work with federal, state,        Time Frame: Annually     The City was not aware of any    Continue.
               and nonprofit housing organizations,        evaluate and apply for   affordable complexes wishing
               such as Sacramento Housing and              funding as necessary.    to convert to market rate
               Redevelopment Agency, that function         Responsibility:          housing during the planning
               to purchase or fund the purchase of         Development Services     period. The majority of the
               subsidized, at risk complexes that the                               City’s affordable multifamily
               owner wishes to convert to market rate      Funding Source: City     housing stock is newer and
               and annually evaluate the need for the      Development Services     will be deed restricted for the
               City to establish a program to preserve     Fund                     foreseeable future.
               affordable units at risk of conversion.
 H23 Action 3 Participate with the California Housing      Time Frame: when         The City was not aware of        Delete. There are no
               Finance Agency, developers using            necessary                any federally assisted housing   expiring Housing Choice
               mortgage revenue bond allocations,          Responsibility:          with expiring Housing Choice     Voucher subsidies during
               and lending institutions to preserve        Development Services     Voucher subsidies during the     this planning period.
               and/or replace subsidies for federally                               planning period.
               assisted housing with expiring Section      Funding Source: City
               8 subsidies.                                Development Services
                                                           Fund
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                              ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	            H-95

Housing Element
                               11. PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
                               State law requires cities and counties to make a diligent effort to achieve participation
                               by all segments of the community in preparing a Housing Element.
                               The City conducted a broad range of public outreach and meetings in order to develop
                               housing policies and programs that address the needs of the City’s residents and
                               workforce. All of these efforts have informed and contributed to the development of the
                               2013–2021 Housing Element update. As a part of identifying current and future housing
                               needs for residents, City staff conducted a number of public outreach efforts including:
                                   •	 Committee and commission meetings
                                   •	 Stakeholder meetings
                                   •	 Nonprofit consultations
                                   •	 Public outreach to local agencies
                                   •	 Public workshops
                                   •	 Public hearings
                               COMMITTEE AND COMMISSION MEETINGS
                               City staff attended the regularly scheduled meetings of the following committees and
                               commissions. These groups’ meetings are publicly noticed, and members of the public
                               are welcome to attend and provide feed-back.
                               Disability Advisory Committee – November 6, 2012.
                               Members of the Disability Advisory Committee noted the following needs:
                                   •	 Affordable housing near transit and in mixed-use areas.
                                   •	 More affordable and market-rate units with universal design features.
                                   •	More extremely low-income units, particularly for households with Supplemental
                                      Security Income (SSI).
                                   •	Developments or buildings within developments dedicated to persons with
                                      disabilities (of a certain type or in general), to foster a sense of community among
                                      residents without isolating them.
                                   •	More separated sidewalks, curb ramp improvements, accessible parks and
                                      recreational areas, and community gathering places.
                                   •	 High-quality professional local jobs for disabled residents.
                                Youth Commission – November 13, 2012.
                               Members of the Youth Commission noted the following needs:
                                   •	 Homes located near schools and jobs.
                                   •	 Increased homeownership to allow students to have more stability in schools.
H-96	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    •	 More parks and recreational amenities, including teen centers and senior centers.
    •	 More housing for active seniors.
Affordable Housing Loan Committee (AHLC) – January 16, 2013.
Members of the AHLC noted the following needs:
    •	Affordable rental housing, in particular for extremely low-income and very low-
       income families.
    •	 More affordable housing for large families (three-bedroom units or larger) and for
       persons with physical and mental disabilities.
    •	 Greater range of accessible units, to accommodate persons with different types of
       disabilities.
    •	Greater emphasis on developing family housing as opposed to senior housing.
       The AHLC felt that the City’s current senior housing is sufficient and seniors are
       comparatively easy to house.
    •	 Proactive rental housing inspection program.
The AHLC also noted challenges to developing affordable housing in the City, including
the cost of fees and Mello-Roos, lack of available land in areas with amenities, lack of
local funds to subsidize housing, tax credit priorities for urban transit amenities, and
Senate Bill 2 legislation that gives preference to urban areas.
STAKEHOLDER MEETINGS
City staff met with two of the region’s housing advocacy groups to gather feedback on
needs.
Sacramento Housing Alliance – January 23, 2013.
The Executive Director and a board member of the Housing Alliance attended the
meeting and provided the following feedback:
    •	 The top priority is creating affordable rental housing for extremely low- and very
       low-income households.
    •	Providing affordable units in each neighborhood, whether through inclusionary
       housing or another strategy, is very important.
    •	The City should encourage more nonprofit affordable housing developers, who
       provide stability and supportive services in their communities.
    •	Homeless residents need a women’s/children’s shelter or transitional house,
       emergency shelter during winter months, and a day center.
    •	 The City should consider a universal design ordinance.
    •	 The City should consider a proactive rental housing inspection program.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-97

Housing Element
                               Legal Services of Northern California (LSNC) – January 24, 2013.
                               A representative of LSNC provided the following feedback:
                                   •	The City should retain the tools it has for supporting affordable housing, in
                                      particular maintaining the afford-able housing fee.
                                   •	 Preserving existing subsidized housing is important.
                                   •	A proactive rental inspection program, with a local contact requirement, is
                                      desirable.
                                   •	 The City should encourage landlords to accept housing choice vouchers (Section
                                      8) and provide resident and landlord education on the HCV program.
                                   •	Offering developers the option of land or unit dedication in lieu of fee payment
                                      is acceptable, but the City should avoid any mandate to build affordable housing
                                      (inclusionary housing), at least until some of the re-cent legal issues are resolved.
                               Homeless Solutions Committee – January 16, 2013.
                               Although not a formal City committee, the Homeless Solutions Committee comprises
                               several nonprofit service providers and faith-based organizations. Their feedback
                               included the following points:
                                   •	The City’s homeless population covers all demographics: singles, families, youth,
                                      seniors, etc. Most are unemployed and there is an increase in those that have been
                                      homeless for more than one year.
                                   •	 There is a shortage of very low-income housing for families and for seniors. Seniors
                                      are generally easier to house because they can access Social Security or other
                                      benefits and there is less of a shortage of senior housing.
                                   •	Employment and training is a huge component of the homeless solution. Short-
                                      term training or re-training opportunities are needed.
                                   •	The City should consider ways to implement an emergency shelter (winter
                                      sanctuary), day shelter, and transitional housing for families.
                                   •	Supportive services, mentoring, job training, and employer hiring incentives are
                                      needed.
                               NONPROFIT CONSULTATIONS
                               The City sent a survey to 54 agencies that had requested to be on the City’s grant
                               opportunities interest list or that have applied for City grants in the past three years. The
                               City received 10 responses to the survey. A summary of feedback is below.
                                   •	Affordable housing resources are a major issue for homeless, special needs
                                      (physically or developmentally disabled), and seniors. Housing for very low-
                                      income households is most needed. Rent and utility assistance is also needed.
                                   •	 Seniors, special needs adults, victims of domestic violence, and the homeless are
                                      underserved populations in the City. There are also an increasing number of single
H-98	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
       parents with multiple children and grandparents raising grandchildren.
    •	The e-tran system is too limited and not well connected to Sacramento’s transit
       system.
    •	The need for social services is increasing, particularly for the homeless and for
       seniors.
    •	 Youth programs are needed to replace those cut by schools.
    •	Job placement, life skills training programs, and domestic violence intervention
       programs are needed by adults.
PUBLIC OUTREACH
The City reached out to clients at two local agencies:
Elk Grove Food Bank – February 12 and February 21, 2013.
    •	 The Food Bank provides monthly food distributions to needy households within the
       City, most of whom are very low income. It also has a Senior Brown Bag Program,
       which once a month provides food assistance specifically to seniors. Interviews
       were conducted both with regular clients and Senior Brown Bag clients.
Elk Grove United Methodist Church Saturday Breakfast – February 23, 2013.
    •	 The church provides a weekly breakfast on Saturdays and lunch on Sundays to any
       member of the community wishing to attend. There is no religious component.
       Many of the attendees are homeless and/or very low-income. The Housing Program
       Manager attended the two-hour Saturday breakfast and spoke with most of the
       120 guests.
Overall, residents tended to mention affordability and accessibility as the two main
housing issues. Most considered the rents at many of the City’s affordable housing units
($700+ per month) to be too high and wanted to see more units in the $300–400/month
range. Additionally, residents of affordable housing noted that annual rent increases,
sometimes of $50+ per month, were difficult to accommodate. Utility assistance was
also frequently mentioned as a need—some households earned too much to qualify for
SMUD or PG&E programs, but still paid so much for housing, medical bills, etc. that there
was not enough money left to pay for utilities.
Many seniors owned a home with a reverse mortgage, but still struggled to afford
necessities. One senior noted that losing the income of a spouse was what made the
difference in being able to continue to afford their home. Seniors in particular mentioned
assistance with medical bills as a key economic issue.
Transportation was also an issue for many residents—for those that didn’t own a car,
the e-tran bus system was not convenient or affordable. More weekend bus service and
better connections with Sacramento Regional Transit routes were noted as priorities.
Several residents noted the need for more jobs, and assistance with job training and
networking. Other needs mentioned included transitional housing for the homeless,
assistance with the SSI process, homeless programs, and youth programs.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-99

Housing Element
                               PUBLIC WORKSHOPS
                               The City conducted public workshops on March 4, April 15, and April 18, 2013. Notices
                               of the public meetings were posted prior to the meetings in the local newspaper, on the
                               City’s website, through e-mails to local and regional stakeholders, and in a prominent
                               location in City Hall. The first meeting, held on March 4, focused on the Housing Element
                               update process and scope, the demographic information from the 2010 Census, and the
                               City’s current Housing Element goals, policies, and programs. The second meeting was
                               held on April 15, with discussion regarding the potential rezoning of 42 sites in order to
                               meet the needs identified in the RHNA allocation. The third meeting was held on April 18
                               at the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. City staff made a presentation
                               on the Housing Element process and timeline, the City’s RHNA allocation, and various
                               Housing Element goals, policies, and programs. Public comments were received and
                               recorded at the March 4 and April 15 meeting. There were no public comments received
                               at the April 18 meeting, although the Planning Commission did provide comments.
                               COMMENTS RECEIVED
                               The City received the following oral questions and comments at the March 4, 2013
                               meeting:
                                   •	 What are the current vacancy rates for rental and owner housing in the City?
                                   •	Residents would like to see affordable housing options near transit and public
                                      services.
                                   •	 Residents advocated for universal design and they encouraged the City to consider
                                      a universal design ordinance.
                               The following oral questions and comments were received at the April 14, 2013, meeting
                               focused on the rezoning of certain sites within the City:
                               General Comments and Questions
                                   •	 How did SACOG allocate the RHNA? Did they consider impacts of the recession?
                                      Staff explained SACOG process and noted that the RHNA is focused on new need,
                                      not existing need.
                                   •	How does the City get a higher-density product? Staff responded that higher-
                                      density includes townhomes, condominiums, and apartments.
                                   •	 What is the status of multifamily overlay zone? Staff responded that the City is not
                                      looking to rely on the overlay zone in this Housing Element update.
                                   •	 Rezoning devalues land.
                                   •	If an application came forward, would the site still be considered for rezoning?
                                      Staff responded that any owner can submit an application for any of these sites
                                      and then the site would probably not be considered for rezoning.
                                   •	 Who pays for affordable housing? Staff responded that the Housing Element focus
                                      is in ensuring there is adequate land for multifamily development, but that it is the
                                      market that produces it. Affordable housing is funded through private financing,
                                      federal and state tax credits, and local funding (such as the City’s Affordable
H-100	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
      Housing Fund). City would like to try and get 9 percent tax credit projects.
   •	Regarding a question about Folsom’s strategy, Legal Services of Northern
      California clarified that Folsom was sued and lost the option to build, and didn’t
      want to provide any high-density land. Elk Grove does want to carry its “fair share”
      and provide for all income levels.
   •	City should have some architecture standards for affordable projects. Affordable
      apartments should look nicer than the current projects.
General Site Comments
   •	 City needs to include high-density zoning throughout the City.
   •	 City has enough sites to meet the needs for moderate and above moderate sites.
      This is based on mostly entitled projects.
   •	Generally not appropriate to rely on non-vacant sites, need to include the
      methodology for that development potential.
   •	Over concentration is a concern. Size of parcels, sites shouldn’t be too large, or
      large sites shouldn’t be placed right next to each other.
   •	 City should consider transportation and shopping access when planning for high-
      density housing.
   •	 Sites for affordable housing should ideally be 2–6 acres in size.
   •	High-density development should be spread throughout the City, not like Mack
      Road.
   •	 Resident asked about the possibility of adding a site at Elk Grove Florin and Sheldon
      Roads, as well as a site along Waterman Road. Staff responded they would look
      into this.
   •	Does City staff go look at the sites identified? Staff responded that further
      investigation of the feasibility of individual sites will be considered in the
      environmental review stage and other analyses.
   •	 City should take into consideration impacts on the surrounding properties’ owners
      so they are not adversely affected by the rezones.
Specific Property Questions
   •	 C-22: Owner inquired if she could sell her house to someone other than a developer.
      Staff responded that the property could remain as current use, but redevelopment
      of site would need to be in conformance with zoning designation in effect at the
      time.
   •	 C-22/C-9: There are existing apartments to the south on Brown Road, resulting in
      concerns about traffic. City did not identify existing apartments in the area.
   •	C-12: Is the City going to rezone that whole area? Staff responded that this is
      the Southeast Policy Area (SEPA, aka Meridian), which will include high-density
      residential along with other uses. On March 13, the Council reviewed the SEPA and
      anticipated 1,200 units at a density of 20+ units/acre. Since the SEPA is still in the
      planning stages, it is too early to identify specific sites. After sites are identified,
      the Housing Element will be updated to reflect the final plan for the site.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-101

Housing Element
                                   •	C-12: What is the timing for development of this site—is it going to happen next
                                      year or ten years from now? Staff responded that while this is generally up to the
                                      market, it will probably take several years for the SEPA to develop.
                                   •	C-4: What is happening with this site? Staff responded that no application has
                                      been received for this site. City received comments from property owner, but
                                      doesn’t know what they are planning to do with the site and may possibly sell it.
                                   •	 C-23: Owner had land taken for Sheldon Road widening, asked if they would have
                                      to move if the site is re-zoned. Staff responded that they could remain living on
                                      the property, and that any new zoning would only come into play if they tried to
                                      redevelop the site.
                               During the April 18, 2013, Planning Commission public workshop, no comments or
                               questions were presented by the attending residents, land owners, SACOG representative,
                               or housing advocates in attendance. However, the following questions were presented
                               by the Planning Commissioners:
                                   •	 Where did the RHNA numbers come from? Staff responded that the numbers are
                                      based on 2013–2021 population projections from SACOG.
                                   •	 Why does the City need to increase densities to meet the RHNA? Elk Grove staff
                                      responded that their RHNA is high and unrealistic during the current market
                                      conditions.
                                   •	What barriers will be removed? Staff responded that development fees are
                                      considered a barrier to development. The City used its affordable housing fund to
                                      subsidize these fees.
                                   •	What kind of buffer in the land inventory is the City looking to include? Staff
                                      responded that this will be decided as the site list is brought forward.
                                   •	Commissioner wants to see the allocation by jurisdiction throughout the SACOG
                                      region and how the methodology for the allocation was determined. Staff
                                      responded that they can provide a memo on the allocation. The RHNA methodology
                                      challenge period is over.
                                   •	 What are the other new mandates for the Housing Element? Staff said they will be
                                      included in the draft Housing Element.
                                   •	Why is the City not using the overlay approach? The City does not have a long
                                      history of successful projects in the overlay so sites will be zoned for high density
                                      outright during this next planning period.
                                   •	 Inclusionary zoning does not exist in Elk Grove. City has a fee on market rate and
                                      nonresidential development.
                                   •	 Does the City have the ability to create mixed-income housing within developments?
                                      The City should avoid over concentration, what policies and programs does the
                                      City have in place to prevent this. City has an RFP out to build affordable housing
                                      units. Based on tax credits, mixing incomes is difficult.
                                   •	 City should consider not using overlays so we don’t create a shortfall situation.
H-102	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
PUBLIC HEARINGS
The City conducted public hearings with the Planning Commission on May 16 and
June 6, 2013. Notices of the hearings were posted prior to the meetings in the local
newspaper, on the City’s website, through e-mails to local and regional stakeholders,
and in a prominent location in City Hall. The May 16 meeting focused on the potential
sites to be considered to accommodate the City’s Regional Housing Needs numbers.
Feedback was solicited from the community and the Commission on the potential sites.
The June 6 meeting focused on draft Housing Element programs. The input received on
the programs will be taken into consideration during drafting of the Housing Element.
May 16, 2013 – Comments Received
Public Comments
Forty-three members of the public spoke during the hearing. Twenty-five people spoke
in opposition of specific sites, including candidate sites C-6, -7, -13, -14, -28, -29 and -30.
The primary concern was the potential negative impacts of high-density development.
The most prominent theme among the remaining 18 speakers was concerns about
adding High Density Residential (HDR) zoned land to their community.
General Site Comments
    •	Several spoke in opposition to low-income housing projects because they bring
       drugs and crime to areas.
    •	 The City should remove the Laguna West sites from the list for consideration.
    •	Based on experience working with low-income families, a concentration of low-
       income housing in one area can cause a huge impact to that area.
    •	 High-density development causes negative impacts to communities and agencies
       and low-income housing is difficult to police.
    •	Allowing HDR land uses in the Laguna West Master Plan Community would
       decrease property values.
    •	 Opposed to allowing HDR land uses because of how a recent condo project in the
       area failed and was changed to apartments. Another speaker was opposed due to
       concerns about safety.
    •	 The owner of sites C-15 and C-16 noted that the sites have minimal road frontage
       and back up to a railroad track which creates a security problem for high-density
       developments. His desire has been to develop low density and asked that those
       properties not be considered on the potential list of sites to be rezoned to RD-25.
    •	 Opposed to the proposed sites surrounding Laguna Town Hall because of existing
       parking issues and be-cause there are already apartments and senior housing in
       the area.
    •	 Opposed to the four sites off Laguna Boulevard.
    •	Would the tenants of projects developed on HDR-designated sites be subject to
       the same homeowner’s association fees as existing homeowners? The Assistant
       City Attorney stated that no property is required to form an association.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-103

Housing Element
                                  •	Opposed the four properties in Laguna West because of the impacts to schools,
                                     parking, and parks. Said high-density projects would change the community.
                                  •	 Consider commercial development instead of high-density residential development
                                     on the site in Laguna West.
                                  •	 Opposed to the Laguna West sites due to the negative impacts to businesses.
                                  •	 Representative of the Laguna West Association was intrigued by the General Plan
                                     policy that no HDR land uses should be allowed unless the sites have 1/3 mile
                                     separation. Said that the 10 sites proposed are very close together and encouraged
                                     the Commission to remove the sites and not waste money with an environmental
                                     analysis.
                                  •	Sites C-3, -4, and -5 (subsequently combined and shown as C-41) owned by
                                     Sheldon Farms – General Plan Policy LU40 has a floating 10–15 acre requirement
                                     for HDR on the sites. Suggested these sites be removed from the candidate list
                                     and include an asterisk that there must be 10 to 15 acres when the site is master
                                     planned.
                                  •	 Concerns about adding high density to an existing problem area in Laguna West.
                                  •	Representative for owners of site C-37 said the owners are opposed to including
                                     this site on the list of potential sites because there is an active development
                                     agreement and tentative map on the site. Strongly encouraged the Commission
                                     to consider an overlay opportunity so that the City could potentially add a high-
                                     density element with commercial.
                                  •	Opposed to sites C-27 and C-31 because there seemed to be little consideration
                                     given to the classification scheme of the Maritime West Rezone and the requirement
                                     for commercial development. Also noted that the stormwater system criteria for
                                     access to public sewer and water would be impacted because of the severed
                                     relationship between parcel owners and Lakeside Community Owners Association.
                               Planning Commission Comments
                                  •	 The Commission agreed to reserve their comments on specific sites until after the
                                     CEQA process is completed.
                               June 6, 2013 – Comments Received
                               Public Comments
                                  •	A representative from the Sacramento Housing Alliance said that part of
                                     removing constraints and allowing development to all economic segments is to
                                     look to leadership to embrace the fair share component. Said that the programs
                                     are designed to be proactive instead of waiting for housing to be substandard.
                                     Programs are also used for maintaining rental housing.
                                  •	 A representative from Sacramento Self Help Housing said that the census showed
                                     a surprising level of poverty in the City. Personally has had a hard time finding
                                     affordable housing. The City inspection program would be a good idea so that the
                                     burden is not on the tenants. Supports anything that can be done to make housing
                                     less costly in order to provide for low-income families.
H-104	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Housing Element
    •	A representative from Mutual Housing California spoke in support of the analysis
       presented in the letter submitted by Legal Services of Northern California and
       the importance of making sure that the sites identi-fied in the land inventory are
       appropriate to the goals of the housing inventory. Stated that Mutual Housing has
       been instrumental to the implementation of an inspection program in Sacramento
       and that it has been a very successful program. In response to a question of what
       has made the inspection program successful, said that it brings landlords into
       compliance with safe housing requirements.
    •	City’s housing policy promotes segregation and violates Housing Goal #5. Also
       suggested that there was a lack of reconciliation between the homelessness in Elk
       Grove and the high rate of home foreclosure.
Planning Commission and Staff Comments
    •	 Staff presented the details of the update and answered questions of the Commission
       relating to the pro-posed new programs of a universal design ordinance that would
       require single-family residential builders to provide universal design features as
       options for prospective buyers and a rental inspection program that would require
       City inspection of rental housing. In response to questions of the Commission, staff
       explained that the Rental Housing Association provided very valuable information
       to draft the program and that the Building Industry Association sent a letter saying
       that the design program would be at the expense of the buyer and that they
       look forward to working with buyers. Staff further explained that the inspection
       program would be a City-initiated inspection and not traceable back to a tenant
       afraid of retaliation.
    •	 The Commission felt the programs may be a nuisance and a solution to problems
       that don’t exist. They felt that the programs may be difficult to support with a lack
       of data.
    •	Staff explained that the programs as discussed were on the agenda for
       consideration, not official action.
    •	 The Assistant City Attorney pointed out that actual ordinances not located in Title
       23 of the Municipal Code may not come back to the Commission.
    •	 The Commission preferred further study of the new programs before recommending
       to the City Council for consideration. The Commission said they would want to
       look at things like incentives and fees.
12. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alta California Regional Center. 2012. Data on Developmentally Disabled Population by
Age Range by ZIP Code by City. Sacramento County.
www.building-cost.net. Accessed December 2012.
California Department of Finance. E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities,
Counties and the State, 2001-2012, with 2000 Benchmark.
Center for Strategic Economic Research. 2010. Elk Grove Market Study.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 H-105

Housing Element
                               County of Sacramento, Assessors Office. 2002. Personal Conversation with Bill Silva.
                               July 10.
                               County of Sacramento, County Sanitation District (CSD-1). 2002. Personal Conversation
                               with Lisa Moll. July 12.
                               County of Sacramento, Department of Public Works. 2002. Infrastructure Finance: Fee
                               Deferral Programs.
                               ——. 2002. Personal Conversation with Paul Philleo. July 15.
                               David Paul Rosen & Associates. 2013. City of Elk Grove Affordable Housing Nexus Study.
                               HCD (California Department of Housing and Community Development). 2000. Raising
                               the Roof, California Housing Development Projections and Constraints 1997-2020, May
                               2000.
                               ——. Division of Housing Policy Development. 2013. 2013 Income Limits.
                               Rent.com. Accessed December 2012.
                               SACOG (Sacramento Area Council of Governments). 2001. Final Regional Housing Needs
                               Plan for the SACOG Region.
                               ——. 2012. Regional Housing Needs Plan 2013–2021.
                               ——. Projections 2035.
                               Trulia.com. Accessed December 2012.
                               US Census Bureau. 1990 US Census.
                               ——. 2000 US Census.
                               ——. 2005–2010 American Community Survey (ACS).
                               ——. 2010 US Census.
H-106	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                              Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Elemen
Land Use element
                                    Land Use is often considered the “heart” of the General Plan. The statement of future
                                    land uses describes how the City believes it should develop in the future—where
                                    housing, shopping, open space, and other uses should occur. The Land Use Policy Map,
                                    therefore, shows the Elk Grove which its residents, businesses, and decision-makers
                                    wish to achieve.
                                    Where open land exists in Elk Grove (as described in the Background Report), the Land
                                    Use Policy Map describes what type of new land uses are desired—or whether existing
                                    open lands will be retained for agriculture, habitat, or other uses. In some areas, the
                                    Land Use Policy Map shows future uses, which differ from the existing land uses; in these
                                    areas, the General Plan foresees change and a transition to new land uses.
                                    LAND USE POLICY AREAS
                                    This General Plan establishes several “Land Use Policy Areas,” which have been
                                    designated to reflect existing and pending major project approvals, or to reflect the
                                    need for more detailed land use planning at a future date. The following policy areas
                                    are discussed in this Element:
                                        •	 East Franklin
      Homes, apartments, and
 commercial uses mix in this aerial     •	 East Elk Grove
   photo of the area near Laguna
      and Franklin boulevards.          •	 Laguna Ridge
                                        •	 Old Town Elk Grove
                                        •	 South Pointe
                                        •	 Southeast Area
                                    Please refer to the sections of this Element for each Policy Area for further information.
                                    ESTATE AND RURAL RESIDENTIAL AREAS/RURAL
                                    “SHELDON” AREA
                                    The “Sheldon” area in the eastern portion of Elk Grove is recognized as an area with
                                    unique characteristics—the “rural lifestyle” of this area, typified by homes on lots generally
                                    two acres in size and larger, is recognized in the Vision Statement of this General Plan as
                                    a major community asset to be preserved and protected from urban encroachment. This
                                    Element contains policies, which are intended to preserve and enhance the character of
                                    this area.
                                    OLD TOWN ELK GROVE
                                    Old Town Elk Grove represents a significant resource of local and national importance—
                                    Old Town is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as an excellent example of
                                    a 19th Century California town. This Element contains policies intended to increase the
                                    protection given to the historic buildings in Old Town (both inside and outside of the
                                    current Old Town Elk Grove Special Planning Area) and elsewhere in the city.
LU-2	     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
EAST ELK GROVE
The East Elk Grove Specific Plan was adopted by the County of Sacramento prior to
incorporation, and had begun development before Elk Grove became a city. The East
Elk Grove Specific Plan is designated as a Policy Area by this General Plan, with the
intent of ensuring that the Specific Plan remains consistent with the General Plan.
EAST FRANKLIN
Adopted in May 2000, prior to the incorporation of Elk Grove, the East Franklin Specific
Plan covers a large portion of the city’s growth area, and will ultimately include more
than 10,000 homes. This Element designates the East Franklin area as a Policy Area,
and envisions the implementation of the East Franklin Specific Plan to achieve the City’s
land use goals in this area.
LAGUNA RIDGE
The Laguna Ridge area is addressed in detail in the Laguna Ridge Specific Plan. This
General Plan designates the Laguna Ridge area with specific land use categories, and
requires that the Specific Plan be used to implement this General Plan’s policies for the
area. The Laguna Ridge Specific Plan is designated as a Policy Area by this General Plan,
with the intent of ensuring that the Specific Plan implements the General Plan.
SOUTHEAST AREA
The Southeast Area is generally located south of the “Laguna Ridge” area, and remains
(as of 2004) the last large, unplanned portion of Elk Grove’s growing southwest quarter.
This General Plan designates the Southeast Area as a Policy Area, and requires further
detailed planning at a future date.
SOUTH POINTE
Planning for this area in the south central portion of Elk Grove was begun prior to the
City’s incorporation. The overall concept for this area is the development of a primarily
residential area with public park uses as well. Specific policies dealing with this project
are included in this Element. This General Plan designates the South Pointe area as a
Policy Area.
URBAN STUDY AREAS
Located outside the current city limits, these areas (south of Kammerer Road and Grant
Line Road) are envisioned by this General Plan as areas in which future study should be
done in order to determine the extent to which urban growth should occur and in what
form growth should be permitted. These areas are, as of this Plan’s adoption, within the
jurisdiction of the County of Sacramento.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-3

Land Use Element
                               TRAILS AND OPEN SPACE
                               Trails and open space are an important part of the overall pattern of land uses in Elk
                               Grove, providing aesthetically pleasing and functional aspects to the community’s
                               residential and commercial areas.
                               Policies related to trails and open space are contained in the Parks, Trails, and Open Space
                               Element of this General Plan.
                               SPHERE OF INFLUENCE AND ANNEXATION
                               This General Plan provides land use planning for the city and a larger Planning Area. The
                               Planning Area is intended to be an area in which the City has an interest in guiding land
                               use decisions by the County of Sacramento, and is envisioned as the area into which the
                               incorporated city boundaries may eventually expand.
                               LAND USE CONSTRAINTS: SAFETY, NOISE, FLOODING,
                               AND OTHER ISSUES
                               The Land Use Policy Map included in this Element is not intended to show—and does not
                               show—all constraints which may affect the ability of any particular parcel of land to be
                               developed. Many constraints, such as safety issues, sensitive biological resources, noise,
                               flooding, easements held by others, etc., may make development of land for some uses
                               unsuitable or financially less feasible.
                               Please see the Noise and Safety Elements for policies related to noise, flooding, and
                               other safety issues.
                                       Many factors can affect the development potential of property. Persons
                                       wishing to determine the development potential of property in Elk Grove
                                       should consult the various Elements of this General Plan, the General
                                       Plan Background Report, the General Plan EIR, and other sources of
                                       information, such as updated flood maps, biological maps, easements,
                                       and the like.
                               URBAN DESIGN
                               “Urban design” generally refers to the design of public and private buildings and spaces;
                               it is urban design which gives rise to the “look” of a community. The City of Elk Grove
                               recognizes that the public’s interest is served by ensuring that new development in the
                               city is of a high level of quality, and adheres to basic levels of design and quality.
                               AREAS SUBJECT TO FLOODING
                               Portions of Elk Grove as identified in the General Plan Background Report are subject
                               to flooding. The Conservation and Safety elements of this General Plan include policies
                               that address the use of land subject to flooding.
LU-4	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
INTERAGENCY COOPERATION
Interagency cooperation is of critical importance in Elk Grove, where several outside
agencies are responsible for providing critical public services such as water, sewer,
flood control, fire protection, and parks. This Element contains policies that state the
City’s desire to maintain strong working relationships with these agencies to ensure the
efficient provision of all services to the residents and businesses of Elk Grove.
The establishment of a Land Use Policy Map and its related policies is one of the most
important functions of the General Plan, since the map and policies will determine the
future land uses and character of the city. The Land Use Policies of the General Plan
implement these Guiding and Focused Goals:
  Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
  Focused Goal 1-1: A safe community, free from manmade and natural hazards
  Focused Goal 1-3: A balanced and efficient transportation system
  Focused Goal 1-5: Excellence in the design of new development
  Focused Goal 1-6: Safe and affordable housing for all persons
  Focused Goal 1-8: Creation and maintenance of a strong, positive community image
  for Elk Grove
  Focused Goal 1-9: A pattern of land use which enhances the community character of
  Elk Grove, provides employment and shopping opportunities to serve residents and
  the region, which provides for use of transit, and which protects Elk Grove’s unique
  historical and natural features
  Guiding Goal 2: Diversified Economic Base
  Focused Goal 2-1: A business community which includes a diversity of office uses,
  locally oriented and regionally oriented retail and services, and a diversity of residential
  types
  Focused Goal 2-2: A balance between the numbers and types of workers residing in
  Elk Grove and opportunities for employment in the city
  Focused Goal 2-4: Creation of Elk Grove as a desired place to locate major employment-
  generating uses
  Guiding Goal 3: Protection of the Natural Environment
  Focused Goal 3-1: Development which recognizes environmental constraints and is
  designed and operated to minimize impacts on the environment
  Focused Goal 3-2: Open space lands in proximity to Elk Grove which provide for
  agricultural use and habitat for native species
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-5

Land Use Element
                                Focused Goal 3-3: Natural resources managed and protected for the use and
                                enjoyment of current and future generations
                                Focused Goal 3-4: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s natural areas, in
                                particular the areas within the floodplain of the Cosumnes River
                                Guiding Goal 4: Preservation and Enhancement of Elk Grove’s Unique Historic and
                                Natural Features
                                Focused Goal 4-1: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s historic structures
                                and districts
                                Focused Goal 4-2: Preservation of the large oak and other tree species which are an
                                important part of the City’s historic and aesthetic character
                                Guiding Goal 5: Preservation of the Rural Character of Elk Grove
                                Focused Goal 5-1: Retention of those areas identified for 2-acre and larger lots on the
                                Land Use Map as a rural area through land use and infrastructure controls
                                Focused Goal 5-2: Maintenance of those features that provide the character of Elk
                                Grove’s rural areas, including: large oak and other trees, small local roadways, animal
                                keeping and raising, equestrians, agriculture, and limited commercial opportunities
                               LAND USE POLICIES
                               LU-1	    The City of Elk Grove recognizes the value of using the City’s land use authority
                                        to regulate the use of land within the city, the uses which can take place upon
                                        lands in Elk Grove, the arrangement of public and private buildings, and the
                                        design of public and private development in order to create an attractive,
                                        vibrant community which fulfills the goals expressed in this General Plan.
                               LU-2	    The City’s Land Use Policy Map (figure LU-1) illustrates the planned land uses
                                        for lands within Elk Grove and the Planning Area outside the city limits. The
                                        following land use categories and definitions shall be used in the assignment of
                                        zoning categories and in the review of proposed projects. (Note: The “Former
                                        GP Designation” reflects the land use designation(s) from the previous General
                                        Plan which most closely correspond to the designations used in this General
                                        Plan. This is provided for informational purposes only.)
LU-6	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
                                                                 Commercial Land Uses
                   Designation                                                                        Notes
                                                     Generally characterized by office, professional, and retail uses in any mix. Residential uses are
Commercial                                           not permitted.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Commercial/Office
                                                     Generally characterized by office and professional land uses; may include ancillary retail sales.
Office                                               No residential uses permitted.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Commercial/Office
                                                     Generally characterized by office and professional land uses; may include ancillary retail sales.
Office/Multi-Family                                  Also includes high density residential development.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Commercial/Office
                                                     Generally characterized by office, professional, and retail uses in any mix. Residential uses are
Commercial/Office                                    not permitted.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Commercial/Office
                                                     Generally characterized by office, professional, and retail uses in any mix. Also includes high
Commercial/Office/ Multi-Family                      density residential development.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Commercial/Office
                                                     Generally characterized by industrial or manufacturing activities, which occur entirely within an
Light Industry                                       enclosed building.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Intensive Industrial
                                                     Generally characterized by industrial or manufacturing activities, which may occur inside or
Heavy Industry                                       outside of an enclosed building.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Extensive Industrial
                                                   Public, Quasi-Public, and Open Space Land Uses
  Note: These categories will typically be applied to lands after acquisition by the City or another agency has occurred, or after the acceptance of
                   roadways by the City or Caltrans, and are intended to reflect existing land uses, rather than planned facilities.
                   Designation                                                                        Notes
                                                     Includes lands owned by the City of Elk Grove, the Elk Grove Unified School District (with the
                                                     exception of public schools), the Elk Grove Community Services District (with the exception of
Public/Quasi-Public
                                                     public parks), and other public agencies.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Public and Quasi Public
                                                     Includes public parks owned by the Elk Grove Community Services District or other public
Public Parks                                         agencies.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Recreation
                                                     Includes lands owned by public entities which have been reserved for open space uses such as
Public Open Space/Recreation                         habitat mitigation, lakes, trails, golf courses, and similar uses.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Recreation and Natural Reserve
                                                     Includes lands owned by private entities, which have been reserved for open space uses such
                                                     as habitat mitigation, lakes, trails, golf courses, and similar uses. Included in this category are
Private Open Space/Recreation
                                                     commercial recreation facilities principally oriented to outdoor uses.
                                                     Former GP Designation: Recreation and Natural Reserve
                                                     Includes public schools or sites (K-12) owned and operated by the Elk Grove Unified School
Public Schools                                       District or other public school districts.
                                                     Former GP Designation: None
                                                     Includes facilities such as hospitals, congregate care facilities, and the like.
Institutional
                                                     Former GP Designation: Public and Quasi Public
                                                     Used to designate existing private streets; locations of planned private streets are not shown
Private Streets                                      on the General Plan Land Use Map
                                                     Former GP Designation: None
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	               LU-7
Land Use Element
                                                              Residential Land Uses
          Residential Land Use Designations                Dwelling Units Per Gross Acre                                    Notes
                                                                                                     Minimum lot size: 2 to 10 acres.
  Rural Residential
                                                                      0.1 - 0.5                      Areas with minimum lot size greater than 10 acres
  Former GP Designation: Agricultural Residential
                                                                                                     are included in agricultural land use categories.
  Estate Residential
  Former GP Designation: Agricultural Residential                    0.51 – 4.0                      Lot sizes range from ¼ acre to 2 acres
  and Low Density Residential
  Low Density Residential                                                                            Lot sizes vary, generally from approximately
                                                                     4.1+ - 7.0
  Former GP Designation: Low Density Residential                                                     6,000 to 10,000 SF
  Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                     May include small lot single family development
  Former GP Designation: Low Density Residential  7.1+ - 15.0
                                                                                                     or condo/ townhome-type development
  and Medium Density Residential
  High Density Residential
                                                                                                     May consist of apartments, condominiums, or
  Former GP Designation: Medium Density                             15.1+ - 30.0
                                                                                                     clustered single family
  Residential and High Density Residential
                                                                    Agriculture
                     Designation                       Minimum Parcel Size (Gross Acres)                                    Notes
                                                                                                     Residential uses permitted; one dwelling unit per
  Rural Agriculture                                                   10 – 20
                                                                                                     parcel
                                                                                                     This designation applies to areas outside the
  General Agriculture                                                   20+
                                                                                                     2002 city limits only.
                                                                Other Designations
                     Designation                                                                    Notes
                                                  Area is not planned for specific urban uses, but is subject to preparation of detailed land use
  Urban study area
                                                  feasibility planning and analysis (see Land Use Element text for further information)
                                                  Area is identified for the integration of transit uses (such as train stations, transfer stations,
                                                  transit hubs, park and ride facilities, etc.) with a mix of high density and intensity urban uses
                                                  (e.g., commercial, office, residential) consistent with the underlying designation(s). The intent
  Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Overlay      of this overlay designation is to identify that specific transit uses shall be incorporated into
                                                  development consistent with the underlying base land use designation. No development
                                                  activity shall preclude intended transit facilities. Corresponding right of way dedications shall
                                                  be required with discretionary approvals as appropriate.
	            LU-2-Action 1: Regularly update the Land Use Policy Map as development projects are approved to designate
             new roadways, schools, etc. for the uses shown in the “Public, Quasi-Public, and Open Space Land Uses” land use
             categories.
LU-3	        The following table illustrates the Zoning Districts, which implement the land use categories shown on the Land Use
             Policy Map of this General Plan.
                  Land Use Category                                                            Zoning Districts
  Commercial                                                                                    AC, LC, GC, SC
  Office                                                                                            BP, MP
  Office/Multi-Family                                                                       BP, MP, (MF) overlay
  Commercial/Office                                                                  AC, LC, GC, SC, TC, C-O, BP, MP
  Commercial/Office/Multi- Family                                                               AC, LC, GC, SC
  C-O, BP, MP, (MF) overlay
  Light Industry                                                                                     MP, LI
  Heavy Industry                                                                                       HI
  Public and Quasi-Public                                                                    Any zoning district
  Public Schools                                            Any agricultural, residential, or office zoning district; LC and C-O zoning districts
LU-8	         ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                            Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
                   Land Use Category                                                              Zoning Districts
  Public Parks                                             Any agricultural or residential zoning districts; O zoning district, LC, GC and C-O zoning
                                                                                                     Districts
  Public and Private Open Space/Recreation                    O zoning district; any agricultural and residential zoning district; C-O zoning district
  Institutional                                            AG-20 and AG-80 zoning districts; any residential zoning district; MP, BP, and LI zoning
                                                                                                      districts
  Rural Residential                                                                             AR-10, AR-5, AR-2
  Estate Residential                                                                       AR-1, RD-1, RD-2, RD-3, RD-4
  Low Density Residential                                                                    RD-4, RD-5, RD-6, RD-7
  Medium Density Residential                                                                       RD-10, RD-15
  High Density Residential                                                                    RD-20, RD-25, RD-30
  Rural Agriculture                                                                                AR-10, AG-20
  General Agriculture                                                                              AG-20, AG-80
  Urban study area                                                                              AG zoning districts
  Private Streets                                                                               Any zoning district
  Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Overlay                         Reference underlying land use designation for consistent Zoning Districts
* The “O” (Recreation) zone is a consistent zoning district in all land use categories.
The Zoning Map and all other land use approvals, including Specific Plans and Special Planning Areas, shall be consistent with
the Land Use Policy Map of this General Plan.
	            LU-3-Action 1 Amend the Elk Grove Zoning Code to add the Multi-Family Overlay District to implement the mixed
             use land use designations, and apply this zoning to lands so designated on the Land Use Policy Map.
	            LU-3-Action 2 Not more than six months after the adoption of this General Plan initiate a Zoning Consistency
             Program to amend the Zoning Map to provide for conformance with the Land Use Policy Map.
	            LU-3-Action 3 As part of the Zoning Consistency program noted in Action 1 above, make the following changes to
             the Elk Grove Zoning Code:
             •	 Revise the list of permitted uses to allow multi-family development in LC, GC, and SC zones or their equivalent.
             •	 Consider creating a Neighborhood Commercial zoning district to provide for a limited range of neighborhood-
                serving retail and service uses which exclude the following:
                •	 Drive-up or drive-through fast food restaurants (other types of drive-through uses, such as drug stores and ATM
                   machines, may be considered)
                •	 Sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site or off-site consumption
                •	 Automotive service
	            The Neighborhood Commercial zoning district may also provide for limited hours of operation for all uses to limit
             potential adverse effects on adjacent residential areas.
             •	 Revise the list of permitted uses to limit multi-family density in the BP or equivalent zoning district to no more than
                25 units per acre.
             •	 Develop “mixed-use” or overlay zoning districts to implement the retail/multi-family and office/multi-family land
                use designations of the Land Use Policy Map.
             •	 Add an RD-6 zoning district.
             •	 Add a “PS” or similar zoning district to be applied to private streets.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                LU-9

Land Use Element                                                                                                                         Land Use Element
Figure LU-1: Land Use Policy Map
 Note: This figure is intended to be viewed in color. Some information may not display correctly in black and white.
LU-10	     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                             Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-11
Land Use Element
                                          •	 Add an “Institutional” or similar zoning district to be applied to
                                             schools, City property, and other public lands.
                                          •	 Add performance standards to the Zoning Code related to issues
                                             such as radio interference, noise, vibration, smoke/dust, heat, and
                                             light/glare to reduce the potential for off-site impacts created by
                                             commercial and industrial land uses.
                               LU-4	      All land use approvals, including, but not limited to:
                                          •	Zoning,
                                          •	 Planning documents (such as Specific Plans and Special Planning
                                             Areas),
                                          •	 Tentative Maps,
                                          •	 Conditional Use Permits,
                                          •	Etc.,
                               	          shall be required to conform with the General Plan.
                               LU-5	      Subsequent plans which implement the Land Use Policy Map may
                                          blend uses or residential densities as part of a master-planned
                                          project, provided that the overall development intensity shown on
                                          the Land Use Policy Map is not exceeded.
                               LU-6	      Multi-family housing development should be located according to
                                          the general criteria.
                               Please also refer to the Conservation/Air Quality and Circulation elements for
                               policies related to:
                                   •	 Clustering of development to protect natural areas
                                   •	 Encouraging location of intensive uses near transit facilities
                               LU-7	      The City encourages disclosure of potential land use compatibility
                                          issues such as noise, dust, odors, etc., in order to provide potential
                                          purchasers with complete information to make informed decisions
                                          about purchasing property.
                               	          LU-7-Action 1 Within two years of the adoption of this General
                                          Plan, adopt an ordinance requiring the disclosure of potential
                                          nuisance issues. This ordinance shall include a requirement that the
                                          information disclosed be reviewed and approved by the City, and
                                          that the disclosure be included in the title to the property to ensure
                                          notification of all future purchasers.
                               LU-8	      Develop a fiscally sound strategy to encourage a mix of uses
                                          that meet the City’s needs and provide sufficient tax base to
                                          maintain adequate community service levels. Development of new
                                          businesses expands the property tax base and increases sales tax
                                          both directly and indirectly. Ways to increase City revenues have
LU-12	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
        become increasingly important as a means to ensure adequate services levels
        and quality of life.
	       LU-8-Action 1 Periodically study typical tax revenues generated by Elk
        Grove business types to determine the kinds of businesses that are fiscally
        advantageous to the City.
	       LU-8-Action 2 Monitor the impact of City controlled taxes to establish the level
        of such taxes that will attract desired businesses and to maintain them in Elk
        Grove.
	       LU-8-Action 3 Monitor revenues generated by different economic sectors on
        an ongoing basis.
	       LU-8-Action 4 Continue to evaluate and promote the desirable maximum
        potential build-out in each of the City’s commercial and industrial areas.
	       LU-8-Action 5 Monitor land use in each commercial area with the intention of
        assuring that departing businesses are replaced by new uses consistent with
        City goals.
LU-9	   Land uses in the vicinity of areas designated as “Heavy Industry” on the
        Land Use Policy Map should include transitions in intensity, buffers, or other
        methods to reduce potential impacts on residential uses. Buffers may include
        land designated for other uses, such as Light Industry, commercial, or open
        spaces.
LU-10	  The City should seek to designate sufficient land in all employment-generating
        categories to provide a minimum 1:1 correspondence between Elk Grove’s
        working population and jobs in categories matching their employment level.
	       LU-10-Action 1 Review the Land Use Policy Map, employment information,
        developed employment-generating uses, and other pertinent information at
        least bi-annually to determine whether the Map should be amended to provide
        additional office, retail, or industrial uses.
LU-11	  The City shall support the development of neighborhood-serving commercial
        uses adjacent to residential areas, which provide quality, convenient
        and community-serving retail choices in a manner that does not impact
        neighborhood character.
LAND USE POLICIES: AREAS OUTSIDE THE
INCORPORATED AREA OF ELK GROVE
LU-12	  The Land Use Policy Map for the Planning Area (Figure LU-2) provides
        conceptual land use policy for the area outside the current incorporated
        boundaries of Elk Grove. This policy is intended as a statement of the City’s
        long-term vision for this area; these lands remain under the jurisdiction of
        Sacramento County. Except where specifically indicated, the City’s land use
        policy for areas outside the city limits reflects the County of Sacramento’s land
        use policy as it existed on December 31, 2002.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-13

Land Use Element
                               	      LU-12-Action 1 Following the annexation of any area within the
                                      Planning Area to the City of Elk Grove, initiate any planning process
                                      necessary to implement the land uses shown in the Land Use Policy
                                      Map for the Planning Area.
                               LAND USE POLICIES: SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
                               AND ANNEXATION
                               LU-13	 The City will work with the Sacramento Local Agency Formation
                                      Commission to establish and update a Sphere of Influence, which
                                      reflects the City’s near-term goals for potential additions to the
                                      corporate boundaries.
                               LU-14	 The City shall apply the following policies to potential annexations:
                                      •	Annexations should conform to an orderly expansion of city
                                         boundaries within planned urban growth areas and provide for a
                                         contiguous development pattern.
                                      •	Annexations should include a comprehensive land use plan
                                         for the affected territory, including Pre-zoning and a plan for
                                         infrastructure financing and phasing;
                                      •	 Annexations should:
                                         •	 Constitute fiscally sound additions to the existing City.
                                         •	Be consistent with State law and Local Agency Formation
                                            Commission policies, standards and criteria.
                                         •	 Preserve neighborhood identities.
                                         •	 Ensure the provision of adequate municipal services.
                                         •	 Be consistent with General Plan and Community Plan land use
                                            policies.
                                         •	Incorporate Smart Growth criteria for sustainable economic
                                            growth while maintaining environmental integrity, and providing
                                            for social equity.
                                         •	 Promote fiscally sound, efficient service boundaries.
                               LU-15	 The City shall encourage annexations initiated by landowner/
                                      residents, which are consistent with the City’s policies.
                               LAND USE POLICIES: URBAN STUDY AREAS
                               LU-16	 The areas designated in the Planning Area as “Urban Study Areas”
                                      are envisioned as areas in which urbanization to some extent could
                                      occur, generally in compliance with the following criteria:
                                      •	 Development should be limited to areas outside of the 100-year
                                         floodplain.
                                      •	 Development should take place in compliance with the goals and
                                         policies of this General Plan.
                                      •	Any study of potential land uses in these areas should be
LU-14	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
            accomplished in cooperation with the County of Sacramento, the Sacramento
            Local Agency Formation Commission, and other agencies and parties with
            ownership or jurisdiction of lands in and near the study area.
         •	Any study of land uses in these areas should be accompanied by an
            environmental evaluation of the potential impacts of development.
         •	 Prior to the completion of land use studies, the City’s policy is that County
            of Sacramento land use designations in effect as of December 31, 2002,
            are retained.
	        LU-16-Action 1 Work with the County of Sacramento to establish and
         implement a program to study the potential for these areas to support urban
         development.
LU-17 	 Implement a comprehensive and city-wide strategy for the preservation of
         open space, habitat and agriculture, both inside and outside the City’s existing
         city limits.
Figure LU-2: Planning Area Land Use Concept
        Note: This figure is intended to be viewed
        in color. Some information may not display
        correctly in black and white.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-15

Land Use Element
                               	         LU-17-Action 1 Within 90 days of the adoption of this General Plan, staff shall
                                         bring to the City Council for its consideration options available for the strategic
                                         funding, acquisition and management of land in and proximate to the City for
                                         the purposes of preserving open space, habitat and agriculture.
                               LAND USE POLICIES: ESTATE AND RURAL RESIDENTIAL
                               AREAS
                               Please refer to the Conservation and Air Quality Element of this General Plan for policies
                               related to clustering of development in Estate and Rural Residential areas.
                               Please refer to the Public Facilities and Finance Element of this General Plan for policies
                               related to provision of sewer service in the Rural Residential area.
                               LAND USE POLICY AREA: RURAL “SHELDON” AREA
                               LU-18	 Land uses within the “Sheldon” area (generally encompassing the area
                                         designated for Rural Residential uses in the eastern portion of Elk Grove) shall
                                         be consistent with the community’s rural character, emphasizing lot sizes of at
                                         least two gross acres, roadways which preserve the area’s mature trees, and
                                         limited commercial services.
                               LAND USE POLICY AREA: ELK GROVE TRIANGLE
                               LU-19	    Land uses in the Elk Grove Triangle Policy Area shall consist primarily of
                                         residential uses on lots of 1 acres in size, with approximately 40 acres of
                                         commercial land uses intended to serve primarily local needs.
                               	         LU-19-Action 1 The City shall prepare a comprehensive plan for the Triangle
                                         Area to implement the General Plan’s land use policies for this area. The
                                         comprehensive plan may be prepared in any form which provides for the
                                         efficient and proper implementation of this policy.
                               LAND USE POLICY AREA: OLD TOWN ELK GROVE
                               LU-20	 Land uses and development standards in and in the vicinity of the Old Town
                                         area of Elk Grove shall be designed to protect, improve, and promote the
                                         historical character of this portion of Elk Grove.
                               	         LU-20-Action 1 Amend and/or revise the Old Town Special Planning Area
                                         (SPA) to ensure that all of the following criteria are met:
                                         •	 All of the parcels listed in the National Register as being “contributing parcels”
                                            to the federally designated Elk Grove Historic District shall be included in the
                                            Old Town SPA. The Old Town SPA shall exclude parcels which are not necessary
                                            to meet the above criteria and which contain existing land uses which are not
                                            historic and/or which have limited or no potential for contributing to the historic
                                            character of the Old Town SPA.
LU-16	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
         •	Sufficient additional area to provide a      Figure LU-3: East Elk Grove Policy Area Land Use Map
            continuous boundary which includes
                                                        Note: This figure is intended to be viewed in color. Some
            these parcels shall also be included.       information may not display correctly in black and white.
         •	The Old Town SPA shall also include
            parcels necessary to provide logical
            boundaries, which meet the above
            criteria.
         •	The Old Town SPA shall include
            detailed development, architectural,
            and land use standards intended to
            assist in the protection and promotion
            of the historical character of the Old
            Town area.
         •	 Permissible land uses in the Old Town
            SPA shall exclude uses that, in the
            judgment of the City, detract from the
            historic character of Old Town.
         •	 The SPA should provide for
            coordination with the City’s overall
            economic development efforts to help
            maintain and improve the economic
            vitality of this area.
See also the Historic Resources Element of this
General Plan for additional policies and actions
related to historic resources in Old Town and
elsewhere in Elk Grove.
LAND USE POLICY AREA:
EAST ELK GROVE
LU-21	   Land uses in the East Elk Grove Policy
         Area shall generally conform with the
         uses shown in Figure LU-3.
LU-22	   Development in the East Elk Grove Policy
         Area shall take place in accordance with
         the East Elk Grove Specific Plan.
LU-23	   The East Elk Grove Specific Plan and any
         related implementation plans (including,
         but not limited to, capital facilities plans,
         public facilities financing plans, etc.)
         shall be consistent with this General Plan
         and shall be used to implement the land
         use and other policies of this General
         Plan.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-17

Land Use Element
  Figure LU-4: East Franklin Policy Area
  Note: This figure is intended to be viewed in color. Some
  information may not display correctly in black and white.
LU-18	     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                          Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015
Land Use Element
LAND USE POLICY AREA:
EAST FRANKLIN
LU-24	 Land uses in the East Franklin Policy Area shall generally conform with the
            uses shown in Figure LU-4, on the following page.
LU-25	      The East Franklin Specific Plan shall designate a minimum of 64 net acres of
            land for development of high-density residential development.
	           LU-25-Action 1 Amend the East Franklin Specific Plan to conform with the
            requirements of this Policy.
LU-26	      Development in the East Franklin Policy Area shall take place in accordance
            with the East Franklin Specific Plan.
LU-27	      The East Franklin Specific Plan and any related implementation plans (including,
            but not limited to, capital facilities plans, public facilities financing plans, etc.)
            shall be consistent with this General Plan and shall be used to implement the
            land use and other policies of this General Plan.
Figure LU-5: Laguna Ridge Policy Area
Note: This figure
is intended to
be viewed in
color. Some
information
may not display
correctly in black
and white.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                         ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-19
Land Use Element
                               LAND USE POLICY AREA: LAGUNA RIDGE
                               LU-28	 Land uses in the Laguna Ridge Policy Area shall conform with the
                                      general layout of land uses shown in Figure LU-5.
                               LU-29	 At least four percent (4%) of the total land area within the Laguna
                                      Ridge Policy Area shall be designated for high-density residential
                                      development.
                               LU-30	 Development in the Laguna Ridge Policy Area shall take place under
                                      the guidance of a Specific Plan which includes:
                                      •	 Land use designations
                                      •	 Development standards
                                      •	 Infrastructure plans
                                      •	 Financing plan
                                      •	 Design guidelines and implementation
                               LU-31	 The Laguna Ridge Specific Plan and any related implementation
                                      plans (including, but not limited to, capital facilities plans, public
                                      facilities financing plans, etc.) shall be consistent with this General
                                      Plan and shall be used to implement the land use and other policies
                                      of this General Plan.
                               LAND USE POLICY AREA: SOUTHEAST POLICY
                               AREA
                               LU-32	 Development in the Southeast Policy Area shall comply with the
                                      policies and provisions of the Southeast Policy Area Community
                                      Plan.
                               LAND USE POLICIES: SOUTH POINTE POLICY
                               AREA
                               LU-33	 The following general criteria shall apply to the South Pointe Policy
                                      Area as shown in Figures LU-1 and LU-6:
                                      •	 Land uses in this area shall consist of a mix of low and medium
                                         density residential and multi-family residential development,
                                         along with supporting land uses such as parks and school.
                                      •	At least 5.5 percent (5.5%) of the total land area shall be
                                         designated high-density residential development.
                                      •	 Development of this area shall take place through a comprehensive
                                         planning process.
LU-20	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                              Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
LAND USE POLICIES: TRAILS AND OPEN SPACE
Please see the Parks, Open Space and Trails Element of this General Plan for information on
trail policies and planned trails.
Open Space policies are contained in the Conservation and Air Quality; Parks, Open
Space and Trails; and Safety elements of this General Plan.
LAND USE CONSTRAINTS: SAFETY, NOISE, FLOODING,
AND OTHER ISSUES
LU-34	 The Land Use Policy Map does not establish the development potential of
            properties within Elk Grove. Land uses which may occur on any given parcel
            or in any project shall also be based on physical constraints and other City
            policies.
LAND USE POLICIES: URBAN DESIGN
LU-35	 The City of Elk Grove shall require that new development—including
            commercial, office, industrial, and residential development—is of high quality
            and reflects the City’s desire to create a high quality, attractive, functional, and
            efficient built environment.
	           LU-35-Action 1 Prepare and adopt Design Guidelines for residential and non-
            residential development.
	           LU-35-Action 2 The Design Guidelines shall include a provision to minimize the
            use of reflective materials in building design in order to reduce the potential
            impacts of daytime glare.
	           LU-35-Action 3 The Citywide Design Guidelines shall include provisions for
            the design of outdoor light fixtures to be directed/shielded downward and
            screened to avoid nighttime lighting spillover effects on adjacent land uses
            and nighttime sky glow conditions.
LU-36	      Signs should be used primarily to facilitate business identification, rather than
            the advertisement of goods and services. Sign size limits and locations should
            be designated consistent with this policy.
	           LU-36-Action 1 Amend the City’s Sign Regulations to conform with this policy,
            adjusting maximum sign sizes, heights, etc.
LU-37	 Require the construction of “City of Elk Grove” signage and landscape
            treatments at major entrances to the city.
	           LU-37-Action 1 Develop an Entry Monument Master Plan which identifies the
            location of City entry statements and provides guidelines for the design of
            these features and their implementation, including funding.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                       ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-21

Land Use Element
                               LU-38	    Reduce the unsightly appearance of overhead and aboveground utilities.
                               	         LU-38-Action 1 To the extent possible, new utility facilities should be located
                                         underground. Facilities to be placed underground should include electrical
                                         transformers (where consistent with the guidelines of the electrical utility),
                                         water backflow preventers, and similar items.
                               	         LU-38-Action 2 Require that development on sites with existing overhead
                                         utilities be required to place these facilities underground where consistent with
                                         the guidelines of the electrical utility.
                               LAND USE POLICIES: AREAS SUBJECT TO FLOODING
                               Please refer to the Conservation/Air Quality and Safety elements of this General Plan for
                               policies related to land uses in areas subject to flooding. For information on areas subject
                               to flooding, please see the Background Report.
                               LAND USE POLICIES: INTERAGENCY COORDINATION
                               LU-39	    The City shall coordinate with regional planning agencies setting land use and
                                         environmental policies and programs and cooperate in the implementation of
                                         programs consistent with General Plan policy.
                               	         LU-39-Action 1 As part of the annual budget process, provide for staff time to
                                         attend meetings and participate in coordinating activities.
                               LAND USE POLICIES: SHELDON FARMS
                               LU-40 	 The Sheldon Farms property, located on the south side of Sheldon Road,
                               east of Bruceville Road, and north of Big Horn Boulevard, and consisting of APNs 116-
                               0012-048, 049, 051, 059, and 064, shall be developed consistent with the following
                               provisions:
                                          •	The City shall require that 15 net acres be designated for high density
                                             residential development. The applicant/property owner may propose and
                                             be granted additional acreage at their request and the City’s approval. It
                                             is anticipated that this acreage will be dispersed to two or three specific
                                             locations, allowing for multi-family development consistent with the policies
                                             of the Housing Element.
                                          •	Development should not occur until a master plan for the site has been
                                             prepared. At a minimum, the master plan should include a detailed
                                             designation of land uses, development standards, and infrastructure planning
                                             as appropriate.
                                          •	 The site is separated by Laguna Creek. As such, two separate master plans
                                             may be prepared, one for the north side of Laguna Creek and one for the
                                             land south of Laguna Creek. Should two master plans be prepared the high
                                             density residential requirement shall be proportionally shared between the
                                             two sides of Laguna Creek. The minimum size for any one high density
LU-22	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Land Use Element
            residential development location shall be 3 acres, consistent with the policies
            of this General Plan.
         •	Consistent with Policy H-1 Action 2 of this General Plan, rezoning of the
            Sheldon Farms property to include the high density residential requirement
            shall be completed by January 1, 2017. Should a master plan or equivalent
            development application not be approved by this time, the City may rezone
            the necessary acreage to satisfy this policy. This action shall not preclude
            the preparation and adoption of the master plan at a future date, including
            identifying different location(s) or configurations for the required high
            density residential development.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 LU-23

Noise Elemen
Noise Element
                                 Noise” is sometimes defined as “unwanted sound.” Sound which is desirable
                                 in some situations—for instance, amplified music—can become “noise”
                                 in other situations. Some types of sound—from trains, vehicle traffic, and
                                 mechanical equipment—are generally considered undesirable in residential
                                 areas, but are accepted in other areas (such as industrial areas). Noise has
                                 been linked directly to human health and, aside from general annoyances,
                                 excessive noise is a source of discomfort, interferes with sleep, and disrupts
                                 communication and relaxation.
                                 The preservation and enhancement of the acoustical environment relates
                                 directly to the quality of life that can be achieved in a community. By recognizing
   Railroad noise affects many   existing sources of noise pollution, taking reasonable steps to mitigate future
  residential areas in Elk Grove
                                 impacts, and preventing additional sources of noise, the City seeks to achieve a
                                 more pleasant environment and a comfortable and calming community.
                                 Elk Grove is committed to implementing “Best Management Practices” for all
                                 development and construction in Elk Grove to help reduce noise sources and
                                 exposure to noise.
                                 However, the development of new neighborhoods may create situations
                                 where new residents are introduced to existing noise sources (such as major
                                 roadways). Proper land use practices can minimize the proximate placement
                                 of conflicting uses.
                                 Soundwalls can minimize many of these impacts, but land use practices will
                                 more effectively address the true issue. Soundwalls can also create unsightly
                                 streetscapes, particularly if they are installed in front yard areas. This Element
                                 contains policies which promote methods other than soundwalls in all cases,
                                 and discourage their construction in front yards in existing neighborhoods.
                                 By recognizing the impacts of noise pollution, the City seeks to effectively
                                 address any proposed sources of noise or noise conflicts as they arise.
                                 The policies of the Noise Element implement the following Goals of the City
        Sound meter of the       of Elk Grove:
       type used to measure
        noise levels for this
           General Plan            Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
                                   Focused Goal 1-1: A safe community, free from manmade and natural hazards
                                 NO-1	      New development of the uses listed in Table NO-C shall conform with
                                            the noise levels contained in that Table. All indoor and outdoor areas
                                            shall be located, constructed, and/or shielded from noise sources in
                                            order to achieve compliance with the City’s noise standards.
                                 NO-2	      Where noise-sensitive land uses are proposed in areas exposed
                                            to existing or projected exterior noise levels exceeding the levels
                                            specified in Table NO-C or the performance standards of Table NO-A,
                                            an acoustical analysis shall be required as part of the environmental
                                            review process so that noise mitigation may be included in the
                                            project design.
NO-2	     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Noise Element
NO-3	    Noise created by new proposed non-transportation noise sources shall be
         mitigated so as not to exceed the noise level standards of Table NO-A as
         measured immediately within the property line of lands designated for noise-
         sensitive uses.
	        NO-3-Action 1 Limit construction activity to the hours of 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
         whenever such activity is adjacent to residential uses.
	        NO-3-Action 2 Consider limiting the hours of operation for loading docks,
         trash compactors, and other noise-producing uses in commercial areas which
         are adjacent to residential uses.
	        NO-3-Action 3 The City shall require that stationary construction equipment
         and construction staging areas be set back from existing noise-sensitive land
         uses.
	        Note: For the purposes of this Noise Element, transportation noise sources are
         defined as traffic on public roadways, railroad line operations and aircraft in
         flight. Control of noise from these sources is preempted by Federal and State
         regulations.
	        Other noise sources are presumed to be subject to local regulations, such
         as a noise control ordinance. Non-transportation noise sources may include
         industrial operations, outdoor recreation facilities, HVAC units, loading docks,
         etc.
NO-4	    Where proposed non-residential land uses are likely to produce noise levels
         exceeding the performance standards of Table NO-A at existing or planned
         noise-sensitive uses, an acoustical analysis shall be required as part of the
         environmental review process so that noise mitigation may be included in the
         project design. The requirements for the content of an acoustical analysis are
         shown in Table NO-B.
NO-5	    Noise created by the construction of new transportation noise sources (such as
         new roadways or new light rail service) shall be mitigated so as not to exceed
         the levels specified in Table NO-C at outdoor activity areas or interior spaces
         of existing noise-sensitive land uses. Please see Policy NO-6 for discussion of
         improvements to existing roadways.
NO-6	    It is anticipated that roadway improvement projects (such as widening of
         existing roadways) will be needed to accommodate build-out of the General
         Plan. Therefore, existing noise-sensitive uses may be exposed to increased
         noise levels due to roadway improvement projects as a result of increased
         roadway capacity, increases in travel speeds, etc. It may not be practical to
         reduce increased traffic noise levels consistent with those contained in Table
         NO-C. Therefore, the following criteria shall be used as a test of significance for
         roadway improvement projects which are not directly tied to a development
         project:
         •	 Where existing traffic noise levels are less than 60 dB Ldn at the outdoor
            activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, a +5 dB Ldn increase in noise levels
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 NO-3

Noise Element
                                             due to roadway improvement projects will be considered significant; and
                                          •	 Where existing traffic noise levels range between 60 and 65 dB Ldn at the
                                             outdoor activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, a +3 dB Ldn increase in noise
                                             levels due to roadway improvement projects will be considered significant;
                                             and
                                          •	 Where existing traffic noise levels are greater than 65 dB Ldn at the outdoor
                                             activity areas of noise-sensitive uses, a +1.5 dB Ldn increase in noise levels
                                             due to roadway improvement projects will be considered significant.
                                NO-7	     The City shall not require the installation of soundwalls in front yard areas to
                                          reduce noise to acceptable levels in residential areas which were originally
                                          constructed without soundwalls. The City shall emphasize other methods to
                                          reduce noise levels in these situations.
                                	         NO-7-Action 1 Consider adopting a citywide noise reduction program to
                                          reduce traffic and other noise levels citywide.
                                NO-8	     Where noise mitigation measures are required to achieve the standards of
                                          Tables NO-A and NO-C, the emphasis of such measures shall be placed upon
                                          site planning and project design. The use of noise barriers shall be considered
                                          a means of achieving the noise standards only after all other practical design-
                                          related noise mitigation measures—including the use of distance from noise
                                          sources—have been integrated into the project.
                                NO-9	     Where soundwalls or noise barriers are constructed, the City shall strongly
                                          encourage and may require the use of a combination of berms and walls to
                                          reduce the apparent height of the wall and produce a more aesthetically
                                          appealing streetscape. See illustration at right:
                                                                         Table NO-A
                                                    Noise Level Performance Standards for New Projects
                                                Affected by or Including Non-Transportation Noise Sources
                                The types of uses which may typically produce the noise sources addressed below
                                include, but are not limited to: industrial facilities including pump stations, trucking
                                operations, tire shops, auto maintenance shops, metal fabricating shops, shopping
                                centers, drive-up windows, car washes, loading docks, public works projects, batch
                                plants, bottling and canning plants, recycling centers, electric generating stations, race
                                tracks, landfills, sand and gravel operations, and athletic fields.
                                           Part 1: Performance Standards for Typical Stationary Noise Sources
                                    Noise Level Descriptor       Daytime (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)    Nighttime (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
                                        Hourly Leq, dB                       55                              45
                                The standards above will apply generally to noise sources that are not tonal, impulsive,
                                or repetitive in nature. Typical noise sources in this category would include HVAC
                                systems, cooling towers, fans, blowers, etc.
NO-4	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Noise Element
        Part 2: Performance Standards for Stationary Noise Sources Which Are
          Tonal, Impulsive, Repetitive, or Consist Primarily of Speech or Music
     Noise Level Descriptor     Daytime (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)  Nighttime (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
         Hourly Leq, dB                    50                             40
The standards in Part 2 apply to noises which are tonal in nature, impulsive or repetitive,
or which consist primarily of speech or music (e.g., humming sounds, outdoor speaker
systems, etc.). Typical noise sources in this category include: pile drivers, drive-through
speaker boxes, punch presses, steam valves, and transformer stations.
These noise level standards in Parts 1 and 2 above do not apply to residential units
established in conjunction with industrial or commercial uses (e.g., caretaker dwellings).
The City may impose noise level standards which are more or less restrictive than those
specified above based upon determination of existing low or high ambient noise levels.
                                         Table NO-B
                            Requirements for Acoustical Analysis
All acoustical analysis prepared pursuant to this Noise Element shall:
 A. Be the financial responsibility of the applicant.
 B. Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise
    assessment and architectural acoustics.
 C. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods
    and locations to adequately describe local conditions and the predominant noise
    sources.
 D. Estimate existing and projected cumulative (20 years) noise levels in terms of Ldn or
    CNEL and/or the standards of Table NO-A, and compare those levels to the adopted
    policies of the Noise Element.
 E. Recommend appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies
    and standards of the Noise Element, giving preference to proper site planning and
    design over mitigation measures which require the construction of noise barriers or
    structural modifications to buildings which contain noise-sensitive land uses.
F. In cases where a sound wall is proposed, the potential impacts associated with
    noise reflecting off the wall and toward other properties or sensitive uses shall be
    evaluated.
  G. Estimate noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been
    implemented.
 H. Describe a post-project assessment program which could be used to evaluate the
    effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 NO-5
Noise Element
                                                                                  Table NO-C
                                              Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure, Transportation Noise Sources
                                                                                                                        Interior Spaces
                                                                                      Outdoor Activity Areas1
                                                     Land Use                             Ldn/CNEL, dB
                                                                                                                 Ldn/CNEL,dB        Leq, dB2
                                  Residential                                                   603                     45             --
                                  Residential subject to noise from railroad
                                  tracks, aircraft overflights, or similar noise
                                  sources which produce clearly identifiable,
                                                                                                603                    405             --
                                  discrete noise events (the passing of a single
                                  train, as opposed to relatively steady noise
                                  sources such as roadways)
                                  Transient Lodging                                             604                     45             --
                                  Hospitals, Nursing Homes                                      603                     45             --
                                  Theaters, Auditoriums,
                                  Music Halls                                                    --                     --             35
                                  Churches, Meeting Halls                                       603                     --            40
                                  Office Buildings                                               --                     --            45
                                  Schools, Libraries,
                                  Museums                                                        --                     --            45
                                  Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                70                     --             --
                                1
                                  Where the location of outdoor activity areas is unknown, the exterior noise level standard shall be
                                applied to the property line of the receiving land use.
                                Where it is not practical to mitigate exterior noise levels at patio or balconies of apartment complexes, a
                                common area such as a pool or recreation area may be designated as the outdoor activity area.
                                2
                                   As determined for a typical worst-case hour during periods of use.
                                3
                                   Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or less using a
                                practical application of the best-available noise reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to 65
                                dB Ldn/CNEL may be allowed provided that available exterior noise level reduction measures have been
                                implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance with this table.
                                4
                                   In the case of hotel/motel facilities or other transient lodging, outdoor activity areas such as pool areas
                                may not be included in the project design. In these cases, only the interior noise level criterion will apply.
                                5
                                  The intent of this noise standard is to provide increased protection against sleep disturbance for
                                residences located near railroad tracks.
NO-6	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                         Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015
 Parks, Trails, and
Open space Element
Parks, Trails, and Open Space element
                                    Parks, Recreation, and Open Space are important components of the quality of life
                                    desired by the residents of Elk Grove. This Element of the General Plan addresses the
                                    City’s goals, policies, and actions to ensure that the City’s desires and/or needs for
                                    parks, recreation, and open space are recognized and addressed as the development
                                    of the city continues.
                                    PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION
                                    Elk Grove is home to numerous public parks, some of which are owned and operated
                                    by the Elk Grove Community Services District (CSD), an independent agency which
  One of the city’s many ballfields
                                    operates in Elk Grove and surrounding areas (see the Background Report for additional
                                    information on the Elk Grove CSD). The Elk Grove CSD has an adopted Master Plan of
                                    Parks, which identifies standards for public parks, desired locations for new facilities,
                                    and standards for the development of new parks.
                                    This General Plan envisions that the City will take a more active role in defining the
                                    locations, sizes, and facilities provided at public parks, as well as in expanding the
                                    number of trails in Elk Grove. At the same time, the City will continue to work with the
                                    Elk Grove CSD.
                                    TRAILS AND OPEN SPACE
                                    An important component of the community’s vision for the future of Elk Grove is the
                                    retention of significant amounts of open space in the Planning Area (please see the
                                    Introduction to this General Plan for a description of the Planning Area), and the creation
                                    of a trails system to link the developed portions of Elk Grove with these areas. Although
       Multi-use trails provide     the area within the current city limits is envisioned to be for the most part developed
     opportunities for cycling,
  pedestrian, and equestrian uses   with urban uses (please see the Land Use Element for a map and discussion of proposed
                                    land uses), the City recognizes that there are many important open space resources in
                                    the Planning Area, including the Cosumnes River, the Delta, and agricultural areas.
                                    This General Plan therefore provides policies and programs to ensure that trails and open
                                    space are addressed as development proceeds within the city, and to ensure that the
                                    City’s vision for trails and open space as well as other habitat and conservation needs
                                    in the Planning Area is considered by the County of Sacramento, the Local Agency
                                    Formation Commission, and other agencies in the area outside the city limits.
                                    The Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Element implements the following Goals of the
                                    City of Elk Grove:
                                      Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
        Open spaces are an
    important part of the City’s      Focused Goal 1-2: Outdoor recreation opportunities for all residents
        vision for the future
                                      Focused Goal 1-7: Active and passive park facilities and recreation programs that
                                      satisfy the leisure time and recreation needs of all residents
                                      Focused Goal 1-8: Creation and maintenance of a strong, positive community image
                                      for Elk Grove
PTO-2	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Parks, Trails and Open Space Element
  Guiding Goal 2: Diversified Economic Base
  Focused Goal 2-3: Creation of Elk Grove as a desired place to locate major
  employment-generating uses
  Guiding Goal 3: Protection of the Natural Environment
  Focused Goal 3-2: Open space lands in proximity to Elk Grove which provide for
  agricultural use and habitat for native species
  Focused Goal 3-3: Natural resources managed and protected for the use and
  enjoyment of current and future generations
                                                                                              Major power line corridors are
  Focused Goal 3-4: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s natural areas, in             proposed to serve as part of a
  particular the areas within the floodplain of the Cosumnes River                             community-wide open space
                                                                                                        network.
  Guiding Goal 4: Preservation and Enhancement of Elk Grove’s Unique Historic and
  Natural Features
  Focused Goal 4-2: Preservation of the large oak and other tree species which are
  an important part of the City’s historic and aesthetic character
  Guiding Goal 5: Preservation of the Rural Character of Elk Grove
  Focused Goal 5-2: Maintenance of those features that provide the character of Elk
  Grove’s rural areas, including: large oak and other trees, small local roadways, animal
  keeping and raising, equestrians, agriculture, and limited commercial opportunities
PARKS, TRAILS, AND OPEN SPACE POLICIES: PARKS
AND TRAILS
PTO-1	    The City of Elk Grove supports the development, maintenance, and enhancement
          of parks and trails serving a variety of needs at the neighborhood, area, and
          citywide level. The City may seek to accomplish the provision of parks and
          trails in cooperation with the Cosumnes Community Services District (CCSD).
	         PTO-1-Action 1 As part of the review of development projects, ensure that
          public parks and trails are provided which meet the City’s and CCSD’s criteria
          and which implement the CCSD/City Parks Master Plan and City Bicycle,
          Pedestrian, and Trail Master Plan.
PTO-2	    The City specifically supports the provision of parkland at a rate which exceeds
          the levels historically (prior to adoption of this General Plan) provided in Elk
          Grove. Parks shall be provided which meet community needs and desires.
	         PTO-2-Action 1 The City shall conduct a “nexus study” to determine the
          demand for parkland in the city and the reasonable relationship between the
          demand and the type of development project to support the imposition of
          parkland dedication and/or fees.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 PTO-3

Parks, Trails and Open Space Element
                                 	      PTO-2-Action 2 To the extent consistent with applicable state law, the City
                                        and CCSD shall develop criteria defining the types of parks and trails to be
                                        developed, including criteria defining desired:
                                        •	 Park types and sizes
                                        •	 Park facilities by type
                                        •	 Locational criteria
                                        •	Spacing
                                        •	 Trails and related facilities by type and function
                                 	      PTO-2-Action 3 The City and CCSD shall adopt a comprehensive Parks Master
                                        Plan which provides information on parks criteria and planned parks, The City
                                        shall also adopt a Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Trail Master Plan that shall provide
                                        information regarding offstreet recreational, walking, equestrian, and multi-use
                                        trails. Prior to the adoption of these Master Plans, the City shall require the
                                        provision of parks as part of development projects to implement the City’s
                                        parkland standards. The size, location, and facilities provided in these parks
                                        may be determined on a case-by-case basis.
                                 PTO-3	 Funding for maintenance of parks and/or trails shall be assured to the City’s
                                        satisfaction prior to the approval of any Final Subdivision Map which contains
                                        or contributes to the need for a public parks and facilities.
                                 	      PTO-3-Action 1 The City shall pursue the implementation of funding
                                        mechanisms to provide for the long-term maintenance of parks and/or trails
                                        in those instances where funding is not available from other sources. Such
                                        mechanisms may include local or regional assessment districts, homeowners
                                        associations, or other methods as determined appropriate by the City.
                                 PTO-4	 New residential developments may be required to, at a minimum, provide parks
                                        consistent with the Quimby Act (CA Govt. Code Section 66477), through land
                                        dedication, fees in lieu, or on-site improvements at a standard of five (5) acres
                                        of land for parks per 1,000 residents. Land dedication and/or payment of in-
                                        lieu fees shall be required consistent with state law. Land dedication and/or
                                        fees may be required pursuant to other policies in this Element with or without
                                        the use of the authority provided in the Quimby Act, or in combination with the
                                        Quimby Act and other legal authority.
                                 	      PTO-4-Action 1 The City and CCSD shall adopt standards designating which
                                        types of lands shall be considered “parks” for the purpose of implementing
                                        Quimby Act requirements.
                                 PTO-5	 The City encourages the Cosumnes Community Services District to develop
                                        self-supporting recreation programs for those activities that go beyond
                                        providing for basic recreation needs. Examples include outdoor and indoor
                                        sports complexes, aquatic centers, and community centers. The City may also
                                        develop and operate such programs independently.
                                 PTO-6	 The City encourages park development adjacent to school sites and the
                                        formation of joint use agreements between school and park districts.
PTO-4	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Parks, Trails and Open Space Element
	        PTO-6-Action 1 During the review of proposed development projects,
         comment to the Cosumnes Community Services District and the Elk Grove
         Unified School District to encourage location of schools adjacent to parks.
Please see the Public Facilities/Finance Element for additional policies related to the
         locations of public schools.
PTO-7	   The trails system in Elk Grove should provide for connectivity, so that all trails
         are linked to the extent possible for greater use as recreational and travel
         routes. The following features should be included in the trails system in Elk
         Grove:
         •	 Trails should link residential areas with parks, commercial and office areas,
            and other destinations.
         •	 Trails along major roadways should avoid meanders or other design features
            which make bicycle use less convenient or safe.
         •	 Trails should be located off-street to the extent possible.
         •	 Easements such as access roads should be placed in joint use as trails.
PTO-8	   The City shall maintain and implement a Bike, Pedestrian, and Trail Master Plan
         that carries out the goals and policies of the General Plan and defines the
         following key elements:
         •	 The type and location of bike, pedestrian, and trail segments.
         •	 Standards for bike, pedestrian, and trail improvements.
         •	Funding and implementation of the proposed bike, pedestrian, and trail
            system.
	        PTO-8-Action 1 As part of the review of development projects, ensure that
         bike, pedestrian, and trail facilities are provided that meet the City’s criteria
         and that implement the City’s desired plan.
PTO-9	 Funding for maintenance of City trails shall be assured prior to the approval of
         any project which contains a City-owned trail.
PTO-10	 Trailheads should be provided at appropriate locations to provide safe starting
         points on the trails system for equestrians, cyclists, and pedestrians.
	        PTO-10-Action 1 Develop standards for and locations of potential trailhead
         locations, including sufficient space for the off-street parking of equestrian
         trailers and vehicles.
	        PTO-10-Action 2 To the extent possible, coordinate with the Elk Grove CSD in
         the review of projects containing trails.
PTO-11	 Trails which parallel streams should be primarily located beyond the riparian
         corridor and wetlands to minimize wildlife impacts and shall be restricted to
         non-motorized traffic.
PTO-12	 Trails should be designed with the safety of users and adjacent property
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 PTO-5

Parks, Trails and Open Space Element
                                         owners in mind. To the extent possible, the bicycle trails system should provide
                                         safe, off-street options suitable for use by children and less-experienced riders.
                                 	       PTO-12-Action 1 Involve the Elk Grove Police Department in the review of
                                         proposed trail locations and designs.
                                 PTO-13	 Recreational trails should not be placed adjacent to or on farmland if feasible
                                         alternative routes exist elsewhere in the vicinity. However, if no other feasible
                                         routes exist, trail facilities should be designed in cooperation with adjacent
                                         property owners to minimize adverse impacts on farming practices.
                                 PTO-14	 The City supports the use of volunteers and community groups to provide
                                         maintenance and safety patrols on trails.
                                 PARKS, TRAILS, AND OPEN SPACE POLICIES: OPEN
                                 SPACE
                                 PTO-15	 The City views open space lands of all types as important resource which
                                         should be preserved in the region, and supports the establishment of multi-
                                         purpose open space areas to address a variety of needs, including, but not
                                         limited to:
                                         •	 Maintenance of agricultural uses;
                                         •	 Wildlife habitat
                                         •	 Recreational open space
                                         •	 Aesthetic benefits
                                         •	 Flood control
                                 	       To the extent possible, lands protected in accordance with this policy should be
                                         in proximity to Elk Grove, to facilitate use of these areas by Elk Grove residents,
                                         assist in mitigation of habitat loss within the city, and provide an open space
                                         resource close to the urbanized areas of Elk Grove.
                                 	       PTO-15-Action 1 Consider the establishment of a citywide fee and/or
                                         assessment system which would provide funding for the purchase of open
                                         space land or easements and the maintenance of these areas.
                                 	       PTO-15-Action 2 Work with the County of Sacramento and other resource
                                         agencies to develop a regional open space plan which provides for multiple
                                         uses of open space (e.g., agriculture and wildlife foraging)
                                 	       PTO-15-Action 3 Consider using funds collected under existing (2003) fee
                                         programs (e.g., Swainson’s Hawk mitigation and East Franklin Specific Plan
                                         agricultural mitigation) to fund this expanded open space program.
                                 PTO-16	 Stream corridors, floodways, electrical transmission corridors, and similar
                                         features shall be considered for inclusion in the citywide trails and open space
                                         system.
PTO-6	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Parks, Trails and Open Space Element
	        PTO-16-Action 1 Involve the Elk Grove CSD in the identification of appropriate
         open space and trails corridors which could be identified in this General Plan
         and the Elk Grove CSD’s Master Plan.
PTO-17	 The City encourages the creation of a regional trail/open space system which
         links the Cosumnes River with the Sacramento River and provides for trail
         connections between Elk Grove and these open space areas. The City’s vision
         for regional open space and trails is shown in Figure PTO-1 and in the “Planning
         Area Land Use Concept” in the Land Use Element of this General Plan.
	        PTO-17-Action 1 Within the Cosumnes River floodplain, the City will encourage
         the dedication or acquisition of easement or fee title for trails as part of an
         overall trail system linking the Cosumnes and Sacramento rivers. Note: This
         policy affects lands within the planning area but outside of the 2002 city limits
         only.
PTO-18	 To the extent possible, retain natural drainage courses in all cases where
         preservation of natural drainage is physically feasible and consistent with the
         need to provide flood protection.
Figure PTO-1: Open Space Policy Map
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 PTO-7

Public Facilities and
  Finance Element
Public Facilities and Finance Element
                                   This Element of the General Plan addresses the following public facilities issues:
                                       •	 Water Service, including both potable (drinkable) and non-potable water delivery.
                                       •	 Sewer Service, and
                                       •	 Financing and construction of public facilities
                                   This Element also addresses the following public services:
                                       •	 Public Libraries and
                                       •	 Public Schools
                                   Note: The City’s policies related to solid waste, another public facility, are contained in
                                   the Conservation and Air Quality Element. Policies related to police and fire protection
     Drinking water in Elk Grove
  comes from both surface water    are in the Safety Element. Policies related to parks are located in the Parks, Trails, and
       (such as rivers) and wells. Open Space Element.
                                   WATER SERVICE
                                   Domestic water service in Elk Grove is provided by two public water service providers—
                                   the Sacramento County Water Agency and the Elk Grove Water Service—and, in the
                                   eastern portion of the city, by private wells tapping the underground aquifer.
                                   Water supply is important both from the standpoint of health and convenience, but
                                   also the need for water to help suppress fires and support the efforts of the Elk Grove
                                   Community Services District’s fire personnel.
                                   For detailed information on water service in Elk Grove, please see the Background Report.
                                   SEWER SERVICE
                                   Sewer service in the Planning Area is provided by County Sanitation District 1 (CSD-1),
                                   which maintains an extensive system of sewer lines and treatment facilities.
                                   For detailed information on CSD-1, please see the Background Report, which accompanies
                                   this General Plan.
      So-called “zipper streets”
       that combine narrow and
   wide sections are the result of FINANCE OF PUBLIC FACILITIES
  deferred roadway construction
    policies in place prior to the
                                   Because they involve projects that will ultimately be owned and/or operated by public
      incorporation of Elk Grove
                                   agencies, and because they involve substantial costs, public facilities projects (roads,
                                   water lines, etc.) are often financed either totally or in part with public funds.
                                   Although many variations of public funding are available, most types involve the
                                   collection of money from either new development or existing development, or both.
                                   Funds can be collected in the form of:
                                       •	 Property assessments
PF-2	       ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Public Facilities and Finance Element
     •	 Connection or “hookup” fees (such as for connection to a public water system)
     •	 Impact fees
The funds collected are then used to fund the construction of facilities in one of several
basic ways:
     •	Construction is funded directly when sufficient money is available (commonly
        known as “pay-as-you-go” financing)
     •	The public agency uses its ability to borrow funds (often through the issuance
        of bonds) to provide “up-front” financing, repaying the loans through fees or
        assessments charged on future development.
In Elk Grove, much of the infrastructure development which occurred prior to the
incorporation of the City used a “pay-as-you-go” approach (although bond financing
was used for some facilities). The policies of the County of Sacramento also allowed the
incremental construction of roadways—for instance, a planned 6-lane roadway would
first be built with 2 or 4 lanes, with the final lanes added at a later date.
Based on a review of past practices, the County also apparently attempted to avoid
building facilities (primarily roadways) on land that was not being developed at the time.
The most visible result of these policies in Elk Grove is the so-called “zipper street,”
which goes from a fully improved section to a narrow, two-lane section and then back
again to a four-lane roadway (as shown in the photo on the previous page). Other, less
visible examples of infrastructure built in increments have included sewer, drainage, and
water systems.
This Element expresses the City’s policy to construct infrastructure facilities through the
use of “up front” financing so that roadways, drainage facilities, etc., can be completed
with the initial phase of construction, avoiding the use of interim facilities and the
creation of traffic congestion and other problems resulting from insufficient capacity.
PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Public schools in Elk Grove and the Planning Area are provided by the Elk Grove Unified
School District (EGUSD), an independent agency which provides elementary, middle
school, and high schools, as well as special education facilities and services.
The Elk Grove Unified School District is known for the high quality of its schools, which
consistently perform well in standardized tests. Growth in the District’s service area
in recent years has resulted in the need to add substantial new capacity, both at new
schools and at existing schools. Projected student enrollment in EGUSD schools as of
2002 is shown at right:
                                                                                               Source: EGUSD web site, 11/2002
Under state law, the Elk Grove Unified School District can in most cases act independently
of the City in the location, construction, and operation of public schools. In practice,
the City and the EGUSD have enjoyed a cooperative working relationship; however, this
General Plan recognizes that the District is not bound by the City’s policies or regulations,
and that the City is limited by state law in its ability to coordinate development of new
homes and other uses with the availability of public schools.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	       PF-3

Public Facilities and Finance Element
                                 This Element of the General Plan, therefore, stresses cooperation with the District to the
                                 extent permitted by law, and expresses the City’s desires with regard to public schools.
                                 Additional information on the Elk Grove Unified School District is included in the General
                                 Plan Background Report.
                                 The following Goals of the City of Elk Grove are implemented in this Public Facilities and
                                 Finance Element:
                                   Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
                                   Focused Goal 1-4: High quality public facilities and services
                                   Focused Goal 1-5: Excellence in the design of new development
                                   Focused Goal 1-8: Creation and maintenance of a strong, positive community image
                                   for Elk Grove
                                   Guiding Goal 2: Diversified Economic Base
                                   Goal 2-4: Creation of Elk Grove as a desirable place to establish a business,
                                   particularly major employment-generating uses
                                   Guiding Goal 5: Preservation of the Rural Character of Elk Grove
                                   Focused Goal 5-1: Retention of those areas identified for 2-acre and larger lots on
                                   the Land Use Map as a rural area through land use and infrastructure controls
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND FINANCE POLICIES: GENERAL
                                 POLICIES
                                 PF-1	     Except when prohibited by state law, the City shall require that sufficient
                                           capacity in all public services and facilities will be available on time to maintain
                                           desired service levels and avoid capacity shortages, traffic congestion, or other
                                           negative effects on safety and quality of life.
                                 	         PF-1-Action 1 Consider participating in efforts to develop regional water
                                           solutions, such as the Water Forum.
                                 PF-2	     The City shall coordinate with outside service agencies—including water and
                                           sewer providers, the Elk Grove Community Services District, and the Elk Grove
                                           Unified School District--during the review of plans and development projects.
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND FINANCE POLICIES: WATER
                                 SERVICE
                                 PF-3	     Water supply and delivery systems shall be available in time to meet the
                                           demand created by new development, or shall be assured through the use of
                                           bonds or other sureties to the City’s satisfaction.
PF-4	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Public Facilities and Finance Element
	        PF-3-Action 1 The following shall be required for all development projects,
         excluding subdivisions:
         •	 An assured water supply and delivery system shall be available at the time
            of project approval. The water agency providing service to the project may
            provide several alternative methods of supply and/or delivery, provided that
            each is capable individually of providing water to the project.
         •	 All required water infrastructure for the project shall be in place at the time
            of project approval, or shall be assured through the use of bonds or other
            sureties to the City’s satisfaction. Water infrastructure may be phased to
            coincide with the phased development of large-scale projects.
	        PF-3-Action 2 The following shall be required for all subdivisions to the extent
         permitted by state law:
         •	 Proposed water supply and delivery systems shall be identified at the time
            of tentative map approval to the satisfaction of the City. The water agency
            providing service to the project may provide several alternative methods
            of supply and/or delivery, provided that each is capable individually of
            providing water to the project.
         •	The agency providing water service to the subdivision shall demonstrate
            prior to the approval of the Final Map by the City that sufficient capacity shall
            be available to accommodate the subdivision plus existing development,
            and other approved projects in the same service area, and other projects
            that have received commitments for water service.
         •	 Offsite and onsite water infrastructure sufficient to provide adequate water
            to the subdivision shall be in place prior to the approval of the Final Map or
            their financing shall be assured to the satisfaction of the City, consistent with
            the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.
         •	Offsite and onsite water distribution systems required to serve the
            subdivision shall be in place and contain water at sufficient quantity and
            pressure prior to the issuance of any building permits. Model homes may
            be exempted from this policy as determined appropriate by the City, and
            subject to approval by the City.
PF-4	    The City shall require new utility infrastructure for electrical, natural gas and
         other infrastructure services avoid sensitive resources, be located so as to not
         be visually obtrusive, and, if possible, be located within roadway rights-of-
         ways or existing utility easements.
PF-5	    The City supports the use of reclaimed water for irrigation wherever feasible.
PF-6	    The City shall seek to protect the quality and quantity of groundwater
         resources, including those which serve households and businesses which rely
         on private wells.
PF-7	    The City shall require that water flow and pressure be provided at sufficient
         levels to meet domestic, commercial, industrial, and firefighting needs.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 PF-5

Public Facilities and Finance Element
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND FINANCE POLICIES:
                                 SEWER SERVICE
                                 PF-8	  Sewage conveyance and treatment capacity shall be available in time to meet
                                        the demand created by new development, or shall be assured through the use
                                        of bonds or other sureties to the City’s satisfaction.
                                 	      PF-8-Action 1 The following shall be required for all development projects,
                                        excluding subdivisions:
                                        •	Sewer/wastewater treatment capacity shall be available at the time of
                                           project approval.
                                        •	 All required sewer/wastewater infrastructure for the project shall be in place
                                           at the time of project approval, or shall be assured through the use of bonds
                                           or other sureties to the City’s satisfaction.
                                 	      PF-8-Action 2 The following shall be required for all subdivisions to the extent
                                        permitted by state law:
                                        •	Sewage/wastewater treatment capacity shall be available at the time of
                                           tentative map approval.
                                        •	 The agency providing sewer service to the subdivision shall demonstrate
                                           prior to the approval of the Final Map by the City that sufficient capacity shall
                                           be available to accommodate the subdivision plus existing development,
                                           and other approved projects using the same conveyance lines, and projects
                                           which have received sewage treatment capacity commitment.
                                        •	Onsite and offsite sewage conveyance systems required to serve the
                                           subdivision shall be in place prior to the approval of the Final Map, or their
                                           financing shall be assured to the satisfaction of the City, consistent with the
                                           requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.
                                        •	Sewage conveyance systems within the subdivision shall be in place and
                                           connected to the sewage disposal system prior to the issuance of any
                                           building permits. Model homes may be exempted from this policy as
                                           determined appropriate by the City, and subject to approval by the City.
                                 PF-9	  Development along corridors identified by sewer providers in their Master
                                        Plans as locations of future sewerage conveyance facilities shall incorporate
                                        appropriate easements as a condition of approval.
                                 PF-10	 The City shall strongly discourage the extension of sewer service into any
                                        area designated for Rural Residential land uses. Sewers shall not be used to
                                        accommodate lot sizes smaller than 2 (two) gross acres in the Rural Residential
                                        area, and lot sizes shall be large enough to accommodate septic systems.
                                        This policy shall not be construed to limit the ability of any sewer agency
                                        to construct “interceptor” lines through or adjacent to the Rural Residential
                                        area, provided that no “trunk” or service lines are provided within the Rural
                                        Residential area.
                                 PF-11	 The installation of “dry sewers” shall not be required as a condition of approval
                                        of development in the Rural Residential land use category.
PF-6	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                               Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Public Facilities and Finance Element
PF-12	   To reduce the potential for health problems and groundwater contamination
         resulting from the use of septic systems, the City shall take the following actions:
	        PF-12-Action 1 The City shall prepare and implement a public information
         campaign aimed at homeowners in areas with septic systems on the proper
         design, use, and care of septic systems.
	        PF-12-Action 2 The City shall consider adopting Plumbing Code revisions to
         allow the use of updated technologies which offer an alternative to septic
         systems for the treatment of sewage on individual sites.
PF-13	   Residential development on lots smaller than two (2) gross acres shall be required
         to connect to public sewer service. This policy shall not apply to lots smaller
         than 2 gross acres in the Rural Residential land use category which existed as
         legal lots as of the date of adoption of this General Plan; these lots shall not be
         required to connect to public sewer service as a condition of development.
PF-14	   Independent community sewer systems may not be established for new
         development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND FINANCE POLICIES: PUBLIC
LIBRARIES
PF-15	   The City shall cooperate with the County of Sacramento in the planning and
         implementation of future library facilities and facility expansions in Elk Grove.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND FINANCE POLICIES: PUBLIC
SCHOOLS
PF-16	   Specific plans shall identify all existing and planned school sites and should
         include guidelines and conceptual examples for incorporating new schools into
         overall neighborhood design.
PF-17	   While recognizing that school siting and development are not within the
         jurisdiction of the City to control, the City strongly encourages the School
         District to consider the following criteria:
         •	 Traffic impacts on nearby roadways are addressed and mitigated to meet
            City standards for level of service.
         •	Schools should serve as a focal point of neighborhood activity and be
            interrelated with churches, parks, greenways and off-street paths whenever
            possible.
         •	 Almost all residences will be within walking distance of a school (one mile or
            less) and all residences are within two miles of a school whenever possible.
         •	 New schools are adjacent to neighborhood and community parks whenever
            possible and designed to promote joint use of appropriate facilities.
         •	 New schools should link with trails, bikeways, and pedestrian paths wherever
            possible.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 PF-7

Public Facilities and Finance Element
                                 PF-18	 The City supports state legislative efforts to secure additional state funding
                                        for school construction and ensure maintenance of local district priorities for
                                        funds in the state school bond program.
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND FINANCE POLICIES:
                                 FINANCING AND PHASING OF PUBLIC FACILITIES
                                 PF-19	 Public facilities should be phased in a logical manner which avoids “leapfrog”
                                        development and encourages the orderly development of roadways, water and
                                        sewer, and other public facilities. The City shall not provide public financing or
                                        assistance for projects that do not comply with the planned phasing of public
                                        facilities. Interim facilities may be used only if specifically approved by the City
                                        Council.
                                 PF-20	 The City shall require secure financing for all components of the transportation
                                        system through the use of special taxes, assessment districts, developer
                                        dedications, or other appropriate mechanisms in order to provide for the
                                        completion of required major public facilities at their full planned widths or
                                        capacities in one phase. For the purposes of this policy, “major” facilities shall
                                        include the following:
                                        •	 Any roadway of a collector size or above, including any roadway shown on
                                           the Circulation Plan in this General Plan.
                                        •	All wells, water transmission lines, treatment facilities, and storage tanks
                                           needed to serve the project.
                                        •	 All sewer trunk and interceptor lines and treatment plants or treatment plant
                                           capacity.
                                 	      The City shall use its financial capacity to facilitate implementation of this
                                        policy if necessary, including, but not limited to:
                                        •	 Issuing bonds,
                                        •	 Using City funds directly, with repayment from future development fees
                                        •	 Fee programs
                                        •	 Developer financing
                                 PF-21	 New development shall fund its fair share portion of its impacts to all public
                                        facilities and infrastructure as provided for in state law.
                                 PF-22	 Infrastructure financing plans which specify the extent, timing and estimated
                                        cost of all necessary infrastructure shall be required for the approval of urban
                                        uses in the Laguna Ridge and Southeast Policy Areas, as defined in this General
                                        Plan. The resulting financing mechanisms shall be implemented prior to the
                                        development of urban uses.
                                 PF-23	 The City will coordinate with independent public service providers, including
                                        schools, parks and recreation, reclamation, water, transit, electric and other
                                        service districts, in developing financial and service planning strategies.
PF-8	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Public Facilities and Finance Element
PF-24	 Fee programs and/or other finance mechanisms for roadway and related
         infrastructure shall include sufficient funding for all of the following items:
         •	Design, engineering, environmental compliance, and construction of
            roadway lanes, traffic signals, and bridges.
         •	Right of way acquisition, design, engineering, environmental compliance,
            and construction costs sufficient to ensure that “zipper streets” are not
            created by non-participating owners. (Please see the introduction to the
            Circulation Element for a discussion of the “zipper street” phenomenon.)
         •	 Drainage and other facilities related to new roadway construction.
         •	 Installation of landscaped medians and streetscaping where appropriate.
         •	Installation of sidewalks or other facilities where needed to provide safe
            passage for pedestrians.
PF-25	 Fee programs and/or other finance mechanisms for roadway and related
         infrastructure shall include sufficient funding for all of the following items:
         •	Design, engineering, environmental compliance, and construction of
            roadway lanes, traffic signals, and bridges.
         •	 Right of way acquisition and design/engineering/environmental compliance/
            construction costs sufficient to ensure that “zipper streets” are not created
            by non-participating owners. (Please see the introduction to the Circulation
            Element for a discussion of the “zipper street” phenomenon.)
         •	 Drainage and other facilities related to new roadway construction.
         •	 Installation of landscaped medians and streetscaping where appropriate.
	        Fee programs and/or other finance mechanisms shall be reviewed regularly
         to ensure that sufficient funding will be available to construct all required
         facilities.
PF-26	   To minimize damage to roadways and to reduce inconvenience to residents and
         businesses, the City shall seek to ensure that all utilities located in roadways are
         installed in a single operation. Multiple installations in which separate utilities
         are installed at different times and/or in different trenches, are specifically
         discouraged.
	        PF-26-Action 1 Work with utility providers to coordinate the installation or
         upgrading of utilities and eliminate multiple trenching of city streets.
PF-27	 Maintain, improve, and modernize existing facilities and services when
         necessary in order to meet the needs of Elk Grove residents and businesses.
	        PF-27-Action 1 Regularly review existing facilities and services and identify
         necessary improvements and upgrades as part of the City’s Capital Improvement
         Program.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 PF-9

Public Facilities and Finance Element
                                 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND FINANCE POLICIES:
                                 OPEN SPACE ACQUISITION
                                 Please see the Conservation Element and the Parks, Trails, and Open Space Element for
                                 policies related to the public financing of open space acquisition.
PF-10	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015
Safety Elemen
Safety Element
                                     Ensuring that Elk Grove is a safe community is an important goal of the City of Elk Grove.
                                     This Safety Element identifies the policies and programs the City will implement to make sure
                                     that residents and businesses are safe from known and reasonably foreseeable hazards. The
                                     Planning Area includes land within the City limits and certain areas outside the City limits as
                                     defined in the Introduction of the General Plan.
                                     POTENTIAL SAFETY HAZARDS
                                     Several major sources of potential safety hazards exist in Elk Grove and are addressed
                                     in this Safety Element:
                                         •	Potential release of toxic or hazardous substances as the result of accidents on
                                            truck routes and/or railroad lines which pass through Elk Grove.
                                         •	The release of toxic or hazardous substances which are used by commercial and
     Both of the freeways in the            industrial businesses in Elk Grove.
  planning area carry heavy truck
  traffic, including trucks carrying     •	Flooding.
   hazardous and toxic materials.
                                         •	 Regional seismic activity and other geologic hazards.
                                         •	 Traffic accidents at at-grade railroad crossings.
                                     This Safety Element provides the City’s policies for ensuring that the risk associated
                                     with these hazards can be reduced to an acceptable level; the City acknowledges that
                                     actions or policy statements on the behalf of the City cannot eliminate all risks.
                                     This Element also provides policies related to police and fire protection and steps the
                                     City can take to assist in the prevention of fire hazards and crime.
                                     Many Safety Element goals, policies, and programs correspond to priorities established
                                     in the 2011 Sacramento County Local Hazard Mitigation Plan, a multi-jurisdictional plan
                                     that includes Sacramento County (County) and the Cities of Citrus Heights, Elk Grove,
                                     Folsom, Galt, Isleton, Rancho Cordova, and Sacramento, as well as 69 special districts
                                     within the county. Annex Chapters of the Sacramento County Local Hazard Mitigation
                                     Plan provide specific analysis for each of the partner cities. Annex B of the document
                                     is specific to Elk Grove. This plan forms the foundation for the City’s long-term strategy
                                     to reduce disaster losses and break the cycle of disaster damage, reconstruction, and
                                     repeated damage. The 2004 Sacramento County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan fulfills the
                                     requirements of Section 322 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency
                                     Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C. 5165, as amended by the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000.
                                     The Elk Grove Community Element of the Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan is incorporated
                                     into this Safety Element by reference and should be consulted when addressing known
                                     hazards to ensure the general health, safety, and public welfare of life and property
                                     within the planning area. Safety Element goals, policy objectives, and implementation
                                     actions support and are consistent with the Local Hazard Mitigation Plan.
                                     POTENTIAL RELEASE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
 Land inundated by the Cosumnes
  River near Michigan Bar in 1997,
  a year that saw historic flooding  A number of entities throughout Elk Grove—from dry cleaners to filling stations to
                 levels.             industrial users—maintain stocks of hazardous substances on-site and therefore raise
                                     the potential for the accidental release of these substances.
SA-2	       ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
In addition, two freeways, several major surface routes, and two active rail lines traverse
the Planning Area. Vehicles and rail cars carrying hazardous substances use all of these
routes and therefore bring the risk of an accident involving hazardous substances to
large areas of Elk Grove.
FLOODING
Flooding affects a large part of the Planning Area. The areas most susceptible to flooding
are the eastern portion of Elk Grove where major drainage facilities have not been built
and stormwater flows either in natural channels or small ditches whose capacity is
frequently exceeded. In the Sheldon area, local flooding is widespread but generally
minor; the flat land causes floodwaters to spread out, reducing threats to life.
Along the eastern and southern edges of the Planning Area, the Cosumnes River represents
a major flood hazard. The Cosumnes River is the last river in California that remains
undammed along its entire length, so flooding caused by this river can be extensive.
A 100-year floodplain zone estimates inundation areas based on a flood that has a 1
percent chance of occurring in any given year. These floodplain zones are defined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In Elk Grove, 100-year flood zones
include areas along Laguna Creek in the northwest and north central portion of the City,
and along the Cosumnes River to the southeast, primarily outside of the City limits, but
within the Planning Area. Flood risk is intensified in the lower stream reaches by the
likelihood of coincident high tides and strong offshore winds during heavy rainfall.
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 65007, 65300.2, 65302.9, 65302, 65303.4,
65584.04, 65584.06, 65865.5, 65962, and 66474.6, as well as portions of Chapter 4 of the
Water Code relating to flood management, as amended by Assembly Bill (AB) 162 (2007)
and Senate Bill (SB) 5, the California Department of Water Resources (DWR) and the
Central Valley Flood Protection Board (formerly the State Reclamation Board) adopted a
Central Valley Flood Protection Plan (CVFPP) in 2012. The amendments also established
flood protection requirements for local land use decision-making to be aligned with the
CVFPP. These laws set a higher standard for flood protection for the Sacramento-San
Joaquin Valley area, which covers the entire Delta region and includes the Elk Grove
Planning Area. These laws established a requirement for jurisdictions to attain an urban
level of flood protection necessary to withstand a flood with a 1 in 200 chance of occurring
in any given year (200-year flood) for areas developed or planned to have a population of
at least 10,000 people. They do not apply to areas of shallow flooding or areas of flooding
from local drainage equivalent to less than 3 feet in depth.
Figure SA-1 shows areas within the 100-year floodplain zones. The map uses Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) 100-year floodplain data produced by FEMA. The FIRM is
the only official mapping for the purposes of National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
regulations and coverage areas. Additional flood risk data, including 200-year flood data
shown in Figure SA 2, described below, is not approved by FEMA for use in relation to the
NFIP.
Figure SA-2 shows areas within the 200-year floodplain which are potentially subject
to urban level of flood protection requirements when flood depths of 3 feet or greater
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-3
Safety Element
                                could occur. This map identifies areas where higher standards of development and flood
                                protection may be required before issuance of building permits. Figure SA 2 was developed
                                using data provided by DWR, supplemented by floodplain studies commissioned by the
                                City, covering local creek systems that have watershed areas of at least 10 square miles.
                                This includes the Laguna Creek and Deer Creek/Cosumnes River watersheds, as well as
                                the Sacramento River watershed, which affects local creek systems.
                                The City commissioned hydrologic modeling to supplement DWR 200-year floodplain
                                mapping of Laguna Creek in order to account for levee improvements completed or in
                                process that were not included in DWR mapping. The Sacramento Area Flood Control
                                Agency (SAFCA) is in the process of implementing a levee improvement project to
                                provide 200-year flood protection for the Sacramento River, and the U.S. Army Corps
                                of Engineers is completing improvements to the Folsom Dam spillway on the American
                                River. These projects were not accounted for within the DWR mapping. Because of these
                                improvements, the City’s supplemental 200-year floodplain calculations use a scenario in
                                which the levees and dams along the Sacramento and American Rivers do not fail.
                                The City’s supplemental mapping also differs from DWR 200-year floodplain mapping by
                                adding 200-year water surface elevations along Deer Creek. Deer Creek was not assessed
                                by DWR since no state flood improvement projects are located in this watershed. Levees
                                in this area have not been certified to provide 100-year protection and have failed in the
                                past during large storm events. Therefore, modeling for this area considers the possibility
                                of extensive levee failure, especially along the north bank of the Cosumnes River.
                                The area potentially affected by a 200-year flood event in Elk Grove is focused in the
                                southeast portion of the Planning Area, along Deer Creek and the Cosumnes River. Much
                                of this land is preserved for agricultural use and would be at limited risk of damage from
                                flood hazard zones. However, a 200-year flood event caused by levee breaks along the
                                Sacramento River could result in flooding in small portions of Laguna West, an existing
                                residential neighborhood on the western side of the City. If, in the future, the City were
                                to consider expanding beyond its existing planning area north or south along Interstate
                                5 (I-5), such development in these areas would also be at risk in a 200-year flood event.
                                The City recognizes that flood risk conditions can change over time through natural
                                processes or project improvements on the local or regional scale. Therefore, the 200-
                                year flood map is considered the base case for establishing potential flood risk. The City
                                will keep updated data on the 200-year floodplain through an annual review, accounting
                                for the results of new technical studies and changes in flood protection infrastructure. This
                                updated information is available and shall be referenced during the development review
                                process for areas within the base case 200-year flood map, as shown in Figure SA-2.
                                As required by the flood management requirements in the Government Code, the City
                                of Elk Grove has incorporated CVFPP measures into this Element of the General Plan
                                through the inclusion of Urban Level Flood Protection mapping, as well as through more
                                extensive flood risk analysis. The City will incorporate related measures into Title 23 of
                                the Municipal Code. The City will then apply more stringent development standards in
                                identified areas when considering approval of future projects and developments.
SA-4	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
AGENCIES RESPONSIBLE FOR FLOOD PROTECTION
Federal Emergency Management Agency
FEMA is a federal agency whose mission is to reduce the loss of life and property from
natural and human-made disasters through a comprehensive, risk-based emergency
management system. One of the agency’s responsibilities is to maintain flood zone maps.
California Department of Water Resources
DWR implements the California Water Code, including the Cobey-Alquist Flood Plain
Management Act. DWR regulates activities in California’s floodways, encourages
preventive flood control maintenance, and operates some flood control projects.
Central Valley Flood Protection Board and Plan
The Central Valley Flood Protection Board developed and adopted the CVFPP in 2012
and continues to oversee the plan’s implementation. The CVFPP provides conceptual
guidance to reduce the risk of flooding for about one million people in California and $70
billion in infrastructure, homes, and businesses with a goal of providing 200-year flood
protection to urban areas.
Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency
The Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency is charged with providing the Sacramento
region with increased flood protection along the American and Sacramento Rivers. The
Agency was formed through a Joint Powers Agreement between the City of Sacramento,
the County of Sacramento, the County of Sutter, the American River Flood Control District,
and Reclamation District No. 1000, and conducts flood control improvement projects
including levee enforcement, and dam improvements.
Sacramento County Department of Water Resources
The Sacramento County Department of Water Resources is the county-level agency that
manages floodplain information, flood insurance, and the ALERT System and provides
up-to-date information to the community and public agencies on potential flooding in
Sacramento County.
Elk Grove Police, Elk Grove Public Works, and Cosumnes CSD Fire Department
These City and CCSD departments play an active role in disaster planning, preparedness,
and first response within the City.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-5

Safety Element                                                                                                      Safety Element
Figure SA-1: FEMA Flood Zones within the City of Elk Grove
SA-6	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                           Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-7
Safety Element                                                                                                                Safety Element
Figure SA-2: 200 year Flood Zones and Critical Facilities within the City of Elk Grove
SA-8	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                     Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-9
Safety Element
                                DAM INUNDATION
                                Dam inundation occurs when a dam is not structurally sound or is unable to withstand
                                damages resulting from seismic activity. The degree and rapidity of dam failure depends
                                on the dam’s structural characteristics. Figure SA-3 shows inundation areas from potential
                                dam failures, based on maps prepared by the California Governor’s Office of Emergency
                                Services (CalOES). CalEOES provides model estimates of the degree and extent of
                                flooding that would occur in the case of a dam failure.
                                Regulation dams at Folsom and Sly Park on the Sacramento River and Cosumnes River
                                respectively have the potential to cause human injury or loss of life in Elk Grove. Since
                                neither of the dams impacting Elk Grove is located within the Planning Area, in order to
                                reduce the likelihood of dam inundation, policies and programs focus on partnerships
                                with regional agencies, including Sacramento County, to track inundation profiles (flood
                                depth) and prepare accordingly and by including requirements for project features that
                                may reduce dam failure hazards.
                                CANAL OR LEVEE FAILURE
                                Generally, levees fail due to overtopping or collapse. A catastrophic levee failure resulting
                                from collapse would occur quickly with little warning. Levees may fail because of
                                earthquake-induced slumping, landslides, and liquefaction. The existing levee system in
                                areas surrounding Elk Grove was initially constructed by hand labor, and later by dredging
                                to hold back river floods and tidal influences, to obtain additional lands for grazing and
                                crop growing. Constant maintenance is necessary to hold these levees against the river
                                floods that threaten surrounding areas. Because levees are vulnerable to peat oxidation
                                as well as sand, silt, and peat erosion, new material is continually added to maintain them.
                                Subsiding farmlands adjacent to levees may increase water pressure against levees,
                                adding to the potential for levee failure. In addition, many levees, known as non-project
                                levees, are not maintained to any specified standard, which can increase the likelihood
                                of failure and inundation. Levee failures can be difficult to predict, since even inspected
                                project levees are prone to failure under certain conditions. DWR has, using the best
                                available information, identified areas where flood levels would be more than 3 feet deep
                                if a project levee were to fail; these areas are known as Levee Flood Protection Zones
                                (LFPZs).
                                The Elk Grove Planning Area is protected by a number of project levees that are part of
                                federally authorized flood projects and are considered part of the State Plan of Flood
                                Control. There are no project levees located in Elk Grove, but several project levees located
                                outside of the Planning Area affect flooding in the Planning Area along the Sacramento
                                River. A number of non-project levees also provide flood protection to the community.
                                These non-project levees were generally constructed prior to project levees, and without
                                federal or state assistance. They are not part of the State Plan of Flood Control. Non-
                                project levees are located along the eastern side of Interstate 5 and along Morrison Creek,
                                Laguna Creek, and the Cosumnes River. Figure SA-4 identifies the locations of project
                                levees, non-project levees, and locations of DWR Levee Flood Protection Zones that
                                affect the Elk Grove Planning Area.
                                The City conducts levee operation and maintenance activities which provide maintenance
                                recommendations and requirements for specific levee inspections and maintenance
                                operations.
SA-10	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
CLIMATE CHANGE
The California Climate Change Center, a research arm of the California Energy
Commission, has found that climate change will result in new flooding concerns
throughout California. Climate change–induced sea level rise is likely to create significant
impacts in the San Francisco Bay and Delta. The California Natural Resources Agency
in a 2012 report estimates that sea levels along the California coast will rise between 3
and 5 feet by 2100. A combination of increased storm intensity and saltwater intrusion
in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta resulting from higher sea levels could increase the
risk for flood-caused levee failures, increasing flood risk and contaminating freshwater
supplies stored and conveyed in the delta. The California Ocean Protection Council
(OPC) released sea level rise planning guidance in 2013, which recommends assessing
and planning for 5 to 24 inches of sea level rise by mid-century and 17 to 66 inches
by the end of the century. The San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development
Commission (BCDC) and other state agencies are evaluating expected impacts using
these projections. While uncertainty exists regarding the extent of sea level rise, there is
consensus that it will increase the frequency, duration, and magnitude of flood events in
the San Francisco Bay and Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta (Bay-Delta) area that borders
the western edge of Elk Grove.
Given a 1-foot rise in sea level, as predicted in low-end sea level rise projections, the
occurrence of a 100-year storm surge–induced flood event would shift to once every 10
years. In other words, the frequency of a 100-year event could increase tenfold. Sea level
rise and the associated increases in flood events would place greater strain on existing
levee systems and could expand floodplains affecting Elk Grove.
In addition to the pressure resulting from sea level rise, climate change will result in
increased severity of winter storms, particularly in El Niño years. Such weather events
will result in higher levels of seasonal flooding than those currently experienced. This too
will strain levees and increase floodplain areas.
The possible increased flooding risk to Elk Grove as a result of sea level rise may require
additional policies or changes to flood mapping. The need for such changes will be
considered by the City during the annual review of the General Plan.
REGIONAL SEISMIC ACTIVITY/GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
No known earthquake faults pass through the city limits or the Planning Area. However,
faults even far from the Planning Area have the potential to generate earthshaking
which could cause damage in Elk Grove. (for more information on seismic and geologic
conditions, please refer to the Background Report.)
This Safety Element provides the City’s policies related to reducing the risk of property
damage and injury to persons as the result of groundshaking.
INDUSTRIAL USES
                                                                                               Storage tanks are visible in this
A variety of industrial uses are located in Elk Grove and the Planning Area, primarily in       aerial photograph of industrial
the southern portion of Elk Grove and in the Laguna West area west of the city. Many            facilities on Waterman Road in
                                                                                                            Elk Grove
of these industrial facilities use and/or store chemicals and other materials that could
result in damage both on- and off-site in the event of an accident.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	          SA-11

Safety Element                                                                                                              Safety Element
Figure SA-3: Dam Failure Inundation Zones within the City of Elk Grove
SA-12	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-13
Safety Element                                                                                            Safety Element
Figure SA-4: Levees in the Vicinity of Elk Grove
SA-14	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-15
Safety Element
                                    This Safety Element sets forth the City’s policies associated with the placement of land
                                    uses near facilities of all kinds that pose a threat of injury in the event of accidental or
                                    deliberate incidents.
                                    AT-GRADE RAILROAD CROSSINGS
                                    Most of the roadway/railroad crossings in Elk Grove are “at-grade”—the roadway crosses
                                    the rails, with crossing gates provided to halt vehicle traffic while the train passes
                                    through. Two major crossings—on Elk Grove Boulevard and Laguna Boulevard in the
                                    western area of Elk Grove—are provided with a bridge crossing to carry the roadway
                                    over the rails.
                                    While at-grade crossings are generally safe, the potential for accidents involving trains
                                    is present.
                                    FIRE HAZARDS
 This accident in February 2001 at
  Elk Grove Boulevard led to calls  Fire hazards within the Planning Area are limited. There are no Moderate, High, or Very
   for increased safety at railroad High Fire Hazard Severity Zones identified by the California Department of Forestry
              crossings.            and Fire Protection (Cal Fire). The Planning Area is located within a Local Responsibility
                                    Area, and contains no State Responsibility Areas as shown in Figure SA-5.
                                    The City faces greater danger from urban fires, which have potential to cause property
                                    damage, injury, and loss of life. In addition to fire-related hazards from structures in
                                    urbanized areas, the main source of wildland fire in the Planning Area occurs where
                                    natural resource and habitat areas interface with development (for example, undeveloped
                                    grassland areas near residential structures in Sheldon). Additionally, several new and
                                    proposed developments in the Planning Area contain natural vegetation, which has
                                    potential to ignite and pose safety risks to adjacent and surrounding development.
                                    FIRE-SAFE PLANNING AND PROTECTION
                                    Fire planning and preparation activities in Elk Grove are primarily undertaken by the
                                    Cosumnes Community Services District Fire Department (CCSDFD). This section
                                    describes a variety of actions that the City can take to assist the CCSD to prevent
                                    property damage and loss of life caused by wildfires. The CCSDFD operates a Fire
                                    Prevention Bureau that provides community prevention services related to fire, life,
                                    occupational hazards, property damage, and environmental safety. Diverse services
                                    including fire safety plan reviews and fire investigations are a part of what the bureau
                                    does to help keep the community safe.
                                    The City’s wildfire planning and prevention strategy focuses on techniques that reduce
                                    wildfire and other fire source potential and ensure use of fire-safe building methods.
                                    The City provides for coordinated fire protection and emergency medical services and
                                    addresses the needs of Elk Grove residents and businesses. Community members have
                                    access to information regarding potential risks and fire prevention techniques, and
                                    existing and new development will continue to be required to incorporate fire prevention
                                    and suppression measures.
SA-16	     ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                    Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
WATER SUPPLY FOR FIREFIGHTING
The issue of providing sufficient water supply (both water pressure and storage capacity)
is addressed in the Public Facilities and Finance Element of this General Plan.
Evacuation Routes
The roadway system in Elk Grove provides numerous evacuation routes. Please see the
Circulation Element of this General Plan for information and policies related to roadways.
CRITICAL FACILITIES
Critical facilities in Elk Grove include essential facilities for emergency response, lifeline
infrastructure, public-serving structures of very high value, and natural or cultural assets.
There are 343 critical facilities that have been identified in Annex B of the Sacramento
County Local Hazard Mitigation Plan. Of these, 69 are essential to government operations
and emergency response, in Elk Grove. Certain essential facilities are necessary for
effective response in the case of a flood. Essential government facilities include police
stations, fire stations, the City Corporate Yard, Emergency Operations Center, vector
control facilities, 911-emergency call centers, and sand bag storage locations. Essential
health care facilities include: assisted living centers, hospitals, and urgent care centers.
None of these essential services facilities are located within the 100-year floodplain;
however, nine essential service facilities are located within the 200-year floodplain, as
shown in Figure SA-2 and listed in Table SA-1 below.
                                         Table SA-1
        Table SA-1 Essential Government Facilities in the 200-Year Floodplain
                Facility                   Facility Type                  Address
  Laguna Town Hall                   Essential government         3020 Renwick Ave.
  Sand bag storage location (S-5)    Essential government         10050 E Taron Dr.
  Sand bag storage location (S-s)    Essential government         Klagge Ct.
  Cosumnes CSD Fire Station          Essential government         2300 Maritime Dr.
  W.V Home for the Elderly           Essential health care        2308 Dinwidie Wy.
  Devers Care Home                   Essential health care        2812 W Pintail Wy.
  Marine Residential Care Home       Essential health care        9649 Sea Cliff Wy.
  Social Vocation                    Essential health care        2204 Kausen Dr.
  Embassy Fountain Inc.              Essential health care        2405 Renwick Ave.
POLICE PROTECTION
Police protection in Elk Grove is provided by the Elk Grove Police Department, which
operates from headquarters on Laguna Palms Way. Detailed information on current
staffing levels and service levels provided by the Elk Grove Police Department is included
in the General Plan Background Report.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                      ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-17
Safety Element                                                                                                               Safety Element
Figure SA-5: Fire Responsibility Areas within the City of Elk Grove
SA-18	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                    Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-19
Safety Element
                                     FIRE PROTECTION
                                     Fire protection services in Elk Grove are provided by a separate agency, the Cosumnes
                                     Community Services District (CCSD). The CCSD maintains an extensive system of fire
                                     stations throughout Elk Grove and in a portion of the Planning Area outside the City
                                     limits.
                                     Because the City of Elk Grove does not provide fire protection services, this General
                                     Plan does not contain policies or action items that provide for the construction or
                                     operation of fire stations or related facilities; these facilities will be constructed pursuant
 Elk Grove firefighters in action in to the CCSD’s Master Plan (summarized in the General Plan Background Report). This
            June 2000                Element, instead, focuses on policies and action items aimed at coordinating the efforts
                                     of the City with those of the CCSD to ensure that an adequate level of fire protection is
                                     available at all times in Elk Grove.
                                     This Safety Element implements the following goals of the City of Elk Grove:
                                       Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
                                       Focused Goal 1-1: A safe community, free from man-made and natural hazards
                                     The following are the Safety Policies of the City of Elk Grove:
                                     GENERAL SAFETY POLICIES
                                     SA-1	     The City will seek to maintain acceptable levels of risk of injury, death, and
                                               property damage resulting from reasonably foreseeable safety hazards in Elk
                                               Grove.
                                     SA-2	     In considering the potential impact of hazardous facilities on the public and/
                                               or adjacent or nearby properties, the City will consider the hazards posed
                                               by reasonably foreseeable events. Evaluation of such hazards will address
                                               the potential for events at facilities to create hazardous physical effects at
                                               off-site locations that could result in death, significant injury, or significant
                                               property damage. The potential hazardous physical effects of an event need
                                               not be considered if the occurrence of an event is not reasonably foreseeable
                                               as defined in Policy SA-3. Absent substantial evidence to the contrary, a
                                               “hazardous physical effect” from an event shall be a level of exposure to a
                                               hazardous physical effect in excess of the levels identified in Policy SA-4.
                                     SA-3	     For the purpose of implementing Policy SA 2, the City considers an event to
                                               be “reasonably foreseeable” when the probability of the event occurring is as
                                               indicated in the table on the following page.
                                     	         SA-3-Action 1 As part of the environmental review process for proposed
                                               projects, the City will analyze potential safety-related impacts resulting from
                                               or affecting new development which could cause or be affected by reasonably
                                               foreseeable events. This analysis will include the potential for events to occur
                                               at the facility, and the potential for hazardous physical effects to result from
                                               such events with respect to the hazards listed in Table SA-A.
SA-20	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                       Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
                        Land Use                          Probability of Occurrence Per Year
  “Agriculture, Light Industrial and Industrial”
  Uses involving continuous access and the           Between 100 in one million and 10 in one million
  presence of limited number of people but                            (10-4 to 10-5)
  easy evacuation, e.g., open space, warehouses,
  manufacturing plants
  “Commercial”
  Uses involving continuous access but of easy
  evacuation,
  e.g. commercial uses, offices, etc.               Between 10 in one million and 1 in one million (10-5
                                                                         to 10-6)
  “Residential”
  All other land uses without restriction including          1 in one million and less (10-6)
  institutional uses, residential areas, etc.
	            SA-3-Action 2 The City will continue to maintain a database which records, in
             maps and text, the identified off-site hazards from any reasonably foreseeable
             events at hazardous facilities in Elk Grove and will make this information
             available to the public.
SA-4	        The Maximum Acceptable Exposure standards shown in Table SA-A will be
             used in determining the appropriateness of either:
	            (1) Placing a use near an existing hazardous facility which could expose the
             new use to hazardous physical effects, or
	            (2) Siting a hazardous facility that could expose other nearby uses to hazardous
             physical effects.
	            Absent substantial evidence to the contrary, the placement of land uses that
             do not meet the Maximum Acceptable Exposure standards will be considered
             to result in a significant, adverse impact for the purposes of CEQA analysis.
SA-5	        The City will cooperate with other local, regional, state, and federal agencies
             and with rail carriers in an effort to secure the safety of all residents and
             businesses in Elk Grove.
	            SA-5-Action 1 Continue to use the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) to
             coordinate and direct overall emergency response operations. Coordinate with
             the Elk Grove Police Department, appropriate City departments, the CCSD Fire
             Department, and the County Sheriff’s Department to ensure clear knowledge of
             roles by all agencies when using the EOC.
	            SA-5-Action 2 Establish an emergency response organization consisting of
             representatives from the Elk Grove Police Department, City departments, the
             CCSD Fire Department, County agencies, utility agencies, schools, and the
             public.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-21

Safety Element
                                                                          Table SA-A
                                                        Maximum Acceptable Exposure Criteria
                                           For Agricultural, Residential, and Non-Residential Land Uses
                                                                              Maximum Acceptable Exposure
           Land Use            Overpressure                 Airborne Toxic Substances                        Radiant Heat                Shrapnel
  Agriculture                 3.4 psig(1)       Dose = ERPG-2(2) ppm for 60 min
                                                                                                     Radiant dose = 200 kJ/
  Residential (all density                      Exposure time = 60 min
                              1.0 psig                                                               m2 (3)
  ranges) (5)                                                                                        Exposure time = 30 sec
                                                For example: chlorine
                                                                                                     Target radiant energy =
                                                ERPG-2 = 3 ppm
                                                                                                     radiant dose/exposure time
                                                Dose = 3 ppm x 60 min = 180 ppm-min
                                                                                                     Target radiant energy =
  Office/ Commercial          1.0 psig          Target concentration = dose/exposure time
                                                                                                     (200 kJ/m2) / 30 sec
                                                Target concentration =
                                                                                                     Target radiant energy =
                                                (180 ppm-min) / 60 min
                                                                                                     6.67 kW/m2
                                                Target concentration = 3 ppm chlorine
                                                Dose = ERPG-2 ppm for 60 min
                                                Exposure time = 30 min                                                          All uses will be located
                                                                                                                                such that the possibility
                                                For example: chlorine                                                           of injury for an
                                                ERPG-2 = 3 ppm                                                                  unprotected person due
  Light industrial            1.25 psig
                                                Dose = 3 ppm x 60 min = 180 ppm-min                                             to shrapnel released by
                                                Target concentration = dose/exposure time            Radiant dose = 200 kJ/m2   a reasonably foreseeable
                                                Target concentration =                               Exposure time = 15 sec     event(4) is less than
                                                (180 ppm-min) / 30 min                               Target radiant energy =    1/10-6 (1/1,000,000)
                                                Target concentration = 6 ppm chlorine                radiant dose/exposure time
                                                Dose = ERPG-2 ppm for 60 min                         Target radiant energy =
                                                Exposure time = 15 min                               (200 kJ/m2) / 15 sec
                                                                                                     Target radiant energy =
                                                For example: chlorine                                13.34 kW/m2
                                                ERPG-2 = 3 ppm
  Industrial                  3.4 psig
                                                Dose = 3 ppm x 60 min = 180 ppm-min
                                                Target concentration = dose/exposure time
                                                Target concentration =
                                                (180 ppm-min) / 15 min
                                                Target concentration = 12 ppm chlorine
(1)
    psig: pounds per square inch gauge
(2)
    ERPG-2: Emergency Response Planning Guidelines. The maximum airborne concentration below which it is believed that nearly all individuals could
be exposed for up to one hour without experiencing or developing irreversible or other serious health effects or symptoms which could impair an
individual’s ability to take protective action; ppm: parts per million
(3)
    kJ/m2: kiloJoules per square meter (a measure of radiant heat received); kW/m2: kilowatts per square meter; 1.0 kJ/m2 = 1.0 kW/m2 for 1 sec = 1 kW/
(m2-sec)
(4)
    As defined in Policy SA-3.
(5)
    Includes schools, parks, libraries, and other similar public gathering places regardless of their location.
                                                  	           SA-5-Action 3 Participate in State mutual aid agreements with neighboring
                                                              cities and counties; State and federal emergency relief agencies; and private
                                                              enterprises such as the Red Cross, the Salvation Army, and local medical
                                                              institutions to assist in shelter, relief, and first aid operations. Encourage
                                                              cooperation among adjacent communities to provide backup fire suppression
                                                              and law enforcement assistance in emergency situations.
                                                  	           SA-5-Action 4 Participate in the Standard Emergency Management System.
                                                  	           SA-5-Action 5 Comply with the State of California Emergency Services Act.
SA-22	        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
SA-6	    Consider developing and adopting a pre-disaster ordinance for post-disaster
         recovery and reconstruction that includes provisions for debris clearance,
         damage assessment, demolitions, re-occupancy and building moratorium
         criteria, fee waivers and deferrals, and expedited permitting procedures for
         repair and reconstruction.
SAFETY POLICIES: ACCIDENTAL RELEASE OF TOXIC OR
         HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
SA-7	    The City of Elk Grove will work to identify and eliminate hazardous waste
         releases from both private companies and public agencies.
SA-8	    Storage of hazardous materials and waste will be strictly regulated, consistent
         with state and federal law.
	        SA-8-Action 1 Regularly review the City’s codes to ensure that City regulations
         reflect the most up-to-date standards for the storage, handling, and use of
         hazardous and toxic materials.
	        SA-8-Action 2 Secondary containment and periodic examination shall be
         required for all storage of hazardous and toxic materials, consistent with the
         requirements of state or federal law.
	        SA-8-Action 3 As part of the review and approval of development plans and
         building permits, ensure that secondary containment is provided for hazardous
         and toxic materials.
	        SA-8 Action 4 Prior to site improvements for properties that are suspected or
         known to contain hazardous materials and sites that are listed on or identified
         on any hazardous material/waste database search will require that the site and
         surrounding area be reviewed, tested, and remediated for potential hazardous
         materials in accordance with all local, state, and federal regulations.
SA-9	    The City will seek to ensure that all industrial facilities are constructed and
         operated in accordance with up-to-date safety and environmental protection
         standards.
	        SA-9-Action 1 Support continued enforcement of permitting requirements for
         radioactive materials, and enforce public safety standards for the use of these
         materials, including the placarding of transport vehicles.
SA-10	   Industries which store and process hazardous or toxic materials shall provide a
         buffer zone between the installation and the property boundaries sufficient to
         protect public safety. The adequacy of the buffer zone shall be determined by
         the City of Elk Grove.
	        SA-10-Action 1 Consider the impact of proposed industrial development projects
         with respect to transport of hazardous materials within the City. To the extent
         feasible, uses requiring substantial transport of hazardous materials should be
         located to direct such traffic away from the City’s residential and commercial
         areas.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-23

Safety Element
                                SAFETY POLICIES:                     TRANSPORT                 OF       HAZARDOUS
                                         MATERIALS
                                SA-11	   Support continued coordination with the California Office of Emergency
                                         Services, the California Department of Toxic Substances Control, the California
                                         Highway Patrol, the Sacramento County Department of Environmental
                                         Health Services, the CCSD Fire Department, the Sacramento County Sheriff’s
                                         Department, and other appropriate agencies in hazardous materials route
                                         planning and incident response.
                                	        SA-11-Action 1 Assist all appropriate state and federal agencies which regulate
                                         the transport of vehicles carrying hazardous materials through the city.
                                  	      SA-11-Action 2 Request that state and federal agencies with responsibilities
                                         for regulating the transportation of hazardous materials review regulations and
                                         procedures, in cooperation with the City, to determine means of mitigating the
                                         public safety hazard in urbanized areas.
                                SAFETY POLICIES: DRAINAGE AND FLOODING
                                Note: The reader should also consult the Conservation and Air Quality Element for
                                additional policies dealing with development within floodplain areas.
                                SA-12	   The City opposes the construction of flood management facilities that would
                                         alter or reduce flows in the Cosumnes River and supports retention of the
                                         Cosumnes River floodplain in non-urban uses consistent with location in an
                                         area subject to flooding.
                                SA-13	   The City shall require that all new projects not result in new or increased
                                         flooding impacts on adjoining parcels or on upstream and downstream areas.
                                SA-14	   The City shall locate, and encourage other agencies to locate, new essential
                                         government service facilities and essential health care facilities outside of 100-
                                         year and 200-year flood hazard zones, except in cases where such locations
                                         would compromise facility functioning.
                                SA-15	   The City shall re-locate or harden existing essential government service
                                         facilities and essential health care facilities that are currently located inside of
                                         100-year and 200-year flood hazard zones.
                                	SA-15-Action 1 The City shall identify construction methods or other hardening
                                         methods to minimize damage for facilities that remain in flood hazard zones.
                                SA-16	   The City shall give priority to the designation of appropriate land uses in areas
                                         subject to flooding to reduce risks to life and property. Construction of new
                                         flood management projects shall have a lower priority, unless land use controls
                                         (such as limiting new development in flood-prone areas) are not sufficient to
                                         reduce hazards to life and property to acceptable levels.
SA-24	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
SA-17	   Development shall not be permitted on land subject to flooding during a 100-
         year event, based on the most recent floodplain mapping prepared by FEMA or
         updated mapping acceptable to the City of Elk Grove. Potential development
         in areas subject to flooding may be clustered onto portions of a site which are
         not subject to flooding, consistent with other policies of this General Plan.
	        SA-17-Action 1 The City will keep updated data on the 200-year floodplain
         through an annual review. This updated information will be made available and
         referenced during the development review process for areas within the base
         case 200-year flood map, as shown in Figure SA-2.
SA-18	   A buildable area outside the 100-year floodplain must be present on every
         residential lot sufficient to accommodate a residence and associated structures.
         Fill may be placed to create a buildable area only if approved by the City and in
         accordance with all other applicable policies and regulations.
	        The use of fill in the 100-year floodplain to create buildable area is strongly
         discouraged and shall be subject to review to determine potential impacts on
         wildlife, habitat, and flooding on other parcels.
SA-19	   The City will not enter into a development agreement, approve a building
         permit or entitlement, or approve a tentative or parcel map for a project
         located within an urban level of flood protection area unless it meets one or
         more established flood protection findings.
	        SA-19-Action 1 By no later than July of 2016, update the Zoning Code to require
         flood protection findings in areas within the 200-year floodplain. Findings shall
         all be consistent with current Central Valley Flood Protection Plan (CVFPP)
         standards for an urban level of flood protection. The amendments shall
         incorporate, at a minimum, the following parameters:
	        The four potential findings for a development project within the 200-year
         floodplain, as shown on Figure SA-1, are: 1) The project has an Urban Level
         of Flood Protection from flood management facilities that is not reflected in
         the most recent map of the two hundred (200) year floodplain; 2) Conditions
         imposed on the project will provide for an Urban Level of Flood Protection; 3)
         Adequate progress has been made toward construction of a flood protection
         system to provide an Urban Level of Flood Protection for the project, as
         indicated by the Central Valley Flood Protection Board; or 4) the project
         is a site improvement that would not result in the development of any new
         habitable structure, and would not increase risk of damage to neighboring
         development or alter the conveyance area of a watercourse in the case of a
         flood.
                  	   •	    Findings shall be based on substantial evidence.
                  	   •	    Substantial evidence necessary to determine findings shall be 	
                      	     consistent with criteria developed by DWR.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-25

Safety Element
                                SA-20	 Ensure common understanding and consistent application of urban level of
                                       flood protection criteria and conditions.
                                	      SA-20-Action 1 Develop a method, such as a checklist provided during
                                       development review, to aid potential project applicants in determine flood risk
                                       and flood protection findings.
                                SA-21	 Work with regional, county, and state agencies to develop mechanisms
                                       to finance the design and construction of flood management and drainage
                                       facilities to achieve an urban level of flood protection in affected areas.
                                SA-22	 Vehicular access to the buildable area of all parcels must be at or above the
                                       10-year flood elevation.
                                SA-23	 Creation of lots whose access will be inundated by flows resulting from a 10-
                                       year or greater storm shall not be allowed. Bridges or similar structures may be
                                       used to provide access over creeks or inundated areas, subject to applicable
                                       local, state, and federal regulations.
                                SA-24	 Discourage the number of crossings of natural creeks in order to reduce
                                       potential flooding and access problems.
                                	      SA-24-Action 1 Lots or parcels which will contain two or more buildable areas
                                       on both sides of a creek or floodplain shall be discouraged. See the figure
                                       below.
                                SA-25	 Parcels should not be created on which the presence of easements, floodplain,
                                       marsh or riparian habitat, or other features would leave insufficient land to
                                       build and operate structures. This policy shall not apply to open space lots
                                       specifically created for dedication to the City or another appropriate party
                                       for habitat protection, flood hazard management, drainage, or wetland
                                       maintenance.
                                SA-26	 Where necessary due to clear dangers to life or property, the City will support
                                       the construction of flood hazard management projects.
SA-26	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016
Safety Element
	        SA-26-Action 1 The City will continue to participate through the Sacramento
         Area Flood Control Agency in implementation of a backbone flood hazard
         management project along the Sacramento River and the immediate
         connection of local internal streams to this river.
	        SA-26-Action 2         The City will continue local efforts that encourage
         implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program.
	        SA-26-Action 3 The City will participate with the City of Sacramento, the
         Army Corps of Engineers, and other Federal, State, and local governments
         and agencies to develop policies to finance, construct, and plan infrastructure
         improvements to reduce potential flood hazards in Elk Grove.
SA-27	 New and modified bridge structures shall not cause an increase in water
         surface elevations of the 100-year floodplain exceeding 1 foot, unless analysis
         clearly indicates that the physical and/or economic use of upstream property
         will not be adversely affected.
SA-28	   The City shall require all new urban development projects to incorporate runoff
         control measures to minimize peak flows of runoff and/or assist in financing or
         otherwise implementing Comprehensive Drainage Plans.
	        SA-28-Action 1 As part of the review of development projects, ensure that
         runoff control measures are planned and provided.
SA-29	 Drainage facilities should be properly maintained to ensure their proper
         operation during storms.
SAFETY POLICIES: GEOLOGIC AND SEISMIC HAZARDS
SA-30	 The City supports efforts by Federal, State, and other local jurisdictions to
         investigate local seismic and geological hazards and support those programs
         that effectively mitigate these hazards.
	        SA-30-Action 1 Implement the International/California Building Code to ensure
         that structures meet all applicable seismic standards.
SA-31	   The City shall seek to ensure that new structures are protected from damage
         caused by geologic and/or soil conditions.
	        SA-31-Action 1 Require that a geotechnical report or other appropriate analysis
         be conducted to determine the shrink/swell potential and stability of the soil
         for public and private construction projects and identifies measures necessary
         to ensure stable soil conditions.
SAFETY POLICIES: RAILROAD CROSSINGS
SA-32	   The City shall initiate as well as cooperate in improvements at existing at-grade
         railroad crossings to improve public safety. This may include construction of
         grade-separated crossings and other appropriate safety features.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-27
Safety Element
                                SA-33	    The City shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that railroad crossings in
                                          Elk Grove are made as safe as possible.
                                	         SA-33-Action 1 The City will coordinate with the railroads operating in Elk
                                          Grove to ensure that all appropriate safety measures are implemented in their
                                          operations in the City.
                                	         SA-33-Action 2 The City will seek to improve the safety at rail crossings by
                                          continuing to investigate improvements in crossing gates and warning devices.
                                	         SA-33-Action 3 The City will make available information on railroad crossing
                                          safety at City Hall and on the City’s website to encourage safe practices by Elk
                                          Grove residents and businesses.
                                SAFETY POLICIES: EVACUATION ROUTES
                                A properly planned and implemented roadway system within the City will facilitate the
                                efficient movement of police and firefighting equipment and the safe evacuation of
                                residents. Please refer to the Circulation Element for policies related to the City’s overall
                                circulation system.
                                SAFETY POLICIES: POLICE PROTECTION
                                SA-34	    The City shall regularly monitor and review the level of police staffing provided
                                          in Elk Grove and ensure that sufficient staffing and resources are available to
                                          serve local needs.
                                SA-35	    Design neighborhoods and buildings in a manner that prevents crime and
                                          provides security and safety for people and property when feasible.
                                SAFETY POLICIES: DESIGN OF SITES AND BUILDINGS
                                SA-36	    Encourage the use of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
                                          (CPTED) principles in the design of development projects and buildings. These
                                          basic principles include:
                                	         Natural Surveillance
                                	         A design concept directed primarily at keeping intruders easily observable.
                                          Promoted by features that maximize visibility of people, parking areas, and
                                          building entrances: doors and windows that look out on to streets and parking
                                          areas; pedestrian-friendly sidewalks and streets; front porches; adequate
                                          nighttime lighting.
                                	         Territorial Reinforcement
                                	         Physical design can create or extend a sphere of influence. Users then develop a
                                          sense of territorial control while potential offenders, perceiving this control, are
                                          discouraged. Promoted by features that define property lines and distinguish
SA-28	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                   Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016

Safety Element
         private spaces from public spaces using landscape plantings, pavement
         designs, gateway treatments, and CPTED fences.
  	      Natural Access Control
	        A design concept directed primarily at decreasing crime opportunity by
         denying access to crime targets and creating in offenders a perception of risk.
         Gained by designing streets, sidewalks, building entrances, and neighborhood
         gateways to clearly indicate public routes and discouraging access to private
         areas with structural elements.
  	      Target Hardening
	        Accomplished by features that prohibit entry or access: window locks, dead
         bolts for doors, interior door hinges.
SAFETY POLICIES: FIRE PROTECTION
SA-37	   Cooperate with the Cosumnes Community Services District (CCSD) Fire
         Department to reduce fire hazards, assist in fire suppression, and promote fire
         safety in Elk Grove.
	        SA-37-Action 1 Review new development for adequate water supply and
         pressure, fire hydrants, and access to structures by firefighting equipment and
         personnel.
	        SA-37-Action 2 Review projects for compliance with the California Fire Code
         and the life safety provisions of the California Building Code as part of the
         building permit process.
	        SA-37-Action 3 Work with the CCSD to develop high visibility fire prevention
         programs, including those which provide voluntary home inspections and
         awareness of home fire prevention measures.
	        SA-37-Action 4 Require, where appropriate, on-site fire suppression systems
         for all new commercial and industrial development to reduce the dependence
         on fire department equipment and personnel.
	        SA-37-Action 5 The City shall continue to maintain, periodically update, and
         test the effectiveness of its Emergency Response Plan.
	        SA-37-Action 6 The City shall require the installation of earthquake-triggered
         automatic gas shut-off sensors in high-occupancy facilities and in industrial
         and commercial structures.
	        SA-37-Action 7 Work with the CCSD Fire Department to enforce all existing
         codes regarding fire protection, including building inspection and vegetation
         management.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 SA-29
Safety Element
                                SAFETY POLICIES: WATER SUPPLY FOR FIREFIGHTING
                                Please see the Public Facilities and Finance Element for policies related to water supply.
SA-30	  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through July 2016
Sustainability Elemen
Sustainability Element
                                     The Sustainability Element is an optional element of the General Plan and is not mandated
                                     by the State of California. Its inclusion in the General Plan demonstrates the City of Elk
                                     Grove’s (City) commitment to the long-term health and viability of the community. The
                                     City worked closely with the community to define sustainability and identify the policy
                                     topics contained within this Element.
  DEFINITION OF SUSTAINABILITY       This Element of the General Plan includes:
  Sustainability in Elk Grove is the
  ability to live responsibly within     •	A definition of sustainability, as defined by the community through public
  our means, meeting present                workshops;
  needs without compromising the
  ability for future generations to      •	 A description of relevant state laws;
  meet their own needs. It is the        •	Identification and description of sustainability policy areas addressed in this
  capacity to endure, and therefore
                                            General Plan;
  applies to everything we do now
  and in the future. The challenge       •	 An explanation of the relationship of this Element to other Elements in the General
  is to incorporate the three               Plan, including a matrix identifying the Element in which policies relating to each
  components of sustainability              sustainability policy area can be found;
  the environment, the economy,
  and the community into City            •	An explanation of the relationship of this Element to the Climate Action Plan
  policies and actions. All three           (CAP);
  components work together as an
                                         •	 A set of focused sustainability goals, policies, and actions not addressed in other
  integrated system to achieve a
                                            Elements of this General Plan.
  sustainable community. The City
  is committed to this challenge
  and to achieving our community’s   The graphic below illustrates the concept of a sustainable community, where each
  vision of a sustainable Elk Grove. circle represents one of the three components and each component is linked and
                                     dependent upon the others. The shaded area in the middle represents a union of all
                                     three components of sustainability. The goal is for the General Plan policies and actions,
                                     together as a whole, to support efforts toward achieving a sustainable community over
                                     the life of the General Plan.
                                     During the public outreach process, the community identified the following five
                                     characteristics in their vision of a sustainable city:
                                         1.	 Municipal Responsibility
                                         2.	 Innovative and Energy Efficient Transportation & Development
                                         3.	 Healthy Natural Environment & Resource Stewardship
                                         4.	Healthy Community & Cultural Diversity
                                         5.	 Robust Sustainable Economy
                                     The sustainability characteristics above directly address the three components of
                                     sustainability: environment, community, and economy. The final characteristic, fiscal
                                     responsibility, addresses the City’s involvement in ensuring that the vitality of the
                                     community endures.
S-2	        ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN		                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENTS
The three components of sustainability the environment, the economy, and the
community are interrelated and individually and collectively important in achieving a
sustainable community. All three components should be carefully considered when
making decisions on behalf of the City. A key challenge will be to balance the demands
of each component and the evolving needs of Elk Grove over the life of the General Plan.
Environment – Environmental sustainability is achieved by being a steward of the
natural environment and reducing the impact of human activities on natural resources
and systems that support the community.
Economy – A sustainable economy is one that is strong and resilient. It is achieved
by supporting education, jobs, businesses, green industries, innovation, and economic
development.
Community – A sustainable community is one that is accessible, healthy, safe, and
diverse and promotes well-being. It is achieved by supporting public participation,
healthy living, access to social services, cultural diversity, historic preservation, and the
arts.
SUSTAINABILITY IN DECISION-MAKING
The General Plan’s policies and actions support the principle of sustainability. Creating
and maintaining a sustainable community will require integrating sustainable principles
into the City’s everyday actions and decisions, adapting to changing conditions and
technologies, and staying informed of innovations and current best practices. The
General Plan incorporates sustainable principles in every Element. Therefore, decisions
that are consistent with the goals, policies, and actions identified in the General Plan
will forward the principle of sustainability and, through time, will result in a sustainable
Elk Grove. Local decisions will be made through a holistic approach that includes
consideration of the environment, the economy, and the community. We refer to this
holistic approach as the “sustainability lens.”
RELEVANT STATE LAWS
Executive Order S-3-05
Executive Order S-3-05, which was signed by Governor Schwarzenegger in 2005,
proclaims that California is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. It declares
that increased temperatures could reduce the Sierra snowpack, further exacerbate
California’s air quality problems, and potentially cause a rise in sea levels. To combat
those concerns, the Executive Order established total greenhouse gas emission targets.
Specifically, emissions are to be reduced to the 2000 level by 2010, to the 1990 level by
2020, and to 80 percent below the 1990 level by 2050. The General Plan recognizes the
City’s role in statewide mitigation efforts and works toward reducing greenhouse gas
emissions to levels established by the City Council.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-3

Sustainability Element
                                Assembly Bill (AB) 32
                                AB 32, also known as the California Climate Solutions Act of 2006, was authorized in
                                September 2006 by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger. AB 32 requires that statewide
                                GHG emissions be reduced to 1990 levels by the year 2020. AB 32 institutes a schedule
                                to meet the emissions cap and to develop tracking, reporting, and enforcement
                                mechanisms to ensure that the state achieves reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
                                necessary to meet the cap. AB 32 also includes guidance to institute emissions
                                reductions in an economically efficient manner and conditions to ensure that businesses
                                and consumers are not unfairly affected by the reductions.
                                Senate Bill (SB) 97
                                SB 97, enacted in 2007, amends the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) statute
                                to clearly establish that greenhouse gas emissions and their effects are appropriate
                                subjects for CEQA analysis. It directs the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research to
                                develop draft CEQA Guidelines “for the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions or the
                                effects of greenhouse gas emissions” by July 1, 2009, and directs the Resources Agency
                                to certify and adopt the CEQA Guidelines. The General Plan is designed to address the
                                environmental impacts associated with the bill’s policies and programs and to meet the
                                State’s intent in adding this topic to CEQA.
                                Senate Bill (SB) 375
                                In August 2008, the Governor signed SB 375, a platform to implement AB 32 by linking
                                regional transportation plans with state greenhouse gas reduction goals. Under SB 375,
                                state agencies and local metropolitan planning organizations (such as the Sacramento
                                Area Council of Governments) are to develop preferred growth scenarios to cut
                                greenhouse gas emissions. SB 375 will tie state transportation funds to projects that
                                conform to those scenarios. SB 375 also requires cities to revise their Housing Elements
                                every eight years in conjunction with the regional transportation plan. The General Plan
                                is designed to address these requirements and allow the City to meet its emissions
                                reduction goals in coordination with planning for housing and overall community growth.
                                Other Relevant State Laws
                                In addition to the above state laws, a number of relevant laws promote sustainable
                                development. These laws include, but are not limited to, the California Building Code
                                and state historic preservation laws.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICY AREAS
                                The five sustainability characteristics identified during the public outreach process are
                                outlined below and categorize each of the policy topic areas addressed in this Element.
                                The policy topic areas are shown in the bulleted list below.
                                1) Municipal Responsibility
                                    •	 Sustainable Decision-Making & Partnerships
                                    •	 Sustainability & Climate Action Plan Monitoring
S-4	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
    •	 Environmentally Preferable Purchasing
    •	 Financing Strategies
2) Innovative and Efficient Transportation & Development
    •	 Green Building
    •	 Transit-Oriented Development (TOD)
    •	 Transportation & Parking Demand Management
3) Healthy Natural Environment & Resource Stewardship
    •	 Air Quality, Greenhouse Gases & Resource Conservation
    •	 Community Forest
    •	 Native & Drought-Tolerant Landscaping
    •	 Energy Efficiency, Conservation & Renewables
    •	 Sustainable Stormwater Management
    •	 Waste Management
    •	 Water Conservation & Efficiency
4) Healthy Community & Cultural Diversity
    •	 Child, Youth & Senior Services
    •	 Community Character & Placemaking
    •	 Community Involvement
    •	 Environmental Justice
    •	 Public Education & Awareness
    •	 Public Health & Safety
5) Robust Economy
    •	 Community Food Systems
    •	 Jobs & Businesses
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
All Elements of the General Plan contribute policies and actions that further the City’s
sustainability goals. For example, the Land Use Element includes policies to promote
compact and mixed-use development, and the Circulation Element promotes enhanced
connectivity between developments, the Housing Element supports equity through
affordable housing opportunities, and the Economic Development Element includes
policies to grow a strong local economy and promotes employment opportunities
for all segments of the community. Figure S.1 illustrates how the various Elements of
this General Plan address sustainability and how the Sustainability Element provides
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                               ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-5

Sustainability Element
                                additional sustainability policies and actions not fully addressed in other Elements. The
                                public outreach process helped to identify the sustainability policy areas important to
                                the community and those are identified in the previous list.
                                RELATIONSHIP TO THE CLIMATE ACTION PLAN
                                The Sustainability Element provides an adopted vision and strategy to guide
                                sustainability in the City over the next 20 years. The Climate Action Plan (CAP) is a
                                tool that is linked to the General Plan through the Sustainability Element, but focuses
                                specifically on greenhouse gas emissions reductions. The CAP is a shorter-term plan
                                that will be updated on a more frequent basis. Any future updates to the CAP may
                                warrant subsequent General Plan amendments to ensure that relevant measures are
                                incorporated as appropriate into the City’s primary policy document.
                                The CAP identifies and quantifies the impact of the City’s sustainability vision, policies,
                                and programs on greenhouse gas emissions. The General Plan, Sustainability Element,
                                and Climate Action Plan function together as part of the City’s comprehensive toolkit to
                                achieve a vibrant and sustainable community.
                                Greenhouse gas reduction measures identified in the CAP are integrated into the policies
                                and actions of this Element. Each policy or action that has related CAP reduction
                                measures is identified with a cross-reference to the CAP. The final column of Figure S.1
                                illustrates the relationship between the sustainability policy areas in this Element and
                                the CAP.
                                The Sustainability Element and Climate Action Plan are part of the framework for
                                developing a greenhouse gas emissions reduction strategy in compliance with Section
                                15183.5(b) of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines. Section
                                15183.5(b) refers to the development of a plan that can be used to streamline future
                                development proposed as a part of the programmatic policy structure in place at the
                                City. Several actions are needed to develop a reduction plan consistent with this section,
                                including:
                                     1)	 Prepare a greenhouse gas inventory that includes projected emissions
                                     6)   Develop an emissions reduction target
                                     7)   Include emissions associated with specific actions in the City
                                     8)   Identify emissions reduction measures and quantify their benefits
                                     9)   Establish a procedure to monitor and update the CAP
                                     10) Go through a public process and appropriate level of environmental review
                                The approach taken by the City to develop the CAP and Sustainability Element satisfies
                                all of the criteria outlined in Section 15183.5(b) of the CEQA Guidelines.
S-6	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
                                                                  Figure S.1: Sustainability Policy Topics Matrix
                           Relationship between the Sustainability Element, other General Plan Elements, and the Climate Action Plan
                                                                                           EXISTING GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS & CITY DOCUMENTS
                                                                                                        Conservation     Economic                                        Parks, Trails,   Public Facilities            Climate Action   Sustainability
                                                                                          Circulation
                                                                                                                                       Historic
                                                                                                                                                  Housing   Land Use                                          Safety
                                       Sustainability Policy Topic Area
                                                                                                        & Air Quality   Development                                     & Open Space        & Finance                       Plan          Element
                                                                                                                                      Resources
   Low Carbon
                           Climate Change (sea level rise, flooding, emissions)
                           Green Building
  Transportation
                           Connectivity
 and Development
                           Transit Oriented Development
                           Transportation/Parking Demand Management Strategies
                           Air Quality / Greenhouse Gases
   Healthy Natural
                           Resource Conservation
                           Parks & Recreation
    Environment
                           Open Space
                           Landscaping - Native & Drought Tolerant
                           Community Forest
                           Energy Efficiency, Conservation, & Renewables
  Resource                 Sustainable Stormwater Management/ Green Infrastructure
 Stewardship
                           Waste Management
                           Water Conservation & Efficiency
                           Affordable Housing
                           Child, Youth & Senior Services
   Healthy Community
                           Community Character & Placemaking
                           Historic Preservation
   & Cultural Diversity
                           Community Involvement
                           Environmental Justice
                           Public Education & Awareness
                           Public Health & Safety
                           Community Food Systems
    Robust
                           Economic Development & Jobs/Housing Balance
   Economy                 Green Jobs & Businesses
     Municipal
                           Sustainable Decision Making & Partnerships
                           Environmentally Preferable Purchasing
   Responsibility
                           Sustainability & Climate Action Plan Monitoring
                           Financing Strategies
                          Indicates that the topic area is addressed completely or partially within that Element or Document.
                          Indicates topics not addressed in the Sustainability Element, but elsewhere in the General Plan and/or Climate Action Plan.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                                                                                             ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                                           S-7
Sustainability Element
                                The sustainability policies of the General Plan implement all of the Guiding Goals
                                identified in the General Plan Goals chapter. These goals unify this General Plan and are
                                restated below:
                                  Guiding Goal 1: A High Quality of Life for All Residents
                                  Focused Goal 1-1: A safe community, free from manmade and natural hazards
                                  Focused Goal 1-2: Outdoor recreation opportunities for all residents
                                  Focused Goal 1-3: A balanced and efficient transportation system
                                  Focused Goal 1-4: High quality public facilities and services
                                  Focused Goal 1-5: Excellence in the design of new development
                                  Focused Goal 1-6: Safe and affordable housing for all persons
                                  Focused Goal 1-7: Active and passive park facilities and recreation programs that
                                  satisfy the leisure time and recreation needs of all residents
                                  Focused Goal 1-8: Creation and maintenance of a strong, positive community image
                                  for Elk Grove
                                  Focused Goal 1-9: A pattern of land use which enhances the community character of
                                  Elk Grove, provides employment and shopping opportunities to serve residents and
                                  the region, which provides for use of transit, and which protects Elk Grove’s unique
                                  historical and natural features
                                  Guiding Goal 2: Diversified Economic Base
                                  Focused Goal 2-1: A business community which includes a diversity of office uses,
                                  locally oriented and regionally oriented retail and services, and a diversity of
                                  residential types
                                  Focused Goal 2-2: A balance between the numbers and types of workers residing in
                                  Elk Grove and opportunities for employment in the city
                                  Focused Goal 2-3: A positive environment for business retention and expansion
                                  Focused Goal 2-4: Creation of Elk Grove as a desired place to locate major
                                  employment-generating uses
                                  Focused Goal 2-6: A balanced municipal budget which will allow the City to provide
                                  a high level of service to all residents and businesses
                                  Guiding Goal 3: Protection of the Natural Environment
                                  Focused Goal 3-1: Development which recognizes environmental constraints and is
                                  designed and operated to minimize impacts on the environment
S-8	    ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
  Focused Goal 3-3: Natural resources managed and protected for the use and
  enjoyment of current and future generations
  Focused Goal 3-4: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s natural areas, in
  particular the areas within the floodplain of the Cosumnes River
  Guiding Goal 4: Preservation and Enhancement of Elk Grove’s Unique Historic and
  Natural Features
  Focused Goal 4-1: Preservation and enhancement of Elk Grove’s historic structures
  and districts
  Focused Goal 4-2: Preservation of the large oak and other tree species which are an
  important part of the City’s historic and aesthetic character
  Guiding Goal 5: Preservation of the Rural Character of Elk Grove
  Focused Goal 5-2: Maintenance of those features that provide the character of Elk
  Grove’s rural areas, including: large oak and other trees, small local roadways, animal
  keeping and raising, equestrians, agriculture, and limited commercial opportunities
The following policies and action items implement these goals. The policies and actions
in this chapter are organized by the sustainability topics previously identified in the
Sustainability Policy Areas section of this Element. The incentives identified throughout
this Element to aid in implementation are intended to utilize a combination of rewards
and penalties to induce behavior.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: SUSTAINABLE DECISION-
MAKING & PARTNERSHIPS
The following policies establish partnerships and integrate the components of
sustainability into the decision-making process. This will lead to well-informed choices
that take into consideration the fundamental links among the economy, the environment,
and the community. These connections help the City work toward its sustainability goals.
S-1	      Consider the three components of sustainability the environment, the
          economy, and the community in decision-making for new development
          projects, special projects, and proposed policies and programs.
S-2	      Partner with public and private agencies to efficiently enforce the policies of
          this Element, and encourage innovation in new development.
S-3 	     Participate in local, regional, and statewide sustainability efforts and programs
          that further the goals and policies outlined in the General Plan.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-9

Sustainability Element
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: SUSTAINABILITY & CLIMATE
                                ACTION PLAN MONITORING
                                These policies formalize the approach for keeping informed of current sustainable
                                practices, implementing sustainability policies and programs, and measuring the City’s
                                success in achieving sustainability targets.
                                S-4	     Assess the City’s progress toward achieving its sustainability objectives.
                                         • S-4-Action 1 Establish a City-staff working group that monitors the City’s
                                         sustainability progress and stays informed of current best management
                                         practices (BMPs).
                                         • S-4-Action 2 Monitor progress on sustainability through the City-staff working
                                         group. The group’s initial work plan shall include the following tasks:
                                          •	 Identify sustainability indicators;
                                          •	 Develop measurable targets;
                                          •	Research current BMPs and provide links to public agency BMPS on the
                                             City’s website as a resource for the community;
                                          •	 Participate in conferences and meetings that promote sustainability; and
                                          •	 Annually assess and report on these targets and indicators to monitor the
                                             City’s progress toward sustainability and make recommendations based on
                                             current best practices and innovation.
                                         • S-4 Action 3 Provide regular training to ensure that Planning Department
                                         staff are able to implement the sustainability policies identified in this Element,
                                         and utilize current best management practices identified by the Sustainability
                                         Committee when enforcing these policies.
                                         • S-4-Action 4 Provide opportunities for public involvement and interaction
                                         with the City-staff working group. Examples include, but are not limited to:
                                          •	 Public workshops
                                          •	 Community forums
                                S-5	     Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from community-wide sources, including
                                         City facilities and operations, by a minimum of 15 percent below 2005 levels
                                         by 2020, consistent with the standards and requirements of AB 32.
                                          •	 S-5 Action 1 Adopt and implement a Climate Action Plan that will identify
                                             goals, measures, and actions to achieve the City’s greenhouse gas reduction
                                             target.
                                          •	S-5 Action 2 Regularly monitor and track the progress toward the City’s
                                             greenhouse gas reduction goals.
                                          •	 Annually report on the implementation status of the Climate Action Plan.
                                          •	 Update the City’s Climate Action Plan as necessary to make progress toward
                                             the City’s greenhouse gas reduction goals.
S-10	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: ENVIRONMENTALLY
PREFERABLE PURCHASING
These policies establish the City’s commitment to purchasing local and environmentally
responsible products and services to improve the health of the environment, its people,
and local businesses.
S-6 	     Promote the use of local and environmentally friendly products and services
          for municipal purchases and contracts. (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
          •	 S-6-Action 1 Review and implement the City’s environmentally preferable
             purchasing program, and consider the inclusion of standards for locally
             produced goods, environmentally friendly cleaning products, recycled
             content for paper products, street furnishings, roadways, and construction
             materials, alternative fuel vehicles, and hiring local and/or sustainable
             businesses for contract services. Balance the use of local and environmentally
             friendly products and services with their financial impact to the City and
             their benefits and effectiveness.
Please see the Economic Development Element of this General Plan for additional
policies that support local goods and services.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: FINANCING STRATEGIES
These policies will financially support the City’s ongoing commitment to sustainability
issues.
S-7	      Use funding and financing mechanisms to support sustainability and
          environmentally-friendly government programs.
          •	 S-7-Action 1 Seek additional grant funding to support sustainability programs
             and demonstration projects.
          •	 S-7-Action 2 Formalize interagency partnerships to support water conservation.
          •	S-7-Action 3 Promote public-private partnerships to upgrade existing
             buildings for energy efficiency and water conservation.
          •	 S-7-Action 4 Utilize or update existing funding mechanisms or establish new
             mechanisms to fund low impact development and green infrastructure (e.g.,
             permeable paving, rain gardens, bioretention) .
Please see the Public Facilities and Finance Element of this General Plan for additional
policies related to public facility financing strategies.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: GREEN BUILDING [PUBLIC
DEVELOPMENT]
Green building techniques are an effective way of reducing the environmental impacts
created by development, and green buildings have been shown to use significantly less
energy than traditional buildings. These policies demonstrate the City’s leadership in
promoting sustainable development in Elk Grove.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                  ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-11

Sustainability Element
                                S-8	      Incorporate green building techniques and best management practices in the
                                          site design, construction, and renovation of all public projects. (Please see
                                          CAP reduction measures.)
                                          •	 S-8-Action 1 Require all new municipal developments to exceed state Title
                                             24 Energy Efficiency Standards by 15 percent to the extent such efficiencies
                                             are possible.
                                          •	 S-8-Action 2 Design new municipal facilities to be at a minimum the baseline
                                             LEED certification.
                                          •	 S-8-Action 3 Implement measures identified during the energy audit process
                                             to reduce energy use in existing municipal buildings.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: GREEN BUILDING [PRIVATE
                                DEVELOPMENT]
                                S-9	      Support innovation and green building best management practices for all
                                          new private development.
                                          •	S-9-Action 1 Require all new private developments to meet and (as
                                             determined feasible by the City) exceed state Title 24 Energy Efficiency
                                             Building Standards. (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
                                          •	S-9-Action 2 Include a Green Building & Development Resource List and
                                             supporting materials with City planning and building permit applications
                                             that outline ways to integrate green building principles into project design.
                                          •	S-9-Action 3 Establish a green building incentive program to encourage
                                             developers to integrate green design techniques above and beyond the
                                             requirements of Action 1. Incentives may include, but are not limited to,
                                             expedited review, plan/permit review fee reduction, density bonuses, tax
                                             credits, and/or technical assistance.
                                          •	 S-9-Action 4 Establish partnerships with the U.S. Department of Housing &
                                             Urban Development (HUD) and utility and water districts and providers to
                                             initiate pilot projects that demonstrate green building best practices.
                                          •	 S-9-Action 5 Create a program to recognize exemplary projects in the city
                                             that exhibit innovation and best practices in green building design.
                                          •	 S-9-Action 6 Provide regular training to ensure that Planning Department
                                             and Building Safety & Inspection Department staff are able to implement the
                                             State’s Green Building Code and review or rate green building projects.
                                Please see the Housing Element and Conservation & Air Quality Element of this General
                                Plan for additional policies related to green building.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: CONNECTIVITY
                                Policies related to connectivity are found in the Circulation Element of this General Plan.
S-12	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: TRANSIT-ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT (TOD)
Transit-oriented development is characterized by a higher density and intensity of
development than typical suburban development and located in close proximity to
public transit. TODs discourage automobile use and encourage alternative modes of
transport, which have numerous benefits including reduced use of fossil fuels, improved
air quality, and increased physical activity. A compact TOD pattern can avoid further
encroachment upon open space and natural resources, helping to safeguard these
resources for our well-being and those of future generations.
S-10	     Support higher-density, compact, residential development along transit by
          placing high-density residential or mixed-use sites near transit opportunities.
          (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
           •	 S-10-Action 1 Review the existing TOD designation in the Land Use Plan to
              determine if additional opportunities exist. Review should give consideration
              to the recommendations presented in the SACOG Blueprint Growth
              Principles. (Please see CAP.)
           •	S-10-Action 2 Review the existing TOD designation in the Land Use Plan
              and revise the definition to emphasize mixed-use, compact, higher-density
              development around transit stations.
           •	S-10-Action 3 Review and update the City’s design guidelines to ensure
              appropriate design of TODs, and establish standards to prioritize pedestrians,
              cyclists, and public transit over private vehicles.
Please see the Circulation and Housing Elements of this General Plan for additional
policies related to TOD.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: TRANSPORTATION &
PARKING DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Transportation and Parking Demand Management strategies discourage private
automobile travel and reduce the amount of land given to parking spaces, which have
a number of environmental benefits including reduced reliance on fossil fuels, improved
air quality, increased physical activity, and more efficient use of developable land.
S-11	     Support strategies that reduce reliance on single-occupancy private vehicles
          and promote the viability of alternative modes of transport. (Please see CAP
          reduction measures.)
           •	S-11-Action 1 Continue to support and operate the City’s Transit Services
              Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Program, and continue to
              develop new and innovative TDM strategies based on current best practices.
           •	 S-11-Action 2 Require new commercial development for projects equal to
              and greater than 100,000 square feet to provide electric vehicle charging
              station and new residential development to pre-wire for plug-in electric
              vehicles.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-13

Sustainability Element
                                          •	S-11-Action 3 Develop incentives for existing commercial and residential
                                             properties seeking to provide for electric vehicle recharging.
                                          •	S-11-Action 4 Ensure new multi-family and commercial developments
                                             provide bicycle parking and other bicycle support facilities appropriate for
                                             the users of the development.
                                          •	 S-11-Action 5 Work with private entities to implement a citywide car-sharing
                                             program.
                                          •	S-11-Action 6 Continue to implement the Safe Routes to School policy.
                                             Continue working with the Sacramento Area Council of Governments
                                             (SACOG) on implementation.
                                          •	 S-11-Action 7 Establish an employee incentive program to encourage the use
                                             of transportation alternatives, such as a parking space cash-out program.
                                          •	S-11-Action 8 Review and revise parking standards to reduce parking
                                             requirements in mixed-use and transit-oriented developments to reinforce
                                             alternative modes of transport.
                                          •	 S-11-Action 9 Develop incentives that promote shared access and shared
                                             parking between adjacent developments.
                                          •	 S-11-Action 10 Work with the local public transit agencies to improve and
                                             expand services to reduce overcrowding on existing routes and entice more
                                             residents to ride transit rather than drive alone.
                                Please see the Alternative Transportation Policies section of the Circulation Element
                                and the Air Quality section of the Conservation & Air Quality Element of this General
                                Plan for additional policies regarding transportation demand management.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: PARKS & RECREATION
                                Policies related to parks and recreation are found in the Parks, Trails, and Open Space
                                Element of this General Plan.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: AIR QUALITY, GREENHOUSE
                                GASES & RESOURCE CONSERVATION
                                Implementing measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is important in order to
                                minimize the environmental effects of climate change and to protect public health. These
                                policies aim to safeguard the health of the environment to assure future generations of
                                the resources they will need to survive and progress.
                                S-12	     Improve the health and sustainability of the community through improved
                                          regional air quality and reduced greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to
                                          climate change.
                                          •	S-12 Action 1 Ensure that new development is consistent with the City’s
                                             Climate Action Plan.
                                S-13	     Preserve, protect, and enhance, as appropriate, the community’s carbon
                                          sequestration resources, also referred to as “carbon sinks,” to improve air
                                          quality and reduce net carbon emissions.
S-14	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
          •	S-13-Action 1 Identify and develop a baseline inventory of existing
             opportunities for carbon sequestration resources in the city, including
             woodlands, grasslands, wetlands, stream corridors, trees, and plants.
          •	S-13-Action 2 Create a Resource Management Report, in which the City
             collects data to inventory citywide natural resources. The report shall be
             published annually and posted on the City’s website.
Please see the Parks, Trails, and Open Space Element and Conservation & Air Quality
Element of this General Plan for additional policies related to air quality, open space
preservation, and resource conservation.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: COMMUNITY FOREST
Providing a tree canopy throughout the city can help filter pollutants from the air,
provide shade, reduce energy use for cooling, mitigate the heat island effect of the built
environment, and provide places for relaxation and refuge from busy city life.
S-14	     Maintain and enhance a community forest by preserving and planting trees in
          appropriate densities and locations to maximize energy conservation and air
          quality benefits. (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
          •	 S-14-Action 1 Continue partnerships that work to preserve and promote the
             planting of oaks.
          •	 S-14-Action 2 Develop a Community Forest Master Plan to include, but not
             be limited to, the following:
             •	 Best management practices for tree planning, planting, and maintenance;
             •	 Designated areas for preservation or future planting;
             •	 Implementation of Chapter 19.12 (Tree Preservation and Protection) of
                the Municipal Code;
             •	 Shade requirements for new multi-family and non-residential
                development to promote planting shade trees and require, where
                feasible, site design that uses trees to shade rooftops, air conditioning
                units, parking facilities, streets, and other facilities to provide cool air
                temperatures and minimize heat island effects;
             •	 Preferred tree list, and specifications for street trees;
             •	 Proper spacing, plant diversity, and planting requirements.
Please see the Conservation and Air Quality Element of this General Plan for additional
policies relating to community forest.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: NATIVE & DROUGHT-
TOLERANT LANDSCAPING
Implementing regulations to encourage or require native and drought-tolerant
landscaping provide a means to reduce water usage, introduce vegetation that is native
to the area, decrease maintenance, and protect against invasive plant species.
S-15	     Advocate for native and/or drought-tolerant landscaping in public and private
          projects.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-15

Sustainability Element
                                          •	S-15-Action 1 Require the planting of native and/or drought-tolerant
                                             landscaping at the site of new/existing City facilities, landscaped medians,
                                             and parkway strips to reduce water use and maintenance costs.
                                          •	S-15-Action 2 Establish incentives to replace private lawns with drought-
                                             tolerant landscaping and native plants.
                                          •	 S-15-Action 3 Establish pilot programs and projects that demonstrate the
                                             benefits and beauty of drought-tolerant and native landscaping through
                                             collaboration with external agencies, such as local watershed organizations
                                             and utility districts.
                                          •	 S-15-Action 4 Promote the use of drought-tolerant and/or native vegetation
                                             to minimize water consumption by providing information to developers and
                                             designers and partnering with local nurseries. (Please see CAP reduction
                                             measures.)
                                          •	S-15-Action 5 Encourage use of drought-tolerant and/or native planting
                                             and grading/improvement design within private development projects to
                                             maximize runoff into designated planter areas. (Please see CAP reduction
                                             measures.)
                                          •	 S-15-Action 6 Develop a recommended drought-tolerant and native tree and
                                             plant species list and make it available on the City’s website, along with
                                             information about the benefits of using drought-tolerant and/or native
                                             vegetation.
                                Please see the Conservation of Water section of the Conservation & Air Quality Element
                                of this General Plan for additional policies relating to drought-tolerant landscaping.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: ENERGY EFFICIENCY,
                                CONSERVATION & RENEWABLES
                                Increased energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources contribute to
                                reduced dependence on fossil fuels for heat and power, and lessen concentrations of
                                greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The use of alternative energy sources contributes
                                to more stable local economies due to decreased reliance on traditional energy sources
                                whose economic future is uncertain.
                                S-16	     Promote innovation in energy efficiency. (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
                                          •	 S-16-Action 1 Support a cost-effective approach to staying on top of best
                                             practices toward energy efficiency.
                                          •	 S-16-Action 2 Connect residents and businesses with programs that provide
                                             free or low-cost energy efficiency audits and retrofits in existing buildings.
                                          •	S-16-Action 3 Consider implementing a program that encourages and
                                             supports energy efficiency audits for residential and commercial buildings.
                                          •	 S-16-Action 4 Partner with the local utility district to develop a pilot program
                                             to demonstrate energy-efficient upgrades in existing municipal buildings.
                                          •	 S-16-Action 5 Partner with the local utility district to develop a pilot program
S-16	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
              to demonstrate energy-efficient techniques and products in new municipal
              buildings.
           •	S-16-Action 6 Incentivize and analyze impediments in the City Municipal
              Code to the placement of small-scale renewable energy facilities within the
              city limits.
           •	S-16-Action 7 Assess the cost-effectiveness of retrofitting existing
              City facilities with appropriate renewable energy technologies such as
              photovoltaics, wind, biofuel, cogeneration, and geothermal.
           •	 S-16-Action 8 Require the use of high-albedo material for public outdoor
              surfaces such as rooftops, parking lots, median barriers, roadway
              improvements (where feasible), and sidewalks.
Please see the Air Quality section of the Conservation & Air Quality Element of this
General Plan for additional policies regarding energy conservation.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: SUSTAINABLE STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT/GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
Sustainable stormwater management strategies are a design approach that use natural
processes to mitigate impacts of increased runoff and stormwater pollution that occur
as a result of urban development. These negative environmental impacts include erosion
and pollution of local water bodies. Green infrastructure techniques and practices
include bioretention facilities, vegetated rooftops, vegetated bioswales, tree box
filters, and permeable pavements. These strategies recharge the groundwater, filter out
contaminants from runoff, capture water which can be used for irrigation, and reduce
the need for expensive curb and gutter infrastructure and maintenance.
S-17	      Integrate sustainable stormwater management techniques in site design to
           reduce stormwater runoff and control erosion.
           •	 S-17-Action 1 Encourage minimization of the amount of impervious surface
              areas at new development sites. Possible solutions may include the use of
              permeable paving materials (e.g., porous concrete, porous asphalt, modular
              paving, gravel, lattice concrete blocks, and porous bricks) for parking areas,
              pedestrian paths, and vehicular circulation, where feasible.
           •	S-17-Action 2 Where feasible, employ on-site natural systems such as
              vegetated bioswales, living roofs, and rain gardens in the treatment of
              stormwater, where possible, to encourage infiltration, detention, retention,
              groundwater recharge, and/or water reuse on-site.
           •	 S-17-Action 3 Develop a Sustainable Stormwater Management/Low Impact
              Development (LID) Ordinance that goes beyond the initial discussion of the
              Storm Drainage Master Plan to set specific standards for new construction
              of both public and private projects.
           •	 S-17-Action 4 Partner with the local mosquito abatement district to ensure
              adequate precautions are taken to minimize mosquito production in the
              planning for new major stormwater management schemes.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-17

Sustainability Element
                                Please see the Conservation & Air Quality Element and the Safety Element of this
                                General Plan for additional policies regarding sustainable stormwater management.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: WASTE MANAGEMENT
                                Regulations to manage waste and promote the reduction, reuse, and recycling of
                                materials, which minimize use of natural resources and encourage the use of innovative
                                materials and technologies.
                                S-18	    Facilitate recycling, reduction in the amount of waste, and reuse of materials
                                         to reduce the amount of solid waste sent to landfill from Elk Grove. (Please
                                         see CAP reduction measures.)
                                          •	 S-18-Action 1 Develop and implement an education campaign to encourage
                                             businesses to take an active role in recycling and composting, focusing on
                                             businesses that generate a large amount of compostable and/or recyclable
                                             waste.
                                          •	S-18-Action 2 Monitor the recycling services contract to ensure that the
                                             range of materials accepted is consistent with the latest technology and
                                             best practices.
                                          •	 S-18-Action 3 Work with the waste and recycling services provider to ensure
                                             that recycling is available and convenient for businesses.
                                          •	S-18-Action 4 Enforce the Construction and Demolition (C&D) Debris
                                             Recycling Program for applicable construction projects and all demolition
                                             projects and increase the requirements to a 65 percent waste diversion.
                                          •	 S-18-Action 5 Create incentives for the use of recycled concrete in all base
                                             material utilized in private road construction.
                                          •	 S-18-Action 6 Consider adopting a policy to reduce or restrict the use of
                                             disposable plastic shopping bags and polystyrene foam (Styrofoam) to-go
                                             containers.
                                          Please see the Conservation & Air Quality Element of this General Plan for
                                             additional actions relating to recycling and recycled content products.
                                S-19	    Reduce municipal waste through recycling programs and employee education.
                                         (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
                                          •	S-19-Action 1 Continue the educational program for City employees on
                                             appropriate waste and recycling protocols.
                                          •	S-19-Action 2 Continue to provide City employees with recycling bins at
                                             each desk.
                                          •	S-19-Action 3 Recycle waste materials for all municipal construction and
                                             demolition projects.
S-18	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES:
WATER CONSERVATION & EFFICIENCY
Water conservation and efficiency regulation minimize impacts on this strained resource
and decrease energy use required to pump water from source to tap.
S-20	     Reduce the amount of water used by residential and nonresidential uses.
          (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
          •	S-20-Action 1 Implement incentives to encourage water-efficient retrofit
             improvements to existing private buildings.
          •	 S-20-Action 2 Establish a program that provides water efficiency audits for
             residential and commercial buildings.
          •	S-20-Action 3 Continue to require new commercial and multi-family
             residential developments to install low-flow fixtures.
          •	 S-20-Action 4 Continue requiring landscaping in surface parking and large
             paved areas for water uptake.
          •	S-20-Action 5 Inform the public of water conservation and efficiency
             strategies and best practices by making this information available on the
             City’s website.
          •	 S-20-Action 6 Continue to partner with water agencies on water efficient
             design for new construction.
S-21	     Promote the use of and analyze barriers to the use of greywater systems and
          recycled water for irrigation purposes. (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
S-22	     Improve the efficiency of municipal water use through retrofits and employee
          education. (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
          •	S-22-Action 1 Conduct a water conservation audit of existing municipal
             facilities, and improve efficiency of municipal water use through retrofits
             and employee education.
Please see the Native & Drought Tolerant Landscaping section of this Element and the
Conservation & Air Quality Element for additional policies related to water conservation.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING & HOUSING CHOICE
Policies related to affordable housing and housing choice are found in the Housing
Element of this General Plan.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-19

Sustainability Element
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES:
                                CHILD, YOUTH & SENIOR SERVICES
                                The provision of human services to vulnerable populations supports community
                                members in leading long, healthy, and fulfilling lives, and contributes to a more positive
                                and satisfied community. Regulations that support community services will help to
                                sustain our current population and secure a promising future for our children.
                                S-23	     Continue to establish public and private partnerships to promote community
                                          events, services, and/or programs for children, youth, and seniors.
                                          •	 S-23-Action 1 Continue to support the City’s Youth Services program.
                                          •	 S-23-Action 2 Continue supporting programs offering services to seniors, to
                                             include opportunities for social interaction, access to public transportation,
                                             and assistance programs and services.
                                          •	S-23-Action 3 Establish funding and review available sites to develop a
                                             community center to support events and recreational programs for children,
                                             youth, and seniors.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: COMMUNITY CHARACTER &
                                PLACEMAKING
                                Places that have a strong identify and unique character instill a sense of pride in the
                                community. These are the types of places where people want to be and businesses want
                                to locate. Community design that emphasizes the city’s natural beauty, while enhancing
                                the built environment through public art, attractive streetscapes, and pedestrian-
                                oriented design, can help sustain the community as a desirable place to live, work, and
                                visit. These types of places create a sustainable community because they encourage
                                people to be part of their community and increase opportunities for economic vitality
                                and civic engagement.
                                S-24	     Emphasize placemaking design principles in new development projects.
                                          •	 S-24-Action 1 Identify locations for major streetscape improvements such as
                                             landscaped medians, enhanced crosswalks, street trees, directional signage,
                                             benches, and public art.
                                          •	 S-24-Action 2 Identify key entry points into the city and provide major entry
                                             features or monuments at these locations to create a sense of arrival to Elk
                                             Grove.
                                          •	 S-24-Action 3 Review the Land Use Plan to develop community focal points
                                             by allowing greater densities and a mix of uses at key locations.
                                          •	S-24-Action 4 New development should prioritize the pedestrian by
                                             implementing the following measures:
                                             •	 Parking areas and curb cuts should be minimized along commercial
                                                street frontages;
                                             •	 Encourage a vertical and horizontal mix of land uses;
                                             •	 Provide urban plazas and gathering spaces in commercial and multi-
                                                family development;
S-20	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                 Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
              •	 Provide pedestrian amenities such as lighting, landscaping, and benches.
           •	S-24-Action 5 Ensure development minimizes disruption of viewsheds
              within the community (e.g., view to the Sierras).
           •	 S-24-Action 6 Continue to support the Committee for the Arts.
           •	S-24-Action 7 Encourage public art in all new large-scale development
              projects equal to and greater than 100,000 square feet.
Please see the Land Use Element and Economic Development Element of this General
Plan for additional policies that promote urban design and placemaking principles.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Policies related to historic preservation are found in the Historic Preservation Element
of this General Plan.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
Citizen-based planning better reflects the needs and desires of the community. Engaging
the public in social activities, programs, and events strengthens community bonds,
enhances civic pride, and fosters a sense of investment in the future of the community.
S-25	      Promote community involvement and public participation.
           •	S-25-Action 1 Continue to provide opportunities for public participation
              in City planning decisions. Provide a range of participation methods that
              meet the needs of all residents, with a particular emphasis on encouraging
              participation among youth.
           •	S-25-Action 2 Support and organize community events throughout the
              city. Examples of events include art walks, film night, live music, crafts for
              children, cultural events, and food festivals.
           •	S-25-Action 3 Continue to provide information on the City’s website and
              other electronic media and methods regarding upcoming events, public
              hearings and meetings, municipal services, city news, and other important
              civic information.
           •	 S-25-Action 4 Create a City Employee Volunteer Program to encourage City
              staff to participate in community service programs.
           •	S-25-Action 5 Continue to support and participate in the Cosumnes
              Community Services District Community Giving program.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION
OF SERVICES AND USES
Provide equal environmental protection and equal access to economic opportunities
and public facilities for all communities regardless of income status, race, gender, or
ethnicity.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-21

Sustainability Element
                                S-26	    Promote community equity.
                                         •	 S-26-Action 1 Support equal access to jobs by working with organizations to
                                            provide job training.
                                         •	 S-26-Action 2 Work with social services organizations to provide safe places
                                            for day laborers.
                                         •	S-26-Action 3 Promote community programs and services that foster
                                            awareness of cultural diversity and heritage.
                                         •	S-26-Action 4 Locate community facilities equitably so that they are
                                            accessible to all members of the community.
                                         •	 S-26-Action 5 Do not unfairly burden any one area in the community that
                                            may be negatively impacted by any environmental factor.
                                Please see the Circulation, Public Facilities & Finance, Housing, and Economic Development
                                Elements of this General Plan for additional policies relating to environmental justice.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: PUBLIC EDUCATION &
                                AWARENESS
                                Educating the community about sustainability issues will raise public understanding of
                                and regard for the future consequences of their decisions and action. This can ultimately
                                lead to behavior changes that promote sustainability principles. Continuing education
                                increases employment opportunities, financial security, and personal well-being for
                                employees and sustains a skilled and specialized workforce for employers.
                                S-27	    Promote continuing education and job training for all residents.
                                         •	 S-27-Action 1 Continue to partner with EGUSD to optimize the joint use of
                                            school facilities for community and neighborhood programs and services.
                                         •	 S-27-Action 2 Continue to support early education programs for children.
                                         •	 S-27-Action 3 Develop a City of Elk Grove Student Internship Program to
                                            provide eligible students with the opportunity to work in departments within
                                            the City.
                                         •	S-27-Action 4 Partner with Los Rios Community College District (e.g.,
                                            Cosumnes River College) on training and education programs for Elk Grove
                                            residents.
                                S-28	    Seek to provide all segments of the community with information relating to
                                         sustainability, climate change, and innovative development strategies.
                                         •	 S-28-Action 1 Establish a Sustainability & Climate Change webpage on the
                                            City website with content to include, but not be limited to:
                                             •	 The efforts the City is undertaking toward sustainability;
                                             •	 Information on opportunities as to how community members can get
                                                involved in sustainable efforts; and
                                             •	 Links to useful resources, including best management practices posted
                                                by other public agencies.
S-22	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

Sustainability Element
         •	S-28-Action 2 Work with local schools and universities to develop an
            awareness program relating to the three components of sustainability:
            environment, economy, and community.
         •	 S-28-Action 3 Sponsor an energy and water efficiency education program
            for the agricultural and business communities.
Please see the Safety and Economic Development Elements of this General Plan for
additional policies relating to public information and education.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY
A safe and healthy community allows people of all ages and abilities to lead full,
productive, and enjoyable lives.
S-29 	   Support programs that promote healthy living.
         •	S-29-Action 1 Demonstrate leadership in efforts to promote community
            health by implementing a Healthy Living at Work Program for City employees.
            A Healthy Living at Work Program may include, but should not be limited
            to, (a) provision of healthy food at meetings, on-site cafeterias, vending
            machines and food vendors; (b) flexible work hours so that employees have
            more opportunities to participate in fitness programs as part of their working
            day; (c) Employee Assistance Program; (d) health education programs
            and online Web tools that help employees work toward their health goals;
            (e) a healthy commuter program that encourages or offers incentives for
            employees to walk and/or bike to work; and (f) planned events and group
            activities to encourage employees to become active, such as team sports or
            lunchtime walks.
         •	 S-29-Action 2 Work with businesses to implement and participate in healthy
            living programs.
         •	 S-29-Action 3 Continue to support the Neighborhood Livability Program,
            which is dedicated to improving safety in residential areas through traffic
            calming.
         •	S-29-Action 4 Continue to support the Cosumnes Community Services
            recreational activity programs for people of all ages and abilities.
         •	 S-29-Action 5 Support SACOG in the development and implementation of a
            Safe Routes to School program. (Please see CAP reduction measures)
            Please see the Circulation Element of this General Plan for policies that
            promote walking and biking as primary modes of transport; the Parks, Trails,
            and Open Space Element for policies that promote outdoor recreational
            opportunities; the Land Use Element for policies supporting mixed-use
            development that allows for walking/biking between origins in close
            proximity to destinations; and the Safety Element for policies related to
            Safety and Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design principles.
Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015	                                 ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	 S-23

Sustainability Element
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: COMMUNITY FOOD SYSTEMS
                                Connecting the community with local food production and distribution enhances
                                community health through improved access to healthy food, strengthens the local
                                agricultural economy, and reduces energy needed to transport food products from
                                greater distances.
                                S-30 	    Cultivate local food systems that encourage healthy eating and support the
                                          regional economy.
                                           •	S-30-Action 1 Encourage the marketing and selling of local agricultural
                                              products to local residents, vendors, and restaurants through farmers
                                              markets and other direct farm-to-table sales.
                                           •	S-30-Action 2 Ensure that local development regulations allow for small-
                                              scale, compatible agricultural use of property, including edible landscaping,
                                              community gardens, and roadside food stands in appropriate areas of the city.
                                Please see the Conservation & Air Quality Element and Economic Development Element
                                of this General Plan for additional policies relating to community food systems.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                Policies related to economic development and jobs/housing balance are found in the
                                Economic Development Element of this General Plan. In addition, see reduction measures
                                relating to economic development and jobs/housing balance that are included in the CAP.
                                SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES: JOBS & BUSINESSES
                                Jobs and businesses provide exciting opportunities to establish a viable local economy
                                that acknowledges the value of the environment and promotes technology, innovation,
                                and sustainable business practices. People living and working in the community can
                                create a sustainable community. Establish a viable local economy that promotes
                                innovation and sustainable business practices. Promote Elk Grove as a center for jobs
                                and businesses.
                                S-31 	    Promote Elk Grove as a center for jobs and businesses.
                                           •	 S-31-Action 1 Establish a sustainable business certification and identification
                                              program to spotlight sustainable business operations in the community.
                                           •	 S-31-Action 2 Support companies by encouraging them to locate and stay in
                                              Elk Grove.
                                           •	S-31-Action 3 Work with community groups and education programs to
                                              create more jobs and job training opportunities.
                                           •	S-31-Action 4 Implement the Think, Shop, Live Elk Grove program to
                                              encourage residents and businesses to shop locally and spur local economic
                                              activity. (Please see CAP reduction measures.)
                                Please see the Economic Development Element of this General Plan for additional
                                policies that supports local businesses.
S-24	   ELK GROVE GENERAL PLAN	                                  Adopted 11/19/03 | Reflects Amendments through March 2015

